Collected Studies in Immunity, Vol. 1 (Paul Ehrlich (Charles Bolduan, trans.), 1906)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/collectedstudie00ehrlgoog). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


•,  *      i .


>>  I  ANf Of^O  UNlVMEDCm

«"=>??  HO  1987

•  rANI*ORO,CA043OS


COLLECTED    STUDIES


ON


I  M  M  U  N  ITY


BY

PROFESSOR  PAUL  EHRLIGH

Pthrf  GoaaeUor  tad  Director  of  the  Royal  Inatitote  for  Experimeatal

Frenkfurt,  Germany

AND    BY    HIS    COLLABORATORS


With  Several  New  Contributions,  including

A  CHAPTER  WRITTEN  EXPRESSLY   FOR  THIS  EDITION  BY

PROFESSOR  EHRLICH


TRANSLATED  BY

Dr.   CHARLES    BOLDUAN

Profeaaor  of  Baeteriology  and  Hygiene  in  Fordham  Univertity,  N.  Y«
Aaaittant  Bacteriologist,  Retearch  Ljiboratory,  Department  of  Healtk

City  of  New  York


FIRST     EDITION

FIRST  THOUSAND


NEW     YORK

JOHN    WILEY    &    SONS

LONDON:    CHAPMAN     &     HALL,    LIMITED

1906



BY

CHARLES  BOLDUAN


KOBXRT  DRUMMOND,  PRXNTBS,  NKW  YORK


To
Dr.     a  L  T  H  O  F  F

Pbivy  Councilor,  Director  is  thb  Prussian  Ministry  of  Education,  Berlin,  etc

The  Able  Friend  and  Promoter  of  Medical  Science

This  Volume  is  Dedicated  in

Grateful  Appreciation


S^*^'^^


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


No  apology  is  needed  for  presenting  this  translation  of  Ehrlieh's
classic  studies  in  immunity,  for  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  master's
work  is  indispensable  to  all  workers  in  this  field.

Attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that  the  important  work  done  since

the  publication  of  the  German  edition  has  been  included  by  the

addition  of  three  chapters,  two  by  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  and  one,  written

expressly  for  this  translation,  by  Prof.  Ehrlich.     The  subject  is  thus

brought  up  to  about  March,  1906.

Charles  Bolduan.

ill


1 1
i


I


Tbb  preeent  volume  embraces  the  greater  portion  of  the  studies-
in  immunity  published  during  the  past  few  years  by  myself  and  my
collaborators.  While  the  publication  of  these  studies  in  a  single
volume  meets  the  request  of  numerous  workers  in  immunity,  it  is
hoped  that  the  collection  will  at  the  same  time  fulfill  another  purpose,
namely,  to  show  clearly  that  my  theory  of  immunity  rests  on  so
broad  an  experimental  basis  that  it  is  practically  identical  with  a.
Bumnmry  of  generalizations  derived  from  an  enormous  mass  of  experi-
mental data.'

When  Behring's  great  discovery  of  antitoxin  opened  new  patha
for  the  study  of  immunity  it  was  at  once  clear  that  further  progress
could  be  attempted  in  two  ways.     The  first  of  these,  having  practical
therapeutic  results  in  mind,  consists  in  bending  all  eSorts  to  the  pro-
duction of  various  individual  curative  sera.     The  other  method  con-
sists in  seeking  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  of   immunity  phe-
nomena, and  discovering  the  general  principles  underlying  the  same,
for  these  in  turn  will  aid  practical  progress.
I         By  pursuing  the  latter  method  it  has  been  found  that  the  immunity
I  reaction  is  merely  a  repetition  of  certain  processes  of  normal  mcta-
I   holism,  and  that  what  is  apparently  a  wonderful  adaptation  to  the
purpose  is  nothing  more  than  the   ever-recurring   manifestation  of
primeval  wisdom  inherent  in  the  protoplasm.     I  have  endeavored  to
establish  this  experimentally  and  to  show  that  the  bond  between

'  With  a  view  of  giving  the  reader  a  better  idea  of  the  technique  ordinarily
employed,  and  thereby  to  facilitate  his  introduction  to  this  subject,  I  have  bad
I    iny  ooUeagueB,  Dr.  Morgenroth  nod  Prof.  Neisaer,  present  the  reault  of  their  ex-
I  tensive  technical  experiences  with  ha^molytic  and  bacteriolytic  test-tube  czperi-
]  roents.  in  two  special  chapters.     (Chapters  XXtX  and  XXX.)


Bl


vi  PREFACE  TO  THE  GERMAN   EDITION.

what  are  at  first  sight  very  dissimilar  biological  processes  is  really
a  conception  of  the  simplest  kind.

The  toxic  metabolic  products  of  bacteria,  the  artificially  produced
bacteriolysins,  hsemolysins,  and  cytotoxins,  and  the  majority  of  the
ferments,  probably  always  produce  their  effects  by  the  co-action  of
two  active  groups  in  the  molecule.  One  of  these  effects  the  union
with  the  substance  to  be  acted  upon,  while  the  other  really  produces
the  characteristic  effect.

It  is  not  surprising,  in  view  of  the  enormous  multiplicity  of  the
vital  phenomena,  that  this  simple  principle  exhibits  the  greatest
variations  in  individual  cases.  Certainly  this  corresponds  entirely
to  what  we  constantly  observe  in  the  domain  of  biology.  The  cell,
for  example,  occurs  as  a  type  in  every  living  form,  from  the  lowest
plant  to  the  highest  animal.  In  principle  it  is  ever  the  same;  in  the
details  of  its  structure,  however,  it  is  of  endless  variety.

But  even  from  such  complex  phenomena  as  are  exhibited,  for
example,  by  the  artificially  produced  haemolysins,  it  is  possible  to
develop  the  fundamental  principles  of  my  theory,  and  thereby  give
a  harmonious  uniform  explanation  of  the  manifold  phenomena  with
their  peculiar  specific  relations.

My  theory  has  developed  essentially  on  the  basis  of  chemical
conceptions.  I  have  been  more  and  more  forcibly  impressed  with
the  idea  that  in  a  study  of  the  fundamental  biological  phenomena,
the  significance  of  morphological  structure  is  far  less  than  the  sig-
nificance of  the  chemistry  involved.  It  is  obvious  that  in  order  to
effect  a  given  chemical  process  certain  mechanical  conditions  must
be  fulfilled.  In  other  words  the  production  of  any  chemical  action
necessitates  the  presence  and  the  suitable  arrangement  of  apparatus.
The  essential  feature,  however,  is  neither  apparatus  nor  form,  but
the  constituents  involved;  for  without  changing  the  apparatus
hundreds  of  different  combinations  can  be  effected  according  to  the
components  employed.  Similarly  in  biology  I  believe  that  the  morpho-
logical arrangement  of  the  organs  and  cells  is  not  the  essential  feature,
but  that  this  is  rather  to  be  sought  for  in  chemical  differences  of  the
constituents.

I  am  convinced  that  the  influence  exerted  by  my  theory  will
extend  far  beyond  the  limits  of  pure  immunity  studies,  and  that  it
is  of  considerable  significance  for  an  appreciation  of  vital  phenomena.
Furthermore,  I  believe  that  the  theory  is  of  great  value  in  studying
certain   phenomena  which  dominate  all  life,   namely,   intracellular


PREFACE  TO  THE  GERiMAN  EDITION.  vii

metabolism,  especially  its  two  main  phases,  anabolism  and  catabolism.
It  has  been  shown  that  the  substances  obtained  by  immunization
are  nothing  but  the  tools  of  normal  cell-life,  tools  which  we  can  thus
isolate  from  their  place  of  production  and  subject  to  an  individual
examination.  This  at  once  opens  new  paths  for  approaching  the
study  of  vital  phenomena,  which  embraces  not  only  the  physiology
and  pathology  of  metabolism,  but  also  certain  other  physiological
problems  such  as  those  of  secretion,  heredity,  etc.


At  the  recent  Congress  for  Hygiene  and  Demography  (Brussels),
in  which  the  chief  problems  of  immunity  were  discussed,  it  was  seen
that  my  theory  is  not  yet  accepted  by  all  the  workers  in  this  subject,
there  being  still  a  few  opponents.  This  was  to  be  expected.  Cer-
tainly nothing  is  more  desirable  in  all  scientific  problems  than  the
expression  of  different  opinions,  for  as  a  result  of  experimental  studies
they  lead  to  a  deeper  insight  into  the  subject  in  question.  Hence
it  is  largely  the  opposition  of  Bordet  and  other  distinguished
workers  in  the  Pasteur  Institute  that  has  spurred  us  on  in  our  experi-
mental labors,  and  caused  us  to  establish  the  amboceptor  theory
more  firmly  than  ever.

On  the  other  hand  it  is  very  annoying  when  such  authors  as  Gruber,
who  have  absolutely  no  personal  experience  in  the  main  questions,
wage  a  bitter  war  merely  because  they  have  made  a  few  literary
studies ;  it  is  the  more  exasperating  since  they  seek  to  make  up  the
deficiencies  in  their  arguments  by  the  intensity  and  personality
of  their  attacks.  Such  authors  are  in  no  position  to  correctly  orientate
themselves  in  the  mass  of  true  and  false  observations  that  each  day's
literature  brings  forth.

It  was  a  great  pleasure,  therefore,  to  see  one  of  the  founders  of
the  doctrine  of  immunity,  R.  Pfeiffer,  and  that  distinguished  repre-
sentative of  Paltaufs  Institute  in  Vienna,  R.  Kraus,  express  them-
selves in  favor  of  my  theory.  They  confessed  they  had  both  really
opposed  the  theory  from  the  start,  and  that  the  main  purpose  in  devis-
ing their  various  experiments  had  been  to  show  that  it  was  untenable.
Just  these,  however,  had  convinced  them  that  the  side-chain  theory
not  only  afforded  the  best  explanation  for  their  results,  but  had  even
enabled  them  to  predict  these  results.  The  chief  problems  now
imder  discussion  are ;    (1)  the  constitution  of  active  cytotoxic  sub-


VUl  PREFACE  TO  THE  GEEIMAN  EDITION.

stances,  whether  or  not  they  are  made  up  of  two  p)arts  possessing
different  functions;  (2)  the  union  of  specific  amboceptors  with  the
complements;  (3)  the  plurality  of  complements.  I  am  convinced
that  the  near  future  will  furnish  so  many  additional  arguments  for
the  correctness  of  my  views  that  all  of  these  questions,  as  well  as
numerous  others,  will  be  decided  in  my  favor.  And  the  decision,  I
believe,  will  not  be  merely  in  favor  of  my  views  in  general,  but  will
extend  even  to  the  details.

In  a  way,  therefore,  n^y  position  is  like  that  of  a  chess-player  who,
even  though  his  game  is  won,  is  forced  by  the  obstinacy  of  his  opponent
to  carry  it  on  move  by  move  until  the  final  ''mate/'


For  the  means  to  carry  on  these  experiments,  I  am  indebted  first
of  all  to  the  intelligent  support  which  my  scientific  aims  have  received
at  the  hands  of  my  superiors,  the  Prussian  Ministry  of  Education.
I  am  especially  grateful  to  the  ministerial  director.  Dr.  Althoff,  who
aided  me  in  every  way  possible,  and  exerted  himself  to  lighten  my
scientific  labors.  I  may  say  that  I  was  first  spurred  on  to  the  im-
munity studies  contained  in  "Die  Werthbemessung  des  Diphtherie-
heilserums,"  and  which  have  led  to  the  formulation  of  the  side-chain
,^  theory,  by  the  remarks  addressed  to  me  by  Dr.  Althoff  when  the
Institute  was  founded.  It  was  he  who  begged  that  my  first  problem
be  an  exhaustive  study  whereby  the  difficulties  which  had  arilen
in  titrating  and  standardizing  diphtheria  antitoxin  might  be  overcon^e.
To  this  kind  and  able  friend  I  have  therefore  dedicated  this  volume  as
a  token  of  my  gratitude  and  esteem.

Paul  Ehrlich.

Fbankfuet  a.  M.,  February  1904.


CONTENTS.


A


.•


CBAFTBR  PAOB

.      I.   CJoin'RIBUTIONS  TO  THE  TbEORT  Of

Ltsin  Action Ehrldch  and  Morgenroth,      1

•    II.  Concerning  HiEMOLTsiNS.  (Second

Communication.) Ehrhch  and  Morgenroth,     1 1

•      III.  Studies  on   HiBMOLYsiNB.     (Third

Communication.) Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,     23

IV.  Contributions  to  the  Studv  or

Immunity von  Dungem,    36

New  Experiments  on  the  Side-
chain  Theory.     Phagocytosis  and
Globulicidal  Immuity.
V.  Contributions  to  the  Study  of

Immunity von  Dungem,    47

Receptors  and  the  Formation  of

Antibodies.    Milk  Immune  Serum.

»  VI.  Studies  on  Hemolysins.     (Fourth

Communication.) Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.     56

t'  VII.  Studies   on    Hemolysins.     (Fifth

Communication.) Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.     71

^   VIII.  Studies  on    HiEMOLYsiNs.     (Sixth

Communication.) Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.     88

IX.  Concerning  the  Mode  of  Action

OF  Bactericidal  Ser^ M.  Neiaser,  120

X.  Tbe  Deflection  of  Complements
IN  Bactericidal  Test-tube  Ex-
periments  Lipstein.  132

XI.  Active  Immunity   and  Overneu-

trauzbd  Diphtheria  Toxins Rehna.  143

XII  Is  it  Possible  by  Injecting  Ag-
glutinated Typhoid  Bacilli  to
Cause  the   Production  of  an

Agglutinin? M.  Neisser.  146

XIII.  Immunizing  Experiments  with
Erythrocytes  Laden  wih  Im-
mune Body Sachs.  15F

ix


CONTENTS.

CBAPTEB  FAOB

XIV.  The  Escape  of  Hemoglobin  from
Blood-cells  Hardened  with
Corrosive  Sublimate Sachs.  163

XV.  A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of
the    Poison    of    the    Common

Garden  Spider Scuiha.  167

XVI.  A  Study  of  Toad  Poison Prdscher.  175

XVII.  Concerning  Alexin  Action Sachs.  181

XVIII.  Concerning    the    Plurality    of

Complements  of  the  Serum Ehrlich  and  Sachs.  195

XIX.  Concerning    the    Mechanism    of

the  Action  of  Amboceptors Ehrlvch  and  Sachs.  209

XX.  Differentiating  Complements  by
Means  of  a  Partial  Anticom-
PLEMENT Marshall  and  Morgenroth,  222

XXI.  Concerning  the  Complemento-
PHiLE  Groups  of  the  Ambo-
ceptors  Ehrlich  and  Marshall.  226

•     XXII.  Concerning     the     Complementi-

bility  of  the  Amboceptors Morgenroth  and  Scichs.  233

XXIII.  The    Production   of    Hemolytic

Amboceptors      by      Means    of

Serum  Injections Morgenroth.  241

XXIV.  The  Quantitative  Relations  be-

tween    Amboceptor,     Comple-
ment, AND  Anticomplement Morgtnroth  and  Sachs.  250

XXV.  The    Hemolytic    Properties    of

Organ  Extracts Korschun  and  Morgenroth.  267

XXVI.  Review    of    Besredka's    Study,
"  Les    Antihemolysines    Natu-

RELLES  " Marshall  and  Morgenroth.  283

XXVII.  The  Mode  of  Action  of  Cobra

Venom Kyes.  291

XXVIII.  Further  Studies  on  the  Dysen-
tery Bacillus Shiga.  312

XXIX.  Methods   of   Studying    Hemoly-
sins   Morgenroth.  326

XXX.  The  Technique  of  Bactericidal

Test-tube  Experiments M.  Xeisser.  348

XXXI.  The   Property  of  the  Brain  to

Neutralize  Tetanus  Toxin Marx.  356

XXXII.  The    Protective    Substances   of

THE  Bix>od. Ehrlich.  364

XXXIII.  The  Receptor  Apparatus  of  the

Red  Blood-cells. Ehrlich.  390


CONTENTS  a

CBAPTEB  FAGB

XXXI V.  The  Relations  Existing  between
Chemical  Constitution,  Distri-
bution,   AND    PhAKMACOLOOICAL

Action Ekrlich.  404

XXXV.  A  Study  op  the  Substances  which

Activate  Cobra  Venom Kyea  and  Sachs  443

XXXVI.  The    Isolation    op   Snake-venom

Lecithids Kyea.  466

XXXV 1 1.  The  Constituents  op  Diphtheria

Toxin Ehrlich  481

XXXVIII.  Toxin  and  Antitoxin:  A  Reply  to

the  Latest  Attack  of  Gruber Ehrlich.  614

XXXIX.  The  Relations  Existing  between

Toxin  and  Antitoxin  and  the

Methods  of  their  Study Ehrlich  and  Scxhs.  547

XL.  The  Mechanism  op  the  Action  op

A  NTT  amboceptors Ehrlich  and  Sachs,  561

XLI.  A  General  Review  op  the  Recent

Work  in  Immunity Ehrlich,  677


COLLECTED   STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


I.  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE    THEORY  OF  LYSIN

ACTION.i

By  Prof.  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  J.  Moroexroth.

One  of  the  most  important  advances  in  the  study  of  immunity
is  the  discovery  of  Pfeififer's  phenomenon,  and  it  is  to  Pfeiffer's
splendid  observations  that  we  owe  the  first  and  most  important
insight  into  the  mode  of  action  of  the  bacteriolytic  inmiune  sera.

As  is  well  known,  the  phenomenon  of  bacteriolysis,  first  demon-
strated by  Pfeiflfer  in  a  guinea-pig  immunized  against  cholera,  con-
sists in  the  immediate  dissolution  of  cholera  bacilli  introduced  into
the  abdominal  cavity  of  the  animal.  The  same  takes  place  when
the  bacilli  together  with  a  small  amount  of  immune  serum  are  intro-
duced into  the  abdominal  cavity  of  a  nonnal  guinea-pig.  Subse-
quently Metchnikoflf  (Annal.  Inst.  Pasteur,  June  1895)  showed  that
the  phenomenon  of  bacteriolysis  takes  place  also  outside  the  animal
body,  in  vitro,  provided  a  small  quantity  of  peritoneal  exudate  of
a  normal  guinea-pig  is  added.  Bordet  (Annal.  Inst.  Pasteur,  June
1895)  was  thereupon  able  to  show  that  the  immune  serum  is  able
to  effect  bacteriolysis  in  vitro  without  any  addition,  provided  that  it
is  absolutely  fresh.  On  standing  it  becomes  inactive;  but  it  may
be  reactivated  by  even  very  small  amounts  of  normal  serum.  PfeifTcr's
ideas  as  to  the  nature  of  bacteriolysis  were  formulated  by  him  in  a
very  clever  theory  which  he  published  in  1896  (Deutsche  med.  Wo-


*  Reprinted  from  Berl.  klin,  Wochenschr.,  1899,  No.  1.


2  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

chenschr.,  1896,  Nos.  7  and  8)  and  which  is  here  reproduced  only  in
its  main  features.

The  immunizing  substances  contained  in  cholera  serum  possess
but  feeble  power  to  retard  development.  They  are  nothing  but  an
antecedent  form  of  substances  developed  in  the  peritoneum  of  the
guinea-pig,  specifically  solvent  for  cholera  vibrios.  They  are  stored
in  the  animal  body  in  an  inactive  but  stable  form,  somewhat  as
glycogen  is  stored  in  cell  depots  as  an  antecedent  form  of  grape-
sugar.  When  needed,  these  inactive  substances  of  the  serum  can  be
converted  into  the  specific  active  form  through  the  active  interference
of  the  body-cells.  This  conversion  can  also  be  effected  by  the  addi-
tionof  a  suitable  serum.  In  this  added  serum  a  certain  "something,''
present  in  very  small  amounts,  effects  the  change,  but  is  very  soon
used  up  in  the  process.  In  the  animal  body,  on  the  other  hand,
this  constituent  is  produced  by  the  body-cells  as  long  as  the  stimulus,
caused  by  the  presence  of  the  cholera  bacilU,  lasts.  The  action  of
this  substance  is  ferment-like.  Bacteriolysis  is  also  regarded  as  a
ferment  action,  caused  by  ferments  of  a  very  peculiar  kind.  These
ferments  are  fitted  in  an  absolutely  specific  manner  each  to  a  single
bacterial  protoplasm,  acting  on  this  exactly  as  pepsin  or  trypsin  acts
on  coagulated  albumin.  According  to  Pfeiffer,  a  somewhat  distant
analogy  is  seen  in  E.  Fischer's  yeast  ferments,  each  of  which  can  only
split  up  a  sugar  of  a  definite  composition.  If  this  theory  be  correct,
these  specific  ferments  must  exist  in  an  active  and  an  inactive  modi-
fication.

Recently  Bordet  (Annal.  Inst.  Pasteur,  Vol.  12,  No.  10)  pub-
lished a  series  of  experiments  in  which  he  showed  that  the  laws  which
govern  the  specific  bacteriolytic  action  of  immune  sera  govern  also
certain  specific  solvent  phenomena  seen  in  red  blood-cells.

Bordet  treats  guinea-pigs  with  repeated  injections  of  defibri-
nated  rabbit  blood.  The  serum  of  animals  so  treated  possesses  the
property  of  dissolving  rabbit  blood  in  vitro  rapidly  and  with  great
intensity,  whereas  serum  of  normal  guinea-pigs  is  unable  to  do  this.
Solution  is  preceded  by  a  marked  agglutination  of  the  erythrocytes.
On  heating  the  specific  serum  for  half  an  hour  to  55°  C.  the  hapmolytic
power  is  destroyed,  while  the  agglutinating  pov/er  remains.  The
serum  thus  inactivated  can  again  be  rendered  active  by  the  addition
of  a  certain  amount  of  normal  guinea-pig  serum,  and  even  of  normal
rabbit  serum.  The  active  guinea-pig  serum,  has  no  effect  on  the
red  blood-cells  of  the  guinea-pig  itself  or  on  those  of  pigeons,  but


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  LYSIN  ACTION.  3

acts,  though  to  a  less  degree,  on  the  blood-cells  of  rats  and  mice.
The  active  guinea-pig  serum  injected  into  the  ear-vein  of  a  rabbit
is  highly  toxic  to  that  animal.

The  analogy  existing  between  these  phenomena  and  those  of
bacteriolysis  is,  as  emphasized  by  Bordet,  a  very  close  one.  This
will  be  clear  to  the  reader.  Very  likely,  therefore,  the  mechanism
of  haemolysis  and  that  of  bacteriolysis  are  very  similar.  The  study
of  haemolysis  thus  gains  considerable  theoretical  significance.

Being  so  fortunate  sls  to  have  at  our  disposal  a  considerable  amount
of  appropriate  serum,  we  have  used  this  in  order  to  gain  a  deeper  in-
sight into  the  nature  of  haemolysis.  This  serum  was  derived  from  a
goat  which  during  eight  months  had  been  subcutaneously  injected  in
somewhat  irregular  fashion  with  sheep  serum  rich  in  blood-corpuscles.
The  experiments  were  therefore  made  with  sheep  blood  in  the  form
of  a  5%  mixture  of  the  defibrinated  blood  in  0.85^^  salt  solution.
By  means  of  this  great  dilution  certain  sources  of  error  arising  from
the  constituents  of  the  serum  are  avoided.  These  had  manifested
themselves  in  Bordet's  experiments.

The  serum  of  our  goat  rapidly  dissolves  sheep  blood-cells  in  vitro.
The  degree  of  action  of  this  serum  can  be  accurately  determined  as
follows:  To  each  5  cc.  of  the  above-mentioned  blood  mixture  decreas-
ing amounts  of  the  goat  serum  are  added.  It  is  then  found  that
at  37°  C.  the  specimens  containing  from  1.5  cc.  to  0.8  cc.  serum  will
become  completely  laky.  After  allowing  all  the  specimens  to  act
for  two  hours  in  a  thermostat  they  are  placed  in  a  refrigerator  and
allowed  to  settle.  It  will  then  be  found  that  there  is  a  regular
decrease  in  the  amount  of  solution  effected  until  finally  the  limit
is  reached  in  the  specimen  containing  0.1  cc.  of  serum.  The  scrum
of  normal  goats  (we  tried  the  sera  of  a  number  of  different  animals)
is  unable  even  in  large  amounts  to  dissolve  sheep  blood-cells.  It
is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the  use  of  this  immune  serum  in  the  amounts
mentioned  no  clumping  was  ever  observed  to  precede  haemolysis,
although  this  phenomenon  was  carefully  looked  for.^


*  Th^;  serum  of  normal  goats  in  doses  of  1.5  cc.  and  over  possesses  the  prop-
erty to  agglutinate  sheep  blood-cells,  but  this  property  seems  to  be  subject
to  great  individual  and  chronologic  fluctuations.  This  agglutination  of  foreign
bloods  by  certain  normal  sera,  and  which  probably  corresponds  to  the  noniial
agglutinating  action  of  sera  on  bacteria,  was  obser\'ed  many  years  ago  by
Creite  (Z.  f.  rat.  Med.,  Vol.  36)  and  later  was  again  emphasized  by  Landois
(Die  Transfusion  des  Blutes,  1875).


4  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  TMMUNlTy.

U  the  immune  serum  is  heated  to  56°  C,  it  completely  loses  its
solvent  action.  The  addition  of  serum  of  normal  animals  to  this
ittactimted  serum  causes  it  to  be  reaUivaled.  For  this  purpose  one
can  use  not  only  normal  goat  serum  but  also  nonnal  sheep  serum,
though  the  latter  acts  somewhat  more  feebly.  This  power  of  the
normal  serum  to  reactivate  an  inactive  immune  serum  is  very  readily
lost.  Even  when  tlie  serum  is  kept  on  ice  and  protected  agtunst
light  it  very  soon  shows  a  diminution  of  its  reactivating  power.  In
uantitative  experiments,  therefore,  the  inactive  (stable)  immune
serum  should  alwara  be  reactivated  by  a  perfectly  fresh  normal
scrum.

In  hasmolysis,  as  in  Pfeiffer's  bacteriolysis,  we  are  therefore  forced
to  assume  the  existence  of  two  substances.  One  of  these,  spedSc
and  quite  resistant  (stable),  we  shall  call  the  immune  body,  following
Pfeiffer's  nomenclature.  The  other,  normally  present  and  highly
labile  (unstable),  we  shall  for  the  present  term  addiment.

Although  our  results  in  the  main  agree  with  those  of  Bordet,
we  must  at  once  call  attention  to  one  difference  in  our  observations.
As  already  mentioned,  the  action  of  our  goat  serum  on  the  sheep
blood-cells  Is  not  preceded  by  any  agglutination.  From  this  we  see
that  the  agglutination  cannot  be  considered  a  preparatorj'  step  neces-
sary for  the  ha?molyiic  action,  as  Bordet  seems  to  assume.  The
specific  agglutinin  Las  no  relation  whatever  to  the  hemolytic
immune  body,  yimilarly,  according  to  the  views  of  eminent  bacte-
riologists, the  specific  bacteriolytic  substances  have  no  relation  tg
the  agglutinins.  The  lysins  may  exist  independently  of  the  agglu-
tinins and  these  again  independently  of  the  bacterioloytic  sulistances,
The  reader  is  reminded  of  the  interesting  observations  of  Pfciffer
and  Kolle.  These  investigators  described  an  immune  serum  which
was  strongly  bacteriolytic  but  which  did  not  at  all  agglutinate  (Cen-
tralhlatt  f.  Ilakt.,  1896.  Vol.  XX,  Noa.  4  and  5).  On  the  other  hand,
E.  Frankel  and  Otto  state  that  if  a  young  dog  be  fed  on  typhoid
cultures,  the  dog's  serum  will  acquire  agglutinating  but  not  bacte-
riolytic properties.  Similarly,  if  a  frog  is  treated  with  typhoid  bacilli,
the  frog  serum  will  agglutinate  such  bacilli.  They  remain  in  the
lymph  sac  of  the  animal,  however,  not  only  alive  but  virulent.  (Widal
and  Sicard,  Comples  rend.  Soc.  de  Biol.,  XI.  27-97).

Pfeiffer's  original  theorv'  sought  only  to  explain  in  general  the
mode  of  action  of  the  specific  bacteriolysins.  It  did  not  concern
itself  with  the  questions  how  or  where  they  originated.     It  was  in


wa


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  THEORY  OP  LYSIN  ACTION.  5

irder  to  throw  some  light  on  these  problems  that  Ehrlich  devised
side-chain  theory.

At  first  Ehrlich's  theory  was  applied  to  the  origin  of  the  anti-
toxins and  to  the  chemical  relation  existing  between  the  toxina  and
certain  atomic  groups  of  the  protoplasmic  molecule.  Pfeiffer  him-
self applied  the  theory  to  the  substances  specifically  bacteriolytic
for  cholera  bacilli,  and  was  able  to  demonstrate  experimentally  that
the  source  of  these  bodies  was  in  the  spleen,  the  bone-marrow,  and  the
lymph  bodies  (Heiffer  and  Marx,  Zeitschr.  f.  Hyg.,  Vol.  37,  189S).
Wassermann,  who  in  his  well-known  tetanus  experiments  had  fur-
:hed  the  first  demonstration  of  the  soundness  of  the  side-chain
succeeded  in  showing  the  source  of  the  specific  typhoid
iCteiiolysin.  The  study  of  these  bacteriolytic  processes  brought  up
B  number  of  important  questions  directly  concerning  the  side-chain
theory,  aTid  we  felt  compelled  to  examine  these  experimentally.

According  to  Ehrlich's  theory,  if  any  substance,  be  it  toxin,
toxoid,  ferment,  or  constituent  of  a  bacterial  cell  or  of  a  blood-
corpuscle,  possess  the  property  of  combining  with  side-chains  of  the
protoplasm,  the  possibihty  is  given  for  the  formation  of  a  corre-
sponding antibody.  The  antilxKly,  according  to  the  theory,  must
possess  such  a  group  as  will  fit  the  haptophore  (the  specific  com-
bining) group  of  the  invading  substance.  The  soluble  body,  therefore,
luced  in  response  to  the  invading  substance  (toxin,  toxoid,  etc),
iust  combine  chemically  with  the  latter.  If  the  invading  substance
in  soluble  form,  as.  for  example,  the  toxins,  the  neutralization
in  the  solution.  If,  however,  it  is  not  directly  soluble,
ig  originally  an  insoluble  part  of,  say,  a  bacterial  or  blood  cell,
len  the  dissolved  antibody  in  the  blood  will  be  abstracted  from
its  solvent  fluid  and  anchored  by  the  cell  particle.  In  the  well-known
experiment  of  Wassermann  on  tetanus  poison,  the  same  thing  is  seen.
In  this  the  invading  substance  (tetanus  toxin)  is  abstracted  from
its  solution  and  anchored  bj'  the  crushed  brain  cells.  In  order  to
maintain  the  analogy  we  should  expect  that  in  our  experiment  the
immune  body  rfissoZj«rf  in  the  goat  senim  would  be  anchored  by  the
eryUtrocytea  of  sheep  blood.

The  manner  of  procedure  in  this  experiment  is  very  simple  and
feonsists  in  the  addition  to  sheep  blood,  or  a  dilution  of  the  same,
immune  serum  which  has  been  heated  to  56°  C  in  order  to  destroy
solvent  properties.  The  mixture  is  then  centrifuged  to  separate
cells  and  the  fluid.     In  case  the  immune  body  has  been  anchored


6  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMlklUNITY.

•

by  the  blood-cells,  the  clear  fluid  should  be  free  from  the  same.  To
prove  this  we  have  merely  to  add  to  some  of  this  clear  fluid  sheep
blood-cells,  and  a  sufficient  amount  of  addiment  in  the  form  of  normal
serum.  If  the  fluid  is  free  from  inunune  body,  the  blood-cells  will
remain  undissolved.  The  centrifuged  sediment  must  likewise  be
tested  for  the  presence  of  immune  body.  The  sediment,  freed  as
much  as  possible  from  fluid,  is  mixed  with  salt  solution  and  a  suffi-  •
cient  amount  of  addiment.  If  a  corresponding  amount  of  inunune
body  has  been  anchored  by  the  blood-cells,  they  will  now  dissolve.
One  of  our  numerous  experiments  follows:

4  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  sheep  blood-cells  are  mixed  with  1.0
or  1.3  cc.  inactivated  serum  from  our  immimized  goat.  This  is  allowed
to  stand  for  fifteen  minutes  at  40°  C.  and  then  carefully  centrifuged.
The  supernatant  clear  fluid  is  poured  off,  mixed  with  0.2  cc.  normal
sheeps  blood  and  then  with  0.8  cc.  serum  from  a  normal  goat.  This
mixture  aft^r  being  kept  in  a  thermostat  at  37°  C.  for  two  hours
and  then  allowed  to  settle  in  the  cold,  shows  no  trace  of  solution.

The  centrifuged  sediment,  freed  as  much  as  possible  from  fluid
by  means  of  filter  paper,  is  mixed  with  4  cc.  physiological  salt  solu-
tion and  with  0.8  cc.  normal  goat  serum.  This  mixture  after  being
kept  for  two  hours  in  a  thermostat  at  37°  C.  is  found  completely
dissolved  or  very  nearly  so.

In  this  experiment  in  which  a  sufficient  amount  of  immune  body
was  used,  we  see  that  complete  union  took  place  between  the  immune
body  and  the  blood-cells,  resulting  in  the  entire  abstraction  of  the
former  from  the  fluid.  We  have  found  that  the  same  takes  place
at  lower  temperatures,  even  at  0°  C.  That  this  is  a  chemical  union
and  not  a  mere  absorption  is  seen  by  experiments  with  other  species
of  blood.  Thus  the  red  blood-cells  of  rabbits  and  of  goats  have  no
affinity  whatever  for  this  immune  body.

As  a  result  of  these  experiments ^  therefore j  and  in  conformity  with
the  side-chain  theory,  we  must  assume  that  the  immune  body  possesses
a  specific  haptophore  group  which  anchors  it  to  the  hlood-ceUs  of  the
sheep.

The  next  important  question  was  that  concerning  the  relation
of  the  addiment  to  the  red  blood-cell.  This  was  studied  in  a  manner
exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  previous  experiment.  Blood  was
mixed  with  addiment,  the  mixtiu-e  centrifuged,  and  the  two  por-
tions tested  separately,  by  the  addition  of  inunune  body,  for  the
presence  of  addiment.    We  varied  our  experiments  greatly  so  far


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  LYSIN  ACTION.  7

as  time  and  temperature  conditions  were  concerned,  but  the  result
was  always  the  same;  the  red  blood-cells  did  not  combine  wUh  a  trace
of  addiment.  This  is  in  direct  contrast  to  their  behavior  toward  the
immune  body.

Having  now  determined  the  behavior  of  the  blood-cells  to  immune
body  and  addiment  separately,  it  remained  to  see  what  the  affinities
of  the  blood-cells  were  when  both  of  these  bodies  were  present  at  the
same  time.  The  solution  of  this  problem  offers  many  technical
difficulties.  Practically  it  wUl  be  best  to  make  the  mixtures  so  that
there  will  be  just  the  proper  amount  of  the  two  ingredients  to  effect
complete  solution  of  the  blood-cells.  We  found  that  if  we  mixed
1.0  to  1.3  cc.  of  our  inactivated  goat  serum  with  0.5  cc.  normal  goat
serum,  this  would  just  suffice  to  dissolve  5  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  (in
saline)  of  sheep  blood-cells.  If  this  mixture  is  placed  in  the  ther-
mostat, complete  solution  will  ensue;  but  because  an  excess  of  the
solvent  substances  has  been  avoided,  the  process  does  not  take  place
rapidly.     Usually  it  is  completed  at  the  end  of  1^  to  2  hours.

If  the  mixture  is  kept  at  0^-3®  C,  no  solution  occurs,  and  if  it  is
then  centrifuged  and  examined  according  to  the  methods  just  studied,
the  red  blood-cells  will  be  found  to  have  loaded  themselves  with
inmiune  body,  leaving  the  addiment  in  the  fluid.  The  experiment
shows  that  under  the  conditions  mentioned,  addiment  and  inmiune
body  exist  in  the  fluid  entirely  independent  of  one  another.

It  still  remained  to  determine  the  combining  affinities  at  higher
temperatures.  A  preliminary  trial  showed  that  if  we  used  the  pro-
portions above  mentioned  and  kept  such  mixtures  in  an  Ostwald
water-bath  at  40°  C.  for  six,  ten,  thirteen,  and  eighteen  minutes
respectively  and  then  centrifuged,  only  in  the  first  two  tubes  did
the  fluid  remain  colorless,  while  in  the  other  tubes  it  was  distinctly
red.  In  the  experiments  at  this  temperature  we  therefore  adopted
a  time  limit  of  ten  minutes.  A  tube  of  the  above-mentioned  mixture
was  allowed  to  remain  in  the  water-bath  at  40°  C.  for  ten  minutes
and  then  centrifuged.    The  results  were  as  follows:

The  sediment  mixed  with  salt  solution  shows  haemolysis  of  a
moderate  degree.  (This  occurs  even  if  the  sediment  is  mixed  with
ice-cold  salt  solution,  centrifuged,  and  then  again  mixed  with  salt
solution.  By  this  manipulation  the  last  trace  of  fluid  originally
adhering  to  the  cells  is  removed.)  Solution  becomes  complete  when
new  addiment  in  the  form  of  normal  serum  is  added  to  the
mixture.    The  centrifuged  fluid  does  not,  by  itself,  dissolve  blood


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNTT??

added  to  it,  or  it  does  so  in  only  a  very  limited  degree.     When,  hi
ever,  new  immune  body  is  added,  the  blood-cella  are  completely
solved.

From  these  experiments  we  conclude  that  the  sediment  thia
contained  both  components,  though  not  in  equivalent  proporti
for  there  was  an  excess  of  immune  body  which  became  manifest
only  on  the  addition  of  new  addiment.     Corresponding  to  this  the
-centrifuged  fluid  contained  only  faint  traces  of  immune  body  and
excess  of  addiment.

The  explanation  of  these  phenomena  presents  no  difficulties,
must  be  assumed  that  under  certain  circumstances  the  immune  bod]
and  addiment  enter  into  loose,  readily  dissociated  chemical  eombi-
nation.  Thia  combination  is  hastened  by  heat  and  retarded  by  cold
in  entire  conformity  to  the  views  previously  expressed  by  Ehrhch
(Werthbemessung  des  Diphtherie-heilserums,  Jena,  1897).  On  the
other  hand,  the  affinity  existing  between  blood-cells  and  immune
body  must  be  very  strong,  for  these  combine  completely  even  in  the
cold.  We  must  therefore  assume  that  the  immune  body  possesses  two
different  hapfophore  groups,  one  v'ith  a  strong  afjinily  for  the  corre-
sponding kaplophore  group  of  the  red  blood-cell,  and  the  other  of  feeble
chemical  affinity,  which  is  able  to  combine  more  or  less  completely  with
the  addiment  present  in  the  serum.  At  30°  C,  therefore,  the  red  blood-
cell  attracts  to  itself  not  only  the  free  molecules  of  immune  body,
but  also  those  which  have  already  combined  with  the  addiment  in
the  fluid.  In  the  latter  case  the  Immune  body  represents  in  a  measure
a  link  which  tiea  addiment  to  the  red  blood-cells  and  subjects  these
to  the  action  of  the  addiment.  In  agreement  with  Pfeiffer,  we  regard
the  phenomena  appearing  under  the  influence  of  the  addiment  as
analogous  to  digestion,  and  we  shall  probably  not  err  if  we  regard  the
addiment  as  havhig  the  character  of  a  digestive  ferment.  Morgen-
roth,  by  the  experiments  in  which  by  immunization  he  succeastully
pipduced  an  antibody  against  rennin  ferment,  has  made  it  very
probable  that  the  ferments,  like  the  toxins,  possess  two  groups,
one  a  haptophore  group  and  the  other  the  actual  carrier  of  the  fer-
ment action.

With  this  preliminary  analysis  all  the  various  phenomena  are
now  readily  explained.  We  assume  that  the  immune  body  combuica
with  the  small  amount  of  digesting  ferment  normally  present  in
the  blood,  and  then,  by  means  of  its  other  haptophore  group,  fitting,
for  example,   to  red  blood-cells  or  bacteria,   carries   this  digestive


1


d


i


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  LYSIN  ACTION.  V

action  over  to  these  cells.  From  this  we  see  alao  why  the  digestive
I  actioQ  becomea  manifest  only  on  the  addition  of  immune  body.
This  brings  the  fennent,  present  in  the  serum  fluid  in  such  sniaU
quantity,  to  the  blood-cells  in  comparatively  large  amounts,  thus
concentrating  and  increasing  its  action.  It  is  possible  and  even
probable  that  only  a  few  substances  with  digestive  properties  exist-
in  the  blood,  perhaps  only  one;  but  that  a  countless  variety  of  specific
immune  bodies  can  exist  there,  as  Gruber,  among  others,  assumes.
In  that  case  we  must  assume  that  in  these  immune  bodies  there  ia
always  one  group  which  fits  only  to  the  cells  or  substances  used  to
excite  ita  production,  but  that  all  these  immune  bodies  possess  an
atomic  group  in  common  which  effects  the  combination  with  the

(digestive  substance.  On  this  assumption  it  is  very  easy  to  explain
by  means  of  the  side-chain  theory  the  otherwise  dilhcult  problem
of  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  lysins.  According  to  Ehrlich's  definition,
'the  side-chains  possess  definite  atomic  groups  which  are  able  to  com-
bine with  certain  other  atomic  groups  and  so  increase  the  proto-
plasmic molecule.  As  far  back  as  1885  (Sauerstoff  Bediirfniss  des
,  Oi^anismus)  Ehrlich  had  pointed  out  that  the  atomic  groups  thus
bftnchored  to  the  living  substance  were  much  more  readily  oxidized
■and  that  they  therefore  represent  the  nourishment  (/car  eSox^/y)  of
Vthe  cell. .  The  study  of  immunity  has  considerably  extended  this  view
md  taught  us  that  the  antilxxiy  represents  such  thrust-off  side-
;  further,  that  the  immunizing  process  consists  in  forcing  the
*  particular  organism  to  produce  these  side-chains  in  surplus  amount
in  conformity  with  Weigert's  theory  of  cell  injury.  It  is  of  course
very  probable  that  these  side-chains,  according  to  their  special  func-
will  be  differently  constituted.  If  a  side-chain  is  designed
)  assimilate  relatively  simple  substances,  we  may  believe  that  the
1  of  a  single  combining  group  will  suffice.  Verj'  likely  the
■nde-chains  which  anchor  toxins  are  of  this  simple  type.  But  it  is
ntirely  different  when  a  giant  molecule  (albumin  molecule)  is  to  be
asimilated.  In  this  case  the  anchoring  of  the  molecule  is  only  a  pre-
■  liminary  requisite.  Such  a  giant  molecule  is  useless  to  the  cell  and
can  only  then  be  utilized  when  it  is  broken  up  by  fermentative  ])ro-
ccsaes  into  smaller  part.s.     It  will  be  particularly  advantageous  to

I  the  cell  it  its  "grasping  arm"  is  at  the  same  time  a  carrier  of  a  fer-
tnentaiive  group  which  can  at  once  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  anchored
Uolecide.  We  see  such  well-atlapted  contrivances  (in  which  the
pasping  apparatus  also  possesses  digesting  properties)  in  a  whole


10  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

series  of  higher  plants.  For  example,  the  tentacles  of  Drosera,.  which
may  be  regarded  as  grasping  arms  in  the  widest  sense,  secrete  a  strong
digesting  fluid.

If,  then,  we  see  that  lysin  action  does  not  occur  with  toxins,  but
only  when  the  contents  of  cells  are  absorbed,  be  these  bacteria  or
blood-cells,  we  must  conclude  that  in  the  latter  case  large-moleculed
albuminous  substances  are  concerned.  These  are  much  more  complex
in  structure  than  the  toxins,  which  represent  mere  cell  secretions.
For  the  assimilation  of  the  highly  complex  bodies  we  therefore  assume
the  existence  of  side-chains  of  a  pecuUar  kind.  These,  besides  their
combining  group,  possess  another  group  which  by  fixation  with
special  ferments  causes  the  digestion  of  the  complex  substances.  If,
by  means  of  the  immimizing  process,  one  succeeds  in  having  a  surplus
of  these  side-chains  produced,  they  will  be  produced  with  both  these
fimctional  groups  and  thrust  off  into  the  blood  as  immune  body.
This  explains  the  wonderful  contrivance  whereby  the  injection  of  a
bacterimn  is  followed  by  the  production  of  a  substance  which  de8tro3rB
this  bacterium  by  dissolving  it.  This  phenomenon  is  nothing  but
the  reproduction  of  a  process  of  normal  cell  life.


n.  CONCERNING  ILEMOLYSINS.^

Second  Communication.

By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehruch  and  Dr.  J.  Morqenroth.

In  a  previous  paper  2  we  demonstrated  the  relations  existing
between  the  red  blood-cells  to  be  dissolved  and  the  two  components  of
a  specific  haemolysin  produced  by  immimization.  It  will  be  remem-
bered that  we  termed  the  two  components  of  the  specific  serum
immune  body  and  addiment.  We  were  able  to  show  that  the  immune
body  combines  with  the  erythrocytes  of  the  species  whose  blood
was  injected,  since  it  has  a  specific  affinity  for  these  cells.  We  showed
further  that  the  addiment,  the  unstable  (labile)  ferment-like  body
which  effects  the  solution  of  the  blood-cells,  is  tied  to  these  cells
indirectly  by  means  of  the  inmiune  body.

Proof  was  thus  afforded  that,  in  confonnity  with  the  require-
ments of  the  side-chain  theory,  the  immune  body  possesses  one
haptophore  group  by  means  of  which  it  combines  with  the  erythrocytes
of  the  corresponding  blood,  and  a  second  haptophore  group  with  less
affinity  by  which  it  combines  with  the  addiment  and  transfers  the
action  of  the  latter  to  the  blood-cells.

At  that  time  we  availed  ourselves  of  the  serum  of  a  goat  which
had  been  treated  for  some  time  with  subcutaneous  injections  of  a
sheep  serum  rich  in  blood  corpuscles.  Corresponding  to  this  treat-
ment, the  serum  of  the  goat  possessed  a  moderate  d^ree  of  solvent
action  on  sheep  blood-cells.

In  order  to  continue  these  studies  it  seemed  essential  to  make
use  of  a  serum  derived  from  an  animal  treated  for  some  time  with
full  blood,  a  serum  that  would  accordingly  possess  a  higher  degree
of  activity.    For  this  purpose  we  began  the  inmiunization  (Nov.  12


*  Reprinted  from  Berl.  klia  Wochenschr.  1899,  No.  22.
'  See  pages  1-10  of  this  volume.

11


Etik^  st&BfsS  f*i


and  Feb.  24)  of  two  male  goats  tjy  injecting  them  Bubcutaneously
with  increasing  amounts  ot  defibrinated  sheep  blood.  In  a  short
time  a  strongly  active  senim  was  produced  in  both  animals,  and
we  were  able  to  observe  how,  following  the  general  laws  of  .inmu-
nization,  its  activity  increased.  The  course  of  the  immunization
did  not  manifest  any  peculiarities.  It  should,  however,  be  remarked
that  on  the  days  following  the  injection  of  a  considerable  amount
of  blood  (350  cc.)  not  the  least  decrease  in  the  activity  of  the  serum
could  be  observed,  in  contrast  to  the  experiences  with  tetanus  or
diphtheria  immunization.

So  far  as  the  general  method  employed  in  the  following  experi-
ments is  concerned,  it  was  the  same  as  that  mentioned  in  the  first
paper.  The  blood  was  always  used  in  the  form  of  a  5%  suspension
in  ph3^iological  salt  solution.  At  the  time  of  these  experiments
the  serum  of  buck  I  was  able  to  dissolve  the  sheep  blood  com-
pletely in  the  proportion  of  0.2-0.3  cc.  serum  to  fi  cc.  sheep  blood
mixture;  0.03-0.07  cc.  serum  were  able  to  produce  a  just  noticeable
amount  of  solution.  Of  the  serum  of  buck  11,  0.15-0.2  cc.  suf-
ficed for  complete  solution.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  serum
of  buck  11  even  before  immunization  possessed  a  slight  solvent
effect  on  sheep  blood.  This,  however,  was  so  slight  that  4.0  cc.  o£
the  senmi  were  not  nearly  able  to  dissolve  5  cc.  of  the  5%  blood
mixture,  and  1.2  cc.  serum  produced  only  a  just  noticeable  amount
ot  solution.  Heating  the  serum  to  57°  C.  for  half  an  liour  destroyed
this  action,  as  it  did  also  that  for  rabbit  and  guinea-pig  blood. ^

With  the  sera  of  these  two  bucks  we  were  now  able  to  proceed
with  our  experiments.  The  combination  of  the  immime  body  with
the  erj-throcytes  of  the  sheep  at  0°  C.  can  be  readily  demonstrated,
for  at  this  temperature  and  by  the  employment  of  proper  amounts
of  serum  no  solution  takes  place.  The  serum  was  allowed  to  act  on
the  sheep  blood  for  twenty-four  hours,  care  being  taken  to  keep  the
mixture  at  0°  C.     The   blood-cells   were  then  separated  by  means


'  On  examining  the  ser&  of  a  large  number  of  normal  goats  one  will  find
same  sera  which  poaseaa  this  feeble  solvent  power  for  sheep  blood.  Thus  the
normal  goat  sera  which  we  eraploired  for  control  tests  in  our  first  experiments,
and  which  were  used  in  great  number,  failed  absolutely  to  show  any  solvent
action,  but  at  most  manifested  only  a  variable  degree  of  agglutinating  action.
This  will  be  seen  from  our  reports  at  that  time.  In  our  first  communication
we  bad  already  called  attention  to  the  great  variability  of  the  agglutinating
property.


CONCERNING  HEMOLYSINS.  18

of  the  centrifuge,  and  they  showed  by  their  behavior  that  they  had
combined  with  the  immune  body.  They  did  not  dissolve  on  the
addition  of  physiological  salt  solution,  but  dissolved  when  addiment
in  the  form  of  normal  goat  senun  was  added.  In  contrast  to  this,
both  components  combined  with  the  sheep  blood-cells  when  the
mixture  was  kept  at  room  temperature  (about  20*^  C.)  even  for  only
eight  minutes.  The  blood-cells,  separated  by  centrifuge  and  washed
with  physiological  salt  solution  to  free  them  from  traces  of  serum,
were  mixed  with  more  salt  solution  and  placed  in  an  incubator,
where  they  dissolved  in  considerable  quantity.

These  new  and  stronger  immime  sera  therefore  exhibited  proper-
ties in  relation  to  the  sheep  blood-cells  entirely  analogous  to  those
of  the  serum  previously  described  by  us.  On  the  other  hand  in  cer-
tain respects  their  behavior  was  entirely  different.

The  serum  described  by  Bordet,  as  well  as  that  of  our  goats,^  lost
its  haemolytic  power  when  heated  for  half  an  hour  to  56®  C.  This  has
been  shown  by  Buchner  to  be  true  of  all  normal  haemolytic  sera.
The  sera  of  our  two  bucks  even  when  heated  for  three-quarters  of  an
hour  to  56^  C.  showed  only  a  scarcely  appreciable  diminution  of  their
solvent  action  on  sheep  bloody  while  their  normal  solvent  action  on  guinea-
pig  blood  and  rabbit  blood  was  entirely  destroyed.  Even  when  the  serum
was  heated  to  56*^  C.  for  three  hours  or  when,  after  mixing  with  equal
parts  of  water,  it  was  heated  for  one  and  one-half  hours  to  65®  C,
it  showed  merely  a  reduction  in  its  solvent  action  for  sheep  blood,
but  not  a  destruction  of  this  action.

Our  preliminary  experiments  on  the  combining  relations  had
shown  us  that  the  action  of  these  hsemolysins  was  due  to  the  pres-
ence in  the  serum  of  a  specific  immune  body  and  an  addiment.  It  was
therefore  clear  that  we  were  here  dealing  with  an  addiment  of  a  very
peculiar  kind,  which  was  distinguished  from  the  addiments  of
all  hsemolysins  heretofore  known  by  its  extraordinary  resistance
to  thermic  influences.  This  property  must  pertain  to  the  addi-
ment itself  and  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  another  sub-
stance in  the  serum  increasing  its  resistance,  for  such  a  substance
would  have  served  to  protect  the  haemolytic  bodies  normally  present.

In  order,  however,  to  analyze  these  phenomena  completely,  it
was  absolutely  essential  to  obtain  the  two  components  of  the  complex


*  Thif)  refers  to  the  female  goats.     The  male  goat  is  always  designated
''buck"  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.     [Translator.]


14  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

serum,  the  immune  body  as  well  as  the  addiment,  in  a  free  state.
In  the  ordinary  specific  haemolytic  serum  the  former  is  usually  readily
obtained  because  the  addiment  is  destroyed  by  slight  heating.  In
the  case  of  our  serum,  however,  heating  proved  ineffective,  so  it
became  necessary  to  adopt  other  means.  Experience  having  taught
us  that  the  addiment  is,  as  a  rule,  more  readily  destroyed  than  the
inunune  body,  we  could  expect  to  accomplish  our  purpose  by  using
stronger  destructive  agents  of  a  chemical  nature.  After  a  number
of  trials  we  have  finally  made  use  of  the  following  procedure:
One  part  of  our  serum  is  mixed  with  one-tenth  part  normal  hydro-
chloric acid,  the  mixture  digested  at  37°  C.  for  30  to  45  minutes,
and  then  neutralized.  It  will  be  found  that  the  serum  has  then  lost
its  solvent  power  for  sheep  blood-cells;  but  that  it  still  possesses
immune  body  in  scarcely  decreased  amount  can  be  shown  by  re-
activating the  serum.

The  isolation  of  the  immune  body  made  it  possible  finally  to  demon-
strate the  combination  of  the  immune  body  at  higher  temperatures,  20®-
35°  C.  This  combination  is  seen  to  be  quantitative,  i.e.,  the  sheep  blood-
cells  are  able  to  combine  with  all  the  immune  body  present  in  that  quan-
tity of  serum  which  in  its  active  staie  would  just  suffice  for  their  com-
plete solution.  For  example,  to  5  cc.  of  the  5%  blood  mixture,  0.15  cc.
of  the  serum  inactivated  with  hydrochloric  acid  is  added,  it  having
been  pre\dously  ascertained  that  this  amount  of  active  serum  just
suffices  for  complete  solution.  The  mixture  is  allowed  to  stand
for  half  an  hour  at  room  temperature  and  is  then  centrifuged.  To
the  sediment  2.0  cc.  normal  goat  serum  are  added,  and  to  the  clear
fluid  some  additional  sheep  blood  mixture  and  2.0  cc.  normal  goat
serum.  The  sediment  thus  treat^xl  will  be  seen  to  dissolve  com-
pletely, whereas  the  blood-cells  added  to  the  clear  fluid  remain  intact
despite  the  presence  of  the  addiment.  This  shows  that  all  the  im-
mune body  combined  with  the  sedimented  sheep  blood-cells.

The  addiment  necessar}'^  for  this  reactivation  is  present  in  normal
goat  serum,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  experiment.  This  is  true  for  all
goat  sera  thus  far  examined  by  us,  although  the  amount  varies.
It  wnll  be  recalled  that  we  had  found  the  original  addiment  which  fitted
the  immune  body  was  able  to  withstand  heat.  The  question  there-
fore at  once  arises  whether  normal  serum  also  contains  such  heat-
resisting  addiments.  As  a  matter  of  fact  this  was  found  to  be  the
case  in  a  niunber  of  goats  examined  by  us.  AMien  the  serum  of  these
goats  was  heated  for  ^  to  |  hr.  to. 56°  C.  and  its  normal  hipmolytic


CONCERNING  H.EMOLYSINS.  16

properties  for  other  blood-cells  were  entirely  destroyed,  it  was  still
able  to  typically  reactivate  the  particular  immune  body  here  con-
cerned.^ In  another  series  of  goats,  however,  the  result  was  different,
for  heating  the  serum  to  56®  C.  destroyed  its  reactivating  properties
completely.  These  sera  then  contained  exclusively  a  thermolabile
addiment  which,  like  the  thermos tabile  addiment,  fitted  the  immune
body.  We  must  therefore  conclude  that  the  inunune  body  developed
by  this  immunization  is  capable  of  being  activated  by  addiments
of  two  kinds,  which  differ  from  each  other  by  their  resistance
to  thermic  influences  and  which  are  both  present  in  normal  serum.

It  is  probable  that  both  kinds  of  addiment  can  be  present  in
goat  serum  at  the  same  time,  but  that  in  most  cases  only  one,  the
thermolabile,  is  present.  The  varying  behavior  toward  thermic  in-
fluences, manifested  by  the  sera  of  our  immunized  animals,  would  thus
be  easily  explained.  We  assume  that  the  same  immune  body  uhis
present  in  both  cases,  but  that  the  serum  of  the  goat  first  immunized  con-
tained only  tJie  thermolabile  addiment,  while  the  sera  of  the  animals
examined  later  contained  also  the  thermostabile  addiment.  In  this
connection,  the  fact  that,  previous  to  the  commencement  of  immu-
nization, we  were  able  to  demonstrate  a  considerable  content  of
thermostabile  addiment  in  the  serum  of  the  third  animal  (buck  II)
is  of  considerable  interest.

Having  thus  arrived  at  some  understanding  of  the  action  of  the
haemolytic  sera  produced  by  immunization  it  seemed  essential  that
we  extend  our  investigations  to  the  haemolytic  properties  of  normal
sera.  These  properties  had  long  been  known  and  had  been  studied
particularly  by  Buchner  and  his  pupils.^

The  fact  that  the  haemolytic  action  of  normal  serum  is  destroyed
by  moderate  heat  led  us  to  believe  that  the  normal  ha^molysins  are


^  As  it  is  thus  possible  to  destroy  all  the  normal  lysins  (which  interfere  with
the  experiment)  it  ought  to  be  possible  to  determine  whether  a  similar  heat-
resisting  addiment  also  occurs  in  the  serum  of  other  species.  We  succeeded
in  demonstrating  its  presence  in  varying  amounts  in  the  serum  of  a  sheep  and
of  a  calf,  but  failed  to  find  it  in  serum  of  a  dog  or  rabbit.

'  It  is  very  probable  that  certain  forms  of  lurmoglobinuria  originate  through
analogous  ha?molysins.  Many  years  ago  Ehrlich  showed  that  the  hnemoglobi-
nuria  ex  frigore  was  caused,  not  by  any  particular  sensitiveness  of  the  erythro-
cytes to  cold,  but  by  certain  poisons  produced,  especially  by  the  vessels,  as  a
result  of  the  cold.  Possibly  also  such  autolysins  play  an  important  r6le  in
the  convalescence  of  severe  anaemias.


Ifi  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

not  of  simple  constitution;  but  the  experimental  solution  of  this
problem  was  attended  with  great  difficulties.

The  primary  t^sts  necessary  to  demonstrat*  the  complex  con-
stitution of  a  lysin  are  very  readily  made  on  a  number  of  series.
They  consist  in  this,  that  a  serum  which  dissolves  certain  red  blood-
cells  at  ordinary  temperatures  is  mixed  with  these  cells  at  0°  and
allowed  to  act  at  this  temperature  for  some  time.  For  example,
goat  serum  is  mixed  with  guinea-pig  blood-cells,  for  which  it  is  nor-
mally hiemolytic.  The  mixture  is  kept  at  0°  and  then  centrifuged.
The  clear  fluid  is  mixed  with  an  additional  amount  of  blood-cells
and  tested  in  the  usual  manner  for  its  luemolytic  power.  In  this
way  it  was  easily  shown  that  through  this  procedure  the  serum  had
lost  part  of  its  power,  but  that  this  was  completely  restored  by
the  addition  of  some  of  the  same  serum  previously  inactivated  by
heat.  According  to  our  previous  experienre  these  experiments  show
that  this  serum  contains  two  substances:  one,  which  we  shall  call
interbody,  possessing  two  haptophore  groups  and  analogous  to  the
immune  body;  the  other,  an  addimerti,  which  we  shall  hereafter  terra
complemcni.  Further,  they  show  that  of  these  two  bodies  the  blood-
cells  combine  preponderantly  with  the  interbody.  The  decrease  in
the  power  of  the  serum  is  thm  explained  by  a  lack  of  interbody,
and  this  is  supplied  by  the  addition  of   inactive  senun.

In  experiments  of  this  kind  we  have  succeeded  with  the  following
combinations:  goat  serum,  sheep  serum,  calf  serum,  and  dog  serum,
with  guinea-pig  blood.

Although  the  demonstration  of  the  lack  of  interbody  ia
extremely  simple,  the  counter-demonstration,  that  this  interbody
has  combined  with  the  sixlimenteel  blood-cells,  is  extraordinarily
difficult;  for  in  this  demonstration  a  completely  isolated  comple-
ment is  essential.  The  production  of  a  complement  to  fit  the  specific
interbody  obtained  by  heating  the  serum  of  our  immimized  goat
b  extremely  easy,  for  it  is  found  in  all  normal  goat  serum  and  can
also  be  obtained  from  immune  serum  by  means  of  elective  absorp-
tion.

It  will  be  well  to  analyze  the  conditions  governing  this  elective
absorption  by  means  of  which  interbody  and  complement  can  be
separated.  Complete  separation  will  be  possible  when,  under  the
circuHLilanees  prevailing  at  the  time,  the  affinity  of  the  interbody's
haptophore  group  for  the  blood-cells  is  greater  than  the  affinity
of  ita  haptophore  group  for  the  complement.     A  measure  of  the


i


CONCERNING  HiEMOLYSINS.  17

relative  affinity  is  found  in  the  degree  of  temperature  at  which
combination  occurs.  In  the  case  of  the  lysin  obtained  by  immimiza-
tion,  which  has  already  been  described,  the  combination  of  the  blood-
cells  with  the  corresponding  haptophore  group  of  the  immime  body
took  place  at  0*^  C;  the  combination  of  the  second  haptophore  group
with  the  complement  took  place  only  at  a  higher  temperature.  At
0°C.  the  fluid  would  therefore  contain  immune  body  and  comple-
ment in  a  free  state,  i.e.  uncombined.  In  this  case,  of  course,  it  is
possible  completely  to  abstract  the  immune  body  from  this  mixture
by  means  of  the  red  blood-cells.  This  is  the  most  favorable  case.
Its  direct  opposite  will  be  one  in  which  the  affinity  of  the  two  hapto-
phore groups  is  exactly  equal.  In  that  case  the  blood-cells  will
invariably  combine  with  interbody  +  addiment  in  such  a  manner
that  equal  amounts  of  the  two  components  are  withdrawn  from  the
fluid.  Natxu^lly  between  these  two  extremes  all  kinds  of  inter-
mediate phases  may  exist  showing  variations  in  the  degree  of  affinity  of
these  two  groups.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  most  frequent  case  is
that  in  which  the  affinity  of  the  haemotropic  group  of  the  interbody  is
not  much  greater  than  that  of  the  group  fitting  the  addiment.  In
this  case  we  are  imable  to  produce  free  addiment  by  treating  the
mixture  with  erythrocytes;  a  certain  amount  of  interbody  always
remains  in  the  serum  so  that  the  latter  does  not  completely  lose
its  solvent  property.  Such  sera,  which  still  possess  solvent  property,
cannot,  of  course,  be  used  for  experiments  in  activation.

In  our  investigations  on  normal  sera  we  met  with  this  last  case
surprisingly  often,  and  it  was  this  circumstance  that  made  the  study
of  the  complements  so  difficult.  We  therefore  sought  to  find  another
method  of  procedure,  one  by  which  these  difficulties  could  be
avoided.

For  analytical  purposes  it  is  essential,  as  already  stated,  to  have
both  components  of  the  serum,  viz.,  interbody  and  complement,
in  an  isolated  form.  The  interbody  can  at  any  time  be  obtained
from  the  normal  active  serum  by  heating,  but  the  production  of
the  complement  from  the  normal  serum  is  not  entirely  successful
because  of  the  above-mentioned  difficulties.

We  therefore  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  every  blood
serum  may  contain  a  whole  series  of  different  ferment-like  bodies,
among  which  some  would  be  capable  of  assuming  the  r61e  of  com-
plement. It  was  of  course  clear  that  such  a  combination  of  circum-
stances would  only  be  a  fortunate  chance  occurrence,  and  that  only


18  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY,

by  examining  a  large  number  of  separate  cases  would  such  a  favor-
able combination  be  foimd.  As  a  matter  of  fact  after  a  rather  long
search,  we  succeeded  in  finding  such  cases.

As  is  well  known,  dog  serum  dissolves  guinea-pig  blood  with  great
energy.  If  it  be  heated  to  57®  C.  it  loses  this  power,  in  accord-
ance with  the  usual  rule.  However  if  to  the  5%  guinea-pig  blood
mixture  some  of  this  inactive  dog-serum  is  added,  and  also  a  sufficient
quantity  of  normal  guinea-pig  serum  (about  2  cc.  to  5  cc.  of  the  5%
blood  mixture),  complete  solution  takes  place.  This  fact  can  be  ex-
plained only  by  assuming  that  the  guinea-pig  serum  contains  a
complement  which  happens  to  fit  the  haptophore  group  of  the  inter-
body derived  from  the  dog,  and  that  it  thus  reactivates  this.  In
this  case  the  proof  is  all  the  more  convincing  because  solution  is
effected  by  the  addition  of  senun  of  the  same  species  from  which  the
blood-cells  are  derived.  This  serum  should  be  the  best  possible
preservative  for  the  cells,  for  it  represents  their  physiological  medium.*

By  means  of  these  experiments  we  regard  it  as  positively  proven
that  the  haemolytic  action  exhibited  by  a  serum,  normally  or  in
response  to  immimizing  procedures,  is  due,  in  the  cases  examined
by  us,  to  the  combined  action  of  /tw>  substances.

Now  that  we  had  at  our  command  the  interbody  of  the  haemol3rsin
solvent  for  guinea-pig  blood,  derived  from  dog  serum,  as  well  as  a
complement  which  reactivated  this,  we  were  ready  to  proceed  to
the  last  of  our  demonstratioas.

To  each  of  two  test-tubes  containing  5  cc.  5%  guinea-pig  blood
0.2  cc.  inactive  dog  serum  were  added,  after  it  had  previously  been
ascertained  by  experiment  that  0.2  cc.  dog  serum  previous  to  heat-
ing were  just  sufficient  completely  to  dissolve  this  amount  of  guinea-
pig  blood.    The  mixtures  were  allowed  to  remain  at  20®  for  half  an

*  We  succeeded  also  in  finding  other  combinations  in  which  an  analogous
relation  in  greater  or  less  degree  could  be  demonstrated.  Of  these  we
may  mention:  1)  guinea-pig  blood,  inactive  calf  serum,  guinea-pig  serum;
2)  sheep  blood,  inactive  rabbit  serum,  sheep  serum;  3)  goat  blood,  inactive
rabbit  serum,  goat  serum;  4)  guinea-pig  blood,  inactive  sheep  serum,  guinea-
pig  serum.  The  fact  that  such  an  interbody,  i.e.,  one  derived  from  one
animal  species,  finds  fitting  complements  not  only  in  its  own  serum  but
also  in  that  of  different  species,  is  of  considerable  importance  in  the  question
whether  curative  sera  can  be  made  harmless  to  man  by  means  of  pasteurization.
Possibly  this  would  serve  to  explain  why  heating  of  the  diphtheria  curative
senun,  introduced  by  Spronck,  has  not  realized  the  expectations  a  priori  held
out  for  the  procedure.


CONCERNING  HEMOLYSINS.  19

hour  and  then  centrifuged.  The  sediments  thus  obtained  were
washed  with  salt  solution  and  again  centrifuged.  If  now  to  one
of  these  sediments  physiological  salt  solution  was  added,  and  to
the  other  1.5  cc.  guinea-pig  serum,  complete  solution  resulted  in  the
latter,  while  the  former  remained  undissolved.  This  proves  that
the  interbody  was  completely  anchored  by  the  blood-corpuscles.
The  fluid  obtained  by  centrifuging  did  not  dissolve  guinea-pig
blood,  even  when  considerable  guinea-pig  serum  was  added.  It
did  not,  therefore,  contain  any  free  interbody  derived  from  the  dog
serum  first  added.

By  these  experiments  we  became  convinced  that  haemolysis  in
general  is  due,  not  to  a  simple  body,  but  to  the  combined  action  of
two  distinct  substances.  At  the  present  time  we  have  no  general
method  to  demonstrate  this  for  each  individual  case,  and  the  solution
of  the  problem  therefore  is  now  possible  only  under  either  of  the
above-mentioned  favorable  conditions:  (1)  when  the  two  hap-
tophore  groups  of  the  interbody  differ  greatly  in  their  affinity;  and
(2)  when,  by  means  of  a  combination  whose  discovery  depends  on
chance,  an  activating  complement  is  foimd.  Where  these  conditions
are  not  fulfilled,  the  solution  of  the  problem,  for  the  present  at  least,
is  impossible.  This,  for  example,  is  the  case  with  ichthyotoxin,  the
haBmol)rtic  constituent  of  eel  serum.  It  is  extremely  easy  to  inactivate
this  eel  serum,  slight  warming  for  fifteen  minutes  to  54®  C.  sufficing,
but  thus  far  we  have  been  entirely  unsuccessful  in  reactivating  it,
because  we  have  been  unable  to  find  the  requisite  complement.

Considering  their  multiplicity,  it  is  but  natural  that  we  are  only
just  getting  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  substances  in
normal  blood  serum.  It  is  obvious  also  that  a  great  many  questions
whose  solution  is  of  importance  present  themselves,  especially  in
connection  with  the  substances  discussed  by  us.

The  first  question  to  be  considered  is  that  of  the  multiplicity  of
the  h8emol)rsins  contained  in  a  given  normal  serum.  According  to
our  observations  it  is  very  probable  that  the  ability  of  serum  of  one
species  to  dissolve  the  blood-cells  of  various  other  species  is  de-
pendent on  the  action,  not  of  a  single  lysin,  but  of  several  lysins.
If,  for  example,  dog  serum  dissolves  the  blood-cells  of  guinea-pigs
and  of  rabbits,  it  must  be  assumed  that  a  multiplicity  of  interbodies
and  of  corresponding  complements  effects  this  action.  Some  of  the
ways  in  which  the  solution  of  this  problem  can  be  approached  are
as  follows:


COLLECTED  STl-DIES  IN  IMHTOTTY.

(1)  The  isolated  destruction  of  single  lysins  by  means  of  thermic
and  ehemic  influences.

(2)  The  binding  of  the  different  lysins  by  means  of  corresponding
species  of  blood,  thus  making  their  elective  removal  possible.  With
red  blood-cella  this  procedure,  to  which  we  shall  return  in  a  sub-
sequent article,  offera  many  technical  difficulties.  On  the  other
hand,  with  a  different  kind  of  specific  constituent  of  the  serum,
namely,  the  agglufinins,  this  method  is  easily  applied,  as  can  be  seen
by  the  experiments  of  Bordet '  made  in  connection  with  our  first
experiments  and  carried  out  by  the  methods  employed  by  us.

(3)  A  separation  of  the  lysins  also  seems  possible  through  im-
munization, by  means  of  which  one  is  able  to  obtain  antibodies
against  the  normal  lysins.  Thus  Kossel,  Camus,  and  Gley,  by  treat-
ing animals  with  the  strongly  globulicidal  eel  serum,  have  obtained
a  serum  wtuch  neutralizes  the  action  of  this  eel  serum,  in  other  words,
one  containing  an  antilysin,  Kvidcntly  this  reactively  formed  anti-
body thrusts  itself  into  the  h^motropic  group  of  the  interbody  and
thus  deflects  this  from  the  erythrocyte.  Our  attempts,  based  on
these  premises,  to  produce  an  isolaled  antibody  for  some  of  the
lysias  have  thus  far  been  unsuccessful.  Thus  a  serum  derived
from  rabbits  after  these  had  been  treated  with  goat  serum,  protected
the  rabbit  erythrocytes  against  solution  by  goat  serum.  At  the  same
time,  however,  it  protected  the  blood  of  guinea-pigs  and  rats  against
the  same  influence,  and  even  prevented  the  hemolytic  action  of  dog
eenim  on  rabbit  blood.  From  this  fact  we  must  conclude  that
immunization  with  one  serum  produces  a  whole  series  of  different
antilysins.  Clearly  this  is  to  be  explained  by  assuming  that  a  serum
contains  a  great  number  of  different  complexes  possessing  haptophore
groups,  of  which  many,  whether  they  are  toxic  or  not,  are  able  to
excite  the  production  of  corresponding  antibodies.

This  surprising  multiplicity  of  substances,  present  in  the  blood,
which  possess  haptophore  groups  (hicmolysins,  agglutinins,  ferments,
antiferraents)  is  very  readily  harmonized  with  Ehrlich's  views.
According  to  his  conception  all  these  sulistances  represent  side-
chains  of  the  protoplasm,  which  have  been  thrust  off  and  have  reached
the  circulation.  The  physiological  object  of  the  side-chains  is,  as
Ehrlich  stated  in  1885.^  to  bind  assimilable  substances  to  the
protoplasm  so  that  these  may  serve  as  nutriment  for  the  latter,
I  Inat.  I'asteiir.  March  18!t9.
'  Ebrliub,  Saueratoffbedurfnias  dea  Organisnius.     Berlin,  1885.


J


CONCERNING  H.EMOLYSINS.

A  lai^e  part  of  these  side-chains  may,  under  suitable  circumstances,
be  thrust  off  and  thus  appear  in  the  blood.

Considering  the  large  numiier  of  organs  in  the  body  and  the  mani-
fold chemistry  of  their  protoplasm,  it  should  not  surprise  us  that
the  blood,  which  represents  all  the  tissues,  can  be  filled  with  innumer-
able side-chains ;    and  it  is  not  at  all  astonishing,  considering  the
constantly  changing  chemistry  of  the  organism  (influenced  by  a  targe
number  of  factors  such  aa  race,  sex,  nutrition,  labor,  secretion,  con-
ditions of  the  surrounding  medium,  etc.)  that  the  serum  should  be
subject   to   constant   qualitative   fluctuations.     Such   variations   are
seen  in  the  examples  already  mentioned,  showing  the  behavior  of
sera  of  normal  animals.     Goat  serum  at  one  time  possesses  a  slight
solvent  action  on  sheep  blood,  at  other  times  this  is  entirely  absent.
Dog  serum  in  one  case  dissolves  the  red  cells  of  cats  very  strongly,
in  another  case  it  docs  not  do  so  at  all.     The  action  of  rabbit  serum
a  guinea-pig  blood  shows  a  special  variability.
A  veiy  mteresting  example  is  afforded  by  lamprey  senim,  which,
I  as  is  well  known,  i>03sesses  an  extraordinarily  toxic  action  for  labora-
t  lory  animals  in  general  and  also  for  reii  blood-cells  in  vitro.     Dr.
r-Schonlein  of  Naples,  whose  recent  death  we  lament,  was  kind  enough
I  to  experiment  with  this  for  us.     His  investigations  showed  that  the
h  emim  of  a   not   inconsiderable   number  of  lamprej's   possesses  no
rtoxic  action  at  all,  so  that  it  could  be  injected  into  rabbits  intra^
I  venously  in  amounts  of  2  cc.  without  any  damage  whatever.

It  is  clear  that  this  extensive  variability  enormously  increases  the
fliculties  in  investigating  these  sera.     Thus  on  repeating  the  well-
lown  experiment  of  Buchner,  whereby  a  mixture,  in  certain  pro-
joriions,  of  dog   and  rabbit  sera  loses   its  ha-molytie  property  for
guinea-pigs  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours,  we  were  able  to  com-
pletely confirm  Buchner's  results  in  three  cases,  while  in  five  other
cases  the  hiemolytic  effect  was  only  more  or  less  lost.
I        We  beheve  that  all  these  invest igation.s  support  the  view  we  have
Lalready  expressed  regarding  the  nature  of  the  complex  poisons  of  the
vblood-sera.     v.  Dungem  (Muench.  med.  Wochenschr.,  1899,  No.  14),
H^ing  his  action  on  some  new  experiments  of  hLs,  has  accepted  our
^Kews.     We  can  content  ourselves,  therefore,  with  merely  mentioning
BDOther  view,  recently  expressed  by  Bordet '     He  has  confirmed  the
statements  made  by  us  regarding  the  fixation  of  the  specific  immune
body  hy  means  of  the  correspondine  er>^throcyte,  and  he  has  ad-
'  .\ntiai.  dc  l"in«tit.  Tasteur,  .4pril  18i)9.


22  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

mitted  that  the  fixation  process  is  connected  with  the  solvent  process,
but  he  believes  that  the  nature  of  this  connection  requires  a  special
.  hypothesis :

"On  pourrait  rapprocher,  si  une  comparaison  un  peu  grossi^re
6tait  permise,  la  modification  apport^  par  la  substance  sensibila-
trice  [our  immune  body]  sur  le  globule,  de  celle  qui  consisterait  k
changer  la  structure  d'une  serrure,  de  fa^on  k  y  permettre  Tintroduc-
tion  facile  d'lme  ou  de  plusieurs  clefs  qui  n'y  entraient  pas  auparavant
ou  n'y  p6n6traient  qu'avec  difficult^.  Deux  clefs  sufhsamment  sem-
blables  enterontd^s  lors  indiff^rtment."

One  could  therefore  pictiu^  the  mode  of  action  of  the  two  sub-
stances as  it  is  conceived  by  Bordet  to  be  like  a  safety  lock  which  re-
quires two  keys  to  open  it,  of  which  the  first  is  necessary  in  order
to  make  the  main  lock  accessible.

Against  this  mechanical  conception  it  can  be  urged  that  the  keys
do  not  fly  into  the  lock  of  their  own  accord,  but  that  certain  forces
are  necessary  to  effect  this.  Our  theory  supplies  a  very  simple
explanation  for  this ;  the  driving  force  is  the  chemical  affinity  between
the  fitting  groups.  The  entire  line  of  experiments  made  by  us  was
designed  to  show  whether  the  two  substances,  together,  combined
with  the  blood-cells  at  one  place  or  whether,  separately,  at  two  different
places.  Our  decision  was  determined  by  the  demonstration  that
the  addiment  was  in  no  way  fixed  by  the  red  blood-cells.  Had
Bordet  repeated  not  only  one  of  our  experiments,  but  the  entire
series,  the  inapplicability  of  his  hypothesis  would  have  become  e\a-
dent  to  him.

If  active  immune  senmi  is  treated  with  red  blood-cells,  at  0®  C.
as  described  in  our  first  article,  thus  fixing  the  immune  body,  the
lock,  according  to  Bordet,  is  made  accessible,  i.e.  the  conditions
are  fulfilled  whereby  the  addiment  (Bordet's  alexin)  could  pene-
trate to  the  blood-cells.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  imder  these
circumstances  the  addiment  does  not  do  so.  This,  as  well  as  the
new  facts  mentioned  in  the  present  article,  harmonize  best  with
our  theory.

If,  however,  this  mode  of  action  of  the  lysins  is  accepted,  it  will
be  impossible  not  to  hold  the  same  views  regarding  the  living  pro-
toplasm, and  assume  in  this  the  presence  of  side-chains  of  pecxiUar.
character  which  are  designed  to  grasp  highly  complicated  substances.
It  must  further  be  assumed  that  these  side-chains,  beside  their  grasp-
ing group,  are  endowed  with  a  second  group  which,  by  fixation  of
peculiar  ferments,  effects  a  digestive  action.


m.  STUDIES   ON  ILEMOLYSIS.i
Third  Communication  ^

By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  J.  Moroenroth.

By  injecting  one  animal  with  the  cells  of  another,  we  can  produce
substances  in  the  serum  of  the  first,  which  have  a  specific  damaging
or  destructive  influence  on  these  cells.  This  possibility  has  within
a  short  time  extended  the  theoretical  doctrines  of  immunity  in  vari-
ous directions.  First  Belfanti  and  Carbone  showed  that  the  serum
of  animals,  after  these  had  been  treated  with  blood-cells  of  a  differ-
ent species,  acquires  a  high  degree  of  toxicity  for  just  this  species-
Shortly  afterward,  Bordet  was  able  to  demonstrate  that  this  toxicity
in  corpore  corresponds  to  a  specific  haBmol3rsis  in  vitro.  This  was
confirmed  independently  by  von  Dungeon  and  Landsteiner  by  expert,
ments  published  somewhat  later,  and  further  by  those  of  our  own
mentioned  in  previous  communications.  The  result  of  the  experi-
ments is  always,  that,  following  the  introduction  of  red  blood-cells
of  one  species  into  the  organism  of  another,  a  hsemolysin  is  formed
which  so  injures  the  blood-cells  of  the  first  species  that  their  haemo-
globin goes  into  solution.  Bordet  also  showed  that  this  haemolysis
depends  on  the  action  of  two  substances  in  the  haemolytic  serum.

The  importance  of  this  subject,  due  specially  to  the  complete
analogy  between  the  h8Bmol3rtic  and  the  bacteriolytic  processes,
led  us  to  a  detailed  study  of  the  mechanism  of  these  processes.  We
were  able  to  show  that  the  substance  produced  by  immunization,  the
immune  body,  possesses  a  maximum  chemical  afl^ty  for  the  corre-
sponding blood-cell.  This  aflSnity  is  due  to  the  presence  of  a  specific
combining  group  in  the  molecule  of  the  immune  body,  which  fits
to  a  corresponding  group  in  the  protoplasm  of  the  erythrocyte.
Beside  this,  the  immune  body  possesses  a  second  combining  group

*  Reprint  from  the  Berliner  klin,  Wochenschr.  1900,  No.  21.
'See  pages  1  and  11.

23


which  fits  to  a  group  in  a  fermenl-like  body  of  normal  serum,  namely,
the  complement  (addimeutj.  By  virtue  of  these  two  baptophoie
groups,  tlie  immune  body  functionates  as  a  coupler  or  interbody.
carrying  the  action  of  the  complement  over  onto  the  red  blood-c^lls,

In  order  to  facilitate  expression,  Ilia!  combining  group  of  the.  pro-
toplasmic motccuU:  to  which  tli£  introduced  group  ia  anchored  will  here-
after be  termed  receptor.  The  side-chain,  tor  example,  which  com-
bines with  the  tetanus  toxin  in  the  organism  ia  such  a  receptor.  The
tetanus  antitoxin  itself  is  nothing  but  the  surplus  of  receptors  thrust
off  into  the  blood.  Similarly,  that  complex  which  latir  functionates
as  immune  body  is  a  receptor  bejore  being  thrust  off.

In  the  further  course  of  these  investigations  it  has  been  found
that  the  function  to  produce  peculiar  antibodies  analogous  to  immune
bodieii  ia  not  confined  to  bacteria  and  erythrocytes.  Cells  of  the
most  varied  kind,  provided  they  are  absorbed,  excite  the  production
of  immime  bodies,  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of  the  side-
chain  theory.  Lands teiner.  Metchnikoff,  and  Moxter  succeeded
in  producing  an  immune  serum  against  spermatozoa;  von  Dungem,
a  specific  serum  which  acted  on  ciliated  epithelium;  and  Mecthni-
koff,  an  immune  serum  against  Ieiicoc\1es  and  kidney  epithelium.
Here  also  in  the  cases  examined  for  this  purpose  (v.  Dungem,  Moxter)
it  could  be  shown  that  the  sjjecific  active  substances  are  of  complex
nature,  consisting  of  an  inunune  body  and  a  corresponding  comple-
ment, and  that  the  immune  body  possesses  a  specific  aflinity  for  the
corresponding  cells.

Tlie  great  theoretical  significance  of  these  investigations  which
open  up  a  new  field  to  the  study  of  immimity  is  clearly  apparent,
but  whether  in  the  near  future  they  will  have  any  jiractical  results
remains  to  be  seen,

In  the  pursuit  of  these  studies,  we  were  led  to  extend  our  research^
into  another  direction  which  seemed  to  us  of  special  importance
in  the  understanding  of  pathological  processes.

The  experimental  investigatiorLs  thus  far  made  have  dealt  exclu-
sively with  the  changes  in  the  serum  which  occur  when  an  animal
is  made  to  absorb  foreign  cell  material.  This  mode  of  exjjeriment,
however,  is  not  limited  in  any  way  by  the  nature  of  the  subject,  but
is  dependent  entirely  on  the  will  of  the  experimenter,  and  it  there-
fore lacks  all  physiological  analogy.

In  pathology,  the  changes  foremost  to  be  considered  ore  thoso
re=uhing  from  the  absorption,  by  an  organism,  of  Us  own  ceM  mate-


I


STUDIES  ON   ILiJdOLYSIS.  25

■rial.  Such  occasions  are  presented  by  many  different  diseases.
Keeping  to  the  blood,  for  example,  if  an  individual  suffers  a  con-
siderable subcutaneous  hemorrhage  or  one  into  a  body-cavity,  or
if  part  of  his  blood-cori>uscles  are  destroyed  and  dissolved  by  certain
blood-poisons,  the  essential  conditions,  just  aa  in  an  exijeriment,
are  given  for  the  reactive  formation  of  substances  possessing  specific
injurious  affinities  for  these  biood-cells.  The  same,  however,  can
apply  to  other  tissues;  for  eveiy  acute  atrophy  of  an  organ's  paren-
chyma can  lead  to  the  absorption  of  cell  material  and  to  its  conse-
quences. The  conditions  necessaiy  for  the  development  of  specific
cell  poisons  may  !>e  presented  by  various  ch'c  urns  tan  ces,  thus,  when,
spontaneously  or  under  the  influence  of  araenic,  large  lymph-gland
tumors  are  absorbed;  when  a  slmina  meJts  and  disappeare  under
'Specific  treatmnt;  when  the  white  blood-cells,  owing  to  the  action
'■frf  toxms  or  other  substances,  are  caused  to  disintegrate;  when,
owing  to  certain  raetabohc  or  infectious  diseases,  acute  atrophy  of
the  li\'er  ensues,  etc.  We  shall  further  have  to  assume  that  these
conditions  can  be  fulfilled,  in  a  wider  sense,  when,  under  the  influence
of  certain  general  diseases,  there  occurs  active  dissolution  of  oi^
ganizod  material  of  any  kind  instead  of  atrophy  of  a  single  organ.

It  is  therefore  of  the  highest  jiathological  import.ance  to  determine
whether  the  absorption  of  its  oinn  body  material  can  excite  reactive
changes  in  the  oi^nism,  and  what  the  nature  of  these  changes  is.  The
simplest  conditions  and  thtwe  most  accessible  to  experimental  study  are
those  which  arise  on  the  alieorption  of  blood-cells.     But  here  we  face  a

ious  dilemma.  If  an  animal  organism,  when  injected  with  blood-
'tdls  of  foreign  species,  always  pnxiuces  a  specific  hipmolysin  for
each  of  these  species,  it  must  surely  be  following  a  natural  law;  and
it  is  improbable  that  this  law  which  applies  in  any  particular  number
of  cases  should  be  suspendefl  in  the  case  of  blood-cells  of  the  same
individual.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  forma-
tion of  such  hipmolytic  substances  would  appear  drateolngical  in  the
highest  degree.  For  example,  if,  in  an  individual  who  has  had  an
extensive  hemorrhage  into  a  body-cavity,  the  absorption  of  this
caused  the  formation  of  a  blood  poison  which  destroyed  the
It  of  the  blood-cells,  this  would  be  a  phenomenon  whose  actual
occurrence  lacks  any  clinical  evidence  whatever  and  one  which  no  one

k'illing  to  accept.

It  cannot  he  doubted  that  the  organism  seeks  a  way  out  of  this
difficulty  by  means  of  certain  regulating  contrivances,  whose  deter-


'     thos
Bciirii

■-CeIIs


Cexten;
niood

KfiBt    C


26  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  DIMCNITY.

mination  will  be  of  the  highest  interest.  To  be  sure  the  studj"  of
this  question  oSers  coiujiderabte  difficulties,  difficulties  through
which  previous  experiments  in  this  direction  have  been  brought
to  naught.     (Belfanti  and  Carbone,  liordet.)

We  lia\-e  from  the  beginning  maintained  that  it  is  possible  to
gain  an  inaight  into  these  processes,  only  when  any  changes  occurring
in  the  serum  are  determined  by  means  of  frequent  and  progressive
examinations.  Small  laboratory  animals,  because  of  the  amount
of  blood  required  tor  these  continuous  examinations,  are  therefore
unavailable,  and  hence  we  selected  goats  as  being  best  adapted  for
these  experiments.

After  it  had  been  determined  that  a  single  injection  of  a  large
amount  of  blood  sufficed  to  produce  the  8])ecifiG  hiemolytic  sub-
stances in  the  sermn,  we  usually  injected  our  animals  once  with  a
lai^e  amount  of  goat-blood.  (SOO-900  cc.  for  a  goat  of  35-40  kg.)
In  order  to  overwhelm  the  body  as  rapidly  as  possible  with  the  con-
stituents of  the  blood-cells,  we  made  use  of  intraperitoneal  injectiona.
For  the  same  reason  we  thought  it  best  not  to  inject  intact  blood-
corpuscles,  but  to  inject  blood  which  had  been  made  laky  by  the
addition  of  water.  We  argued  that  blood-cells  of  the  same  species
as  the  animal  injected  would  be  destroyed  very  slowly  in  the  peri-
toneal cavity  of  this  animal,  and  that  consequently  the  absorption
would  be  so  gradual  as  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  what  may  be
termed  an  "  ictus  immunisatorius."  From  the  second  or  third
day  on,  we  withdrew  samples  of  scnim  from  the  animals  so  treated,
and  tested  the  solvent  action  on  the  blood  of  numerous  other  goats.
Our  method  generally  was  first  to  determine  whether  any  indica-
tions of  hjDmolytic  action  were  present.  For  this  purpose  a  drop
of  normal  goat  blood  was  allowed  to  fall  into  undiluted  serum  of
the  treated  goata,  and  the  occurrence  of  any  red  coloration  looked
for.  If  this  test  was  positive,  we  proceeded  to  test  the  htemolyain
in  the  usual  manner  by  adding  decreasing  amounts  of  this  serum
to  tubes  containing  1  co.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  goat-blood  in  0.85%
salt  solution.

With  these  preliminary  remarks  we  proceed  to  our  first  posi-
tive test  (February  16,  1900).  The  subject  of  this  was  a  strong
male  goat,  buck  A.  weighing  33.5  kg.,  into  whom  there  were  injected
intraperitoneally  920  cc.  goat-blood  (mixed  from  the  blood  of  goats
1,  2,  and  3)  made  laky  by  the  addition  of  750  cc.  water.  From  the
second  day  on,  small  amounts  of  blood  were  withdrawn  daily  ft


iyf|^


STUDIES  ON  HiEMOLYSIS.  27

the  purpose  of  obtaining  serum.  This  serum,  as  we  had  antici-
pated, never  showed  a  trace  of  hsemoglobin  coloration.  As  early
as  the  second  day,  a  sUght  solvent  action  for  the  blood  of  goats  4  and
5  was  developed.  A  drop  of  the  blood  allowed  to  fall  into  the  undi-
luted senun  of  buck  A  suffered  partial  solution,  so  that  after  the
blood-corpuscles  had  sedimented,  the  serum  remained  slightly  tinged
with  red.  By  the  fifth  day  the  solvent  property  had  increased
considerably;  0.5  cc.  senun  completely  dissolving  1.0  cc.  of  the
5%  blood-mixture  of  goat  No.  4.  By  the  seventh  day  the  action
had  reached  its  maximum.  0.3  cc.  serum  produced  complete  sola*
tion  (No.  4);    0.07  a  just  appreciable  effect.

As  we  now  had  at  our  disposal  a  sufficient  amount  of  hsemolysin^
we  sought  to  determine  whether  this  haemolysin  dissolved  all  goat
blood-corpuscles  without  exception.  We  found  that  of  nine  goats
which  we  examined,  the  majority  were  markedly  sensitive  to  this
haemolysin.  Thus  goats  Nos.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  and  9  were  highly  sen-
sitive; two  goats,  Nos.  3  and  8,  somewhat  less  so;  and  only  one,
No.  7,  (which  had  previously  been  treated  for  some  time  with  the
expressed  juice  of  eel  muscle,)  showed  so  slight  a  susceptibility  that
even  imdiluted  serum  failed  to  cause  strong  solution.

After  noting  these  results  it  was  important  to  determine  the
behavior  of  the  blood-cells  of  this  buck  toward  the  haemolysin  of
his  own  serum.  If  a  drop  of  blood  was  added  to  the  serum,  in  vitro,
not  even  a  trace  of  solution  occurred.  These  blood-cells  then  were
entirely  insusceptible  to  the  haemolysin  of  their  own  serum,  as  had
already  been  indicated  by  the  absence  of  hsemoglobin  coloration
in  the  freshly  drawn  serum.

If  we  designate  the  specific  haemolysin  developed  by  the  injec-
tion of  blood  of  foreign  species  as  heterolysiriy  then  we  must  designate
the  haemolysin  due  to  the  injection  of  blood  of  the  same  species  as
isolysin.  In  no  case,  however,  and  this  is  to  be  emphasized,  are
we  here  dealing  with  an  autolysin,  i.e.  a  lysin  which  dissolves  the
blood-cells  of  the  animal  in  whose  serum  it  circulates.  However,
such  a  condition  is  not  at  all  a  matter  of  course,  and  the  question
arises  why  the  isolysin  in  this  case  does  not  also  functionate  as  auto-
lysin.

The  toxins  as  well  as  the  haemolysins  can  act  only  when  they
are  anchored  by  certain  haptophore  groups,  the  receptors,  whereby
the  action  of  the  poisons  is  concentrated  on  the  cells  possessing  these
receptors.    If  these  groups  are  lacking,  the  poison  has  no  point  of


attack.  We  have  already  demonstrated  that  a  haemolv-sin,  or  rather
its  immune  body,  is  anchored  by  the  erythrocytes,  and  the  solution
of  the  aljove  question  therefore  becomes  very  easy.  To  begin,  we
have  determined  that  the  isulysin  behaves  like  a  typical  hfemoiysin
of  the  well-known  kind.  It  loses  its  action  by  being  heated  for
half  an  hour  to  55°  C.  (destruction  of  the  complement)  and  is  reac-
tivated by  the  addition  of  a  corresponding  amount  of  normal  goat
Berura,

Next  we  have  determined  that  the  immune  body  of  the  iaolysin
is  bound  by  the  susceptible  blood-cells  in  typical  fashion;  that  the
blood-cells  of  the  immunized  animal,  however,  take  up  only  traces
of  the  immune  body  in  vitro,  amounts  far  less  than  those  taken  up
by  the  almost  insensitive  blond-cells  of  goat  No.  7.  This  phenomenon
can  at  once  be  ascribed  to  a  slight  mechanical  absorption.  We  see,
therefore,  that  the  serum's  own  inseasilive  blood-celts  are  incapable
of  anchoring  the  specific  immune  body  of  the  isolysin.

This  result  can  be  explained  in  either  of  two  ways.  It  may  be
assumed  that  the  blood-cells  lack  this  receptor  entirely,  or  that.
although  the  cells  possess  the  receptor,  the  affinity  of  this  had  already
been  satisfied  by  the  immune  body  in  the  circulation.  In  the  latter
case,  however,  it  is  incomprehensible  why  the  blood-cells  were  not
dissolved  by  the  complement  also  circulating  in  the  blood.  Further
reasons  against  the  latter  assumption  will  be  apparent  laler,  and
so  we  shall  at  once  discuss  a  series  of  facts  which,  according  to  our
views,  demonstrate  that  the  insusceptibility  of  the  blood-cells  in
this  case  is  due  to  an  ahsolvte  lack  of  these  receptors.

Assuming  that  a  given  toxin,  in  an  organism,  finds  receptors
which  anchor  it,  the  injection  of  this  toxin  will  be  followed  by  the
production  of  a  corresponding  aniibody.  If,  howev'er,  an  organism
lack  receptors  for  this  poison,  the  firHt  essential  for  the  production
of  an  antibody  will  be  wanting.  In  the  de\'elopment  or  non-develop-
ment of  antibodies  we  shall  have  an  indication  of  the  presence  or
absence  of  recejitors.

Now  the  hicmolysins  belong  to  the  class  of  poisons  which  pro-
duce antibodies.  We  om^elves  have  demonstrated  that  the  normal
hajmolysin.'j  of  dog's  and  goat's  serum,  when  injected  into  a  forcipii
animal  body,  excite  the  production  of  anliha>molysins.  The  ques-
tion was  whether  the  isolysin  when  injected  into  the  organism  of
other  goats  would  be  able  to  cause  the  production  of  an  anti-isoli/sin.
In  order  to  save  material  we  injected  a  young  goat  (No.  10),  whoae


STUDIES  ON  H.^3I0LYSIS.  29

blood-cells  we  had  previously  shown  to  be  very  sensitive  to  the  iso-
lysin,  several  times  with  considerable  quantities  of  serum  A.  As
a  matter  of  fact  an  antibody  was  developed,  so  that  0.4  cc.  of  the
serum  thus  obtained  were  able  to  protect  1  cc.  of  a  5%  sensitive
goat-blood-cell  mixture  against  solution  by  isolysin  A  (0.5  cc).  The
blood-cells  of  this  same  goat  No.  10,  on  the  contrary,  after  they  had
been  repeatedly  washed  with  physiological  salt  solution  to  free  them
from  serum,  proved  just  as  susceptible  to  the  isolysin  as  before.
Hence  it  follows  that  the  isolysin  here  concerned,  isolysin  A,  causes
the  production  of  antilysins  in  the  body  of  the  same  species  when
it  finds  fitting  receptors.

From  this  we  conclude  that  the  insensitiveness  of  the  red  blood-cells
can  only  be  due  to  the  lack  of  receptors  for  the  isolysin.  A  further
conclusion  must  be  that  these  receptors  are  not  present  in  any  other
tissue  of  buck  A,  that  they  are  absent  in  the  entire  organism,  for  other-
wise there  should  have  been  a  formation  of  anti-isolysin.

It  goes  without  saying  that  we  repeated  these  experiments  on
a  large  number  of  animals  in  order  to  exclude  all  accidental  phenom-
ena. In  the  course  of  these  experiments  we  noted  numerous  and
interesting  variations  in  the  reaction  to  isolysins.

Of  special  interest  is  goat  B,  which  had  been  treated  exactly  like
buck  A.  At  first  it  seemed  as  though  the  experiment  with  this
animal  would  run  an  entirely  different  course,  for  during  the  first
fourteen  days  we  were  unable  to  detect  even  a  suggestion  of  an  iso-
lysin. The  red  cells,  however,  remained  completely  sensitive  to  the
isolysin  derived  from  buck  A.  Then  suddenly  on  the  fifteenth  day
after  the  blood  injection  a  haemolysin  made  its  appearance,  one
which  acted  on  goat  blood  quite  as  strongly  as  the  isolysin  of  buck

A.  The  animal's  own  blood-cells  were  just  as  insensitive  to  this
haemolysin  as  were  those  in  the  first  experiment  to  theirs.  Here  also,
then,  we  were  dealing  with  an  isolysin,  not  an  autolysin.  The  sen-
sitiveness of  the  blood  toward  isolysin  A  continued.  We  now
examined  the  majority  of  our  goats  in  order  to  determine  their  sen-
sitiveness to  this  isolysin,  and  found  that  some  animals  which  were
highly  sensitive  to  isolysin  A  were  very  slightly  sensitive  to  isolysin

B,  and  vice  versa.  The  blood  of  buck  A  occupied  a  peculiar  place.
It  was  as  completely  insensitive  to  isolysin  B  as  it  was  to  that  of
its  own  serum.

From  the  behavior  of  the  blood  of  the  various  animals  toward
these  two  isolysins.  it  was  clear  that  these  isolysins  were  essentially


30  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUOTTY.

different.  This  was  positively  proven  by  the  fact  that  the  anti-
isolysin  A  was  entirely  ineffectual  against  isolysin  B.  The  difference
between  these  two  isolysins  is  further  illustrated  by  the  difference
of  the  intervals  between  blood  injection  and  isol3^in  formation.  In
the  one  case  this  was  only  a  few  days  and  in  thie  other  fourteen  days.
That  the  injection  of  the  goat  blood  should  result  in  the  formation
of  two  entirely  distinct  and  easily  differentiated  icolysins  was  cer-
tainly a  remarkable  phenomenon.  And  yet  this  did  not  exhaust
the  multiplicity  of  the  isolysins.

In  a  third  goat,  C,  (injected  on  the  same  day  as  B  and  with  sim-
ilar amounts  of  the  same  blood,)  a  hemolysin  C  appeared  on  the
seventh  day  which  again  differed  from  isolysins  A  and  B.  This,
furthermore,  proved  itself  an  isolysin,  for  the  blood-cells  of  the  ani-
mal were  entirely  insensitive  to  its  action,  though  they  were  sensitive
to  isolysins  A  and  B.  This  fact  shows  that  isolysin  C  differed  from
isolysins  A  and  B.  It  is  specially  noteworthy  that,  although  the  two
goats  B  and  C  were  injected  at  the  same  time  with  similar  amounts
of  the  same  blood,  they  should  develop  different  isolysins.  This
observation  is  particularly  important  because  it  shows  that  the
constitution  of  the  isolysin  is  dependent  on  the  individuality  of  the
animal  in  which  it  is  developed.

It  is  also  very  remarkable  that  these  three  isolysins,  A,  B,  and  C,
were  able  to  destroy  not  only  goat  blood-cells,  but  also  those  of
sheep.  The  sheep  erythrocytes  therefore  possess  three  different
groups  which  are  identical  with  those  of  these  goat  blood-cells,  or
at  least  are  closely  related  to  them.  On  the  other  hand  still  another
isolysin,  D,  does  not  dissolve  sheep  blood-cells.

After  having  observed  three  different  isolysins  in  three  different
goats,  we  are  in  no  wise  to  assume  that  this  exhausts  the  possibilities.*
On  the  contrary,  it  seems  highly  probable  that  by  further  experi-
ments we  shall  come  to  know  other  isolysins.  Nevertheless  it  must
not  be  assumed  that  this  variation  of  the  isolvsins  is  unlimited.
It  is  to  be  expected  that  a  sufficient  repetition  of  the  experiments
will  finally  lead  us  to  recognize  a  certain  cycle  of  constantly  repeat-
ing types.    The  attainment  of  this  goal,  however,  is  rendered  very

*  Note  on  revision. — In  the  mean  time  we  have  obtained  a  fourth  isolysin,
D,  which  differs  from  isolysins  B  and  C  in  the  fact  that  it  dissolves  the  blood-
cells  of  B  and  C.  Erythrocytes  of  A  are  not  dissolved,  but  the  isolysin  differs
from  A  in  its  behavior  to  various  normal  kinds  of  goat  blood.  The  behavior
of  isolysin  D  toward  sheep  blood  has  already  been  mentioned.


I


vwiU

■in   ™


STUDIES  ON  HAEMOLYSIS.

tedious  by  the  fact  that  in  some  casea  in  which  the  production  cf
an  isolysin  is  attempted  after  the  method  already  outlined,  no  iso-
lysin  is  formed.  We  have  records  of  a  number  of  goats  in  which
the  injection  of  goat  blood  produced  apparently  no  effect  wliatever;
among  these  ia  one  which  was  injected  with  its  own  blood.

The  ditlerence  in  the  isolysins  in  their  dependence  on  the  injected'
blood  and  on  the  individuality  of  the  treated  animal,  the  fact  that
there  is  formed  always  an  isoli/sin,  not  an  autolysin,  the  special  con-
ditions governing  the  formation  of  the  anti-isolysins,  the  failure  of
the  isolj'sin  reaction  in  certain  cases, — all  these  make  the  problems
connected  with  the  above  facts  appear  very  complicated,  and  make
it  necessarj'  now  to  analyze  these  more  closely.

Every  red  blood-cell  possesses  a  large  number  of  side-chains  with
haplophore  groups,  each  of  which  is  able  to  combine  in  the  animal
body  with  fitting  receptors.  Let  us,  in  our  own  case,  designate  such
a  group  of  the  injected  goat  erythrocytes  aa  group  a,  and  a  corre-
sponding receptor  as  receptor  a.  There  will  then  be  presented  two
possibilities.  First  ia  the  possibility  that  the  «  receptor  b  entirely
absent  in  the  organism  of  the  goat  into  which  the  blood  is  injected.
If  this  be  the  case,  there  ia  lacking  the  &saential  condition  for  the
formation  of  any  reactive  product,  and  the  result  of  the  injection
will  be  entirely  negative.

It,  however,  the  second  possibility  obtains,  and  a  receptors  are

lent  in  the  lx)dy  of  the  animal  injected,  there  are  again  two  ways
In  which  the  reaction  may  proceed:  (1)  the  at  receptors  exduaively
may  be  present;  (2)  besides  these,  the  organism  may  contain  the
same  group  a  which  is  present  in  the  injected  blood-cells.

We  shall  study  these  two  cases  separately  and  begin  with  the
simpler,  in  which  only  a  roceptora  are  present.  In  this  case  the
conditions  for  the  formation  of  a  hffimolysin  are  given  and  the  bind-
ing, hyper-regeneration,  and  final  thrusting-ofT  of  the  a  receptors
will  follow.  This  newly  formed  immune  body,  in  conjunction  with
the  complement  always  nonnall>'  present,  will  dissolve  all  those  goat
blood-ceib,  and  only  those,  which  possess  the  group  a.  But  as
this  group  a,  according  to  our  assumption,  is  completely  al)aent  in
the  organism  of  the  animal  itself,  the  immune  body  fails  here  to
find  any  point  of  attack.  The  immune  body  therefore  will  accu-
mulate in  the  blood  without  hindrance  and  without  causing  the
shghtest  damage  to  the  organism.  This  case  is  the  one  which  appliea
to  the  examples  of  isolysin  formation  described  by  us,  for  it  ia  the


32


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


only  one  which  fulfills  the  conditions  necessary  for  a.  permanent
existence  of  a  free  hamnlysin.

The  course  of  the  reaction,  however,  is  entirely  different  in  the
second  case,  i.e.,  when  the  group  a  of  the  foreign  blood-cells  which
fits  into  the  receptor  group  is  found  also  in  the  organism  of  the
animal  injected,  being  present  in  its  blood-cells  and  tissues.  In  this
case,  groups  fitting  to  one  another  would  be  present  in  the  same
organism.  A  pregnant  example  is  seen  in  this,  that  both  the  rennin
and  the  antirennin  group  may  occur  simultaneously  in  the  Organism.
In  fact  we  believe  that  this  simultaneous  occurrence  of  such  corre-
sponding groups  is  a  very  frequent  phenomenon  in  the  economy  of  the
organism,  and  that  it  occurs  especially  in  those  cases  in  which  &
certain  cell  is  dependent  for  its  nutrition  on  the  products  of  a,  dif-
ferent kind  of  cell.'

If  this  is  the  case,  i.e.,  when  group  a  is  present  in  the  organism
beside  the  receptor  group,  the  first  phase  will  proceed  just  as  in  the
first  case.  There  will  be  a  binding,  regeneration,  and  thrusting-off
of  the  receptor  as  immune  body.  The  difference  in  the  course  of
the  reactions  becomes  manifest  in  a  second  phase  in  which  these
thrust-off  receptors  are  taken  up  by  group  a.

I'nder  certain  circumttances  this  might  lead  to  serious  injury,
namely,  when  the  thrusting-off  of  the  receptors  as  immune  bodies
occurs  so  suddenly  that  the  organism  is  overwhelmed,  the  red  blood-
cells  anchoring  the  receptor  group  and  being  dissolved  by  the  cvct-
present  complement.  In  this  case,  then,  an  autolysin  could  develop.
But  this  result  need  not  of  necessity  ensue.  It  can  be  prevented,
tor  example,  if  at  first  only  small  amounts  of  the  liberated  receptor


'  In  contrast  to  this  we  shall  have  to  assume  that  tingiilar  Imptophora  groilpi
occur  wherever  it  is  designed  to  catch  hold  of  certain  exogenous  constituents
of  the  nourishment.  In  immunizs.tion  i(.  is  of  eoiae  consequence  whether  &
aingular  group  funcdlonates  as  receptor,  or  one  which  corrcBponUs  (o  another.
The  former  is  probably  the  ease  wilh  the  toxin,  and  this  pertnits  of  an  extraor-
dinary increftse  in  the  production  of  antitoxin,  being  limited  by  no  regulating
contrivance.  If,  howe\'er,  tlie  antigroup  is  present  in  the  organism,  owing  to
eeeondnry  influennes.  s  regulatory  production  of  now  antigroups  will  occur.
This  might  be  the  reason  why  it  ia  apparently  impossible  to  increase  the  pro-
duction of  antirennin  to  any  desired  degree.  The  antirennin  finds  the  cort«-
aponding  rennin  group  in  the  organism  and  causpB  (ho  production  and  thniBting
off  of  This  group.  As  a  result  of  this  series  of  chimges  we  find  at  one  time  th&t
the  nerum  of  an  animal  contains  free  antirennin,  at  another  time  that  rennin
Ib  heing  excreted  by  the  urine.


STUDIES  UN  H-E.M0LY8IS.  33

body)  reach  the  tissues.  Tliis  would  effect  a  production
wid  thrusting-off  of  the  eorreaponding  group  a,  which  woiild  then
Birculate  as  an  antiautolysin  and  serve  to  switch  the  autolysin  there-
ifter  formed,  away  from  the  blood-ceils,  lie  this  aa  it  may,  whether
the  organism  be  injured  as  a  result  of  an  acute  flooding  with  the
liberated  receptors,  or  whether  this  injurj'  be  prevented  by  the  slow
Bourse  of  the  reaction,  the  end  result  in  the  second  case  will  regularly
be  a  development  of  an  anliautolysin}

The  three  possibilities,  therefore,  which  present  themselves  on
the  injection  of  blood  of  the  same  species  are:  1,  ihe  failure  of  any
formation  of  heemolysin;  2,  the  formaiion  of  an  isolysin;  3,  the  derelop-
ment  of  an  nnlumtolysin.

Each  haptophore  group  of  the  red  blood-cells  (and  we  have  reason
to  assume  a  large  number  of  different  groups  in  each  erythrocyte
of  everj-  species)  will  have  to  react,  in  the  animal  body,  according
to  the  above  scheme.  This  leads  to  a  large  number  of  posgibilities.
If,  for  example,  an  injected  blood-cell  possesses  three  haptophore
groups,  a,  ^,  X,  it  will  be  possible  for  a  to  cause  the  development  of
an  isolysin,  ^  an  antiautolysin,  while  ;•  produces  no  eJTect  whatever.

This,  of  course,  complicates  the  problem  extraordinarily.  A
multiplicity  of  variations  is  presented  whose  complete  investigation
would  require  a  great  deal  of  time  and  labor.  TTie  three  cases  above-
nentioned,  howe\-er,  amply  suffice  to  explain  all  our  observations
Lhus  far.  The  differences  in  the  three  isolysins  previously  described
to  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  three  different  haptophore  groups
of  the  blood-cells;  and  the  fact  that  the  same  blood  injected  into  Iwo
inimala  causes  the  development  of  different  isolysins  is  to  be  explained
ay  the  individual  differences  in  Ihe  receptors.  Finally,  the  failure
of  any  isolysin  reaction  whatever  would  correspond  to  an  absence
of  suitable  receptors.

'  The  cases  here  discitssed  are  of  general  stgciificance  for  the  question  whether

lolyeins  exist  at  all.  and  they  deterniino  also  the  conditions  under  which

hiMnolyeins  of  normal  eenim  are  capable  of  existence  <8ee  also  the  second

•ommunieation,  pages  11-23).      The  fact  that  a  normal  hn'tnolysin  dissolves  the

>lood-<»lIs  ot  foreign  iiperies  but  spares  its  own  hlood-eells,  that,  for  example,

log  serum  dissolvej)  guinea-pig  blood,  rat  blood,  goat  blood,  eheep  blood,  etc.,

Mat  not  dog  blood,  is  only  a  Btngle  instance  of  the  above-mentioned  general

that  autolyttins  are  not  capable  of  existence  in  an  organism;  for  the  presence

jf  receptore.  which  ts  essential  to  the  production  of  niitolysins,  would,  if  the

lutolysins  should  develop,  soon  result  in  a  compeoeation  by  means  of  anti-

lutolymn  form  at  ion.


34


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUTmT.


Though  the  existence  of  the  antiautolyain  is  theoretically  pes-
Bible,  we  have  thus  far  been  unable  to  demonstrate  it.  To  do  this
it  would  first  be  necessary  to  get  hold  of  an  appropriate  autolysin.
The  possibility  of  getting  this,  however,  is  only  conceivable  in  such
favorable  cases  where  the  autolysin  might  be  produced  critically
and  in  large  amounts.  This  certainly  did  not  occur  in  the  cases
observed  by  us,  and  we  were  therefore  compelled  to  try  a  different
method  to  demonstrate  such  an  antibody.  We  know  of  a  number
of  hEemoIysina  which  dissolve  goat-blood  and  which  therefore  fit
to  certain  haptophore  groups  of  the  goat  blood  cells.  It  is  con-
ceivable that  one  of  these  haptophore  groups  is  identical  with  that
of  the  autolysin  sought  for,  and  that  an  antiautolysin  fits  this
group.!

With  this  end  in  view  we  have  made  a  number  of  experiments
and  tested  the  action  of  our  inactive  goat  serum  on  the  goat^blood-
disaolving  action  of  dog  serum,  pig  serum,  and  goose  serum  a  d  on
the  serum  of  a  rabbit  treated  with  goat  blood.  The  results,  however,
were  not  positive.  From  this,  of  course,  we  are  not  to  conclude
that  antiautolysins  are  not  at  all  present  in  these  cases.  We  shaU
rather  extend  and  vary  our  experiments  in  all  possible  directions  '
until  a  lucky  coincidence  leads  ua  to  find  a  fitting  hiemolysin.

Perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  questions  thus  presented  is
whether  this  deficiency  of  binding  groups  in  the  red  cells  b  performed,
or  whether  it  is  due  to  a  new  regulating  power  of  the  organism.  In
the  latter  case  this  power  would  be  suited  in  the  highest  degree  to
protect  the  body  even  without  the  formation  of  an  antiautolysin.

In  one  case,  to  be  sure  (goat  E),  it  seemed  aa  though  the  insen-
sitivenesa  was  developed  only  in  response  to  the  blood  injection.
The  blood-cells  of  this  goat  (the  goat  had  been  repeatedly  injected)
were  primarily  sensitive  to  isolysins  A  and  B,  After  the  injection
there  developed  a  complete  insensitiveness  to  isolysin  B.  although
the  sensitiveness  to  A  remained.  In  this  case  an  isolysin  was  not
developed,  so  that  if  accidental  circumstances  are  excluded,  it  appears
as  if  under  the  influence  of  this  blood  injection  a  direct  change  or
destruction  of  the  binding  groups  had  taken  place.

We  may  perhaps  also  assume  that  the  complete  insensitiyeneas

'  The  multipliKity  of  the  combining  groups  of  the  blood-cells  is  well  illustrftted
by  the  blood  of  buck  A.  This  blood  is  insensitive  to  (he  isolysins  mentioned.
Independently  of  this,  however,  it  retains  complete  Bensitiveness  to  hipmolynna
of  a  different  origin,  pig  serum,  goose  serum,  specific  goose  serum  from  rabbita.


p


STUDIES  ON   H/KMOLYSIS.  35

pf  buck  A  to  isolysin  B  is  a  secondary  one,  due  to  the  treatment;
for  thus  far,  among  the  many  normal  goata  examined,  we  liave  failed
to  find  a  single  one  whose  blood-ceils  are  completely  insensitive  to
isolyains  A  or  B.

These  phenomena  require  further  and  more  extended  investi-
gation,  and  in  this  we  are  at  present  engaged.

In  closing  we  should  like  to  point  out  that  the  difference  between
isolyains  and  autolysins  emphasized  by  us  makes  several  recent
attempts  directed  to  the  solution  of  certain  pathological  processes,
particularly  those  of  autointoxication  in  man,  appear  questionable.
It  has  frequently  been  ascertained  that  serum  secretions  and  excre-
tions of  the  diseased  body  are  poisonous  in  animal  experiments,
and  the  conclusion  has  been  drawn  that  the  substances  to  which
this  poisonous  action  is  due  must  exert  an  injurious  effect  on  the
organism  of  the  patient.  From  the  above  analysis  we  see  that  this
conclusion  is  not  at  all  imperative.  If,  for  example,  the  serum  of
a  scarlet  fever  patient  is  especially  toxic  to  guinea-pigs,  it  is  possible
that  the  same  may  be  absolutely  harmless  to  the  patient  himself.
Even  if  one  demonstrates  that  the  serum  of  aniemic  individuals  dis-
solves the  blood-cells  of  other  individuals,  it  does  not  prove  that
this  property  is  of  any  significance  for  the  origin  of  the  amemia.
In  the  contrary  it  is  highly  probable  that  this  htemolysm  is  only

isolysin  and  not  an  autolysin.

The  above  experiments  may  suiRce  to  show  how  very  complicated
the  conditions  are  when  the  mat-erial  of  its  own  body  is  absorbed
by  an  organism.  Drawing  a  general  conclusion,  however,  we  may
say  that  such  an  absorption,  which  as  already  stated  ext€nda  to
the  greatest  variety  of  cells  and  occurs  in  numerous  instances,  will
not  as  a  rule  lead  to  permanent  injury  of  the  organism,  owing  to
the  formation  of  reaction  products.  Only  when  the  internal  regu-
latuig  contrivances  are  no  longer  intact  can  great  dangers  arise.
■In  the  explanation  of  many  disease  phenomena  it  will  in  the  future
to  consider  the  possible  failure  of  the  internal  regii-
as  well  as  the  action  of  directly  injurious  exogenous  or  endog-

lus  substances.


IV.  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE    STUDY   OF  IMMUNITY.'
By  Dr,  von  DusaBRK,  Univeraity  of  Freiburg,  Germ&E^.

A.    New  Experiments  on  tbe  Side-chain  Theory.

The  combining  ejtperiments  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  ^  showed
conclusively  that  the  two  components  of  an  immune  serum  necessary
for  hiEmolyais  and  first  demonstrated  by  Bordet,  namely  the  immune
body  which  withstands  heating  to  56°  C.  and  the  complement  (addi-
ment)  which  is  present  even  in  normal  serum,  can  under  certain  cir-
cumatances  exist  in  a  serum  side  by  side,  uncombined.  The  immune
body  possessed  a  strong  affinity  to  the  blood-cells  to  which  it  spe-
cifically belonged,  being  anchored  by  these  cells  at  0°  C.  and  thus
separated  from  the  complement,  which  latter  remained  in  the  serum.
The  complement  was  abstracted  from  the  serum  by  the  erythrocjtea
only  at  higher  temperatures  provided  the  immune  body  was  present
at  the  same  time.  'When  the  latter  was  absent  the  blood-eells  failed
to  combine  with  any  complement  whatever.  The  complement,
therefore,  because  of  its  lack  of  affinity,  was  unable  to  act  on  the
blood-cells,  and  likewise  the  mere  anchoring  of  Ihe  immune  body
by  the  blood-cells,  without  the  presence  of  the  complement,  was
unable  to  effect  any  hsEmolysis.  The  most  plausible  explanation
for  these  facta  was  this,  that  solution  is  effected  by  the  complement,
but  that  this  substance  first  requires  the  immune  body  to  enable  it
to  lay  hold  of  the  blood-cells.

Bordet '  has  assumed  that  the  immune  body,  independently  of
the  complement,  combines  with  the  substance  of  the  erythrocyte
and  so  changes  this  that  it  (the  erythrocyte)  now  combines  with
the  complement.  Against  this  assumption  must  be  urged  that
as  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  a  definite  relation  between  immune  body


'  Reprinted  from  the  Miinehener  med.  Wochensohrift,  No.  20,  1900,

'See  pages  1-23  of  this  volume.

•  Annalos  de  I'lusiitut  Pasteur,  1899,  No.  14.


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STDDY  OF  IMMUNITY.


371


\


and  complement  of  the  same  speoies.     Aji  immune  serum  inactivated   ■
by  heating  to  5C°  C.  can  always  be  reactivated  by  the  addition  of
fresh  blood  serum  from  an  animal  belonging  to  the  same  species  aa
that  from  which  the  inmiune  serum  was  derived.     The  eomplementa
of  other  species  of  animal,  however,  reactivate  this  immune  body  i
in  the  most  divergent  manner.

The  results  of  the  combining  experiments  were  readily  harmonized
with  the  requirements  of  the  side-chain  theory.  The  immune  body
is  nothing  but  a  side-chain  with  two  haptophore  groups,  which  has
been  produced  in  excess  and  thrust  off  into  the  blood.  One  of  these
haptophore  groups  possesses  a  strong  chemical  affinity  for  the  corre-
sponding group  of  the  erythrocyte,  and  ordinarily  it  serves  to  anchor
nutritive  material  possessing  corresponding  haptophore  groups  to
the  cells.  The  other  haptophore  group  is  able  to  combine  more
or  less  completely  with  complement  present  in  the  scrum.  It  is
probably  designed  to  collect  from  the  blood  plasma  the  ferment-
like  complement,  which,  by  splitting  up  the  nutritive  substances,
makes  their  assimilation  possible.

There  is,  however,  another  view  to  take  of  these  phenomena.  It
comprehensible  that  the  cell,  aa  such,  produces  the  two  compo-
its  necessary  for  haemolysis  simultaneously  and  in  relation  with
each  other,  in  such  fashion  that  in  the  assimilation  of  the  substances
anchored,  it  constantly  produces  the  complement  required  by  meam
of  ita  own  activity  and  docs  not  depend  on  the  supply  from  with-
out, from  the  blood  plasma.  The  assumption  of  such  a  complex
system — in  which  two  members  so  intimately  connected  are  yet
so  readily  dissociated— offers  difficulties  which  it  is  unnecessary  to
discuss  further,  especially  because,  as  will  be  seen  later,  experi-
ints  have  precluded  this  possibility.
If,  however,  the  side-chain  theory  is  correct  we  shall  axpect:

1.  That  immune  body  and.  complement  are  not  present  in  the
imune  serum  in  etpiivalent  proportions,  but  that  quantitatively

itiiey  may  be  independent  of  each  other.

2.  That  the  same  group  of  the  red  blood-ceJls  which  in  hemolysis
combines  with  the  immune  body  causes  the  production  of  the  inv-
mune  body.

3.  That  cells  which  possess  such  form  of  complex  side-chains  are
enabled  by  the  presence  of  the  eomplementophile  groups  to  abstract
complement  from  the  blood  serum.

1.  The  question  whether  in  the  immunity  reaction  only  the  inao-


Kfis  CI
^eact


tive  immune  body  is  produced,  wtiich  then  combines  secondarily
with  the  complement  present  in  the  blood,  or  whelher  the  two  sulj-
stances  reach  the  circulation  together,  can  under  favorable  con-
ditions be  answered  by  an  exact  quantitative  analysis  of  the  immune
serum  for  immune  body  and  complement.

I  have  therefore  treated  a  nmnber  of  rabbits  with  cattle  blood,
cow's  milk,  and  tracheal  epithelium  of  cattle,  and  examined  the
hemolytic  immune  sera  thus  obtained  for  their  exact  content  in  im-
mune body  and  complement.  Corresponding  to  the  material  injected,
the  erythrocytes  of  cattle  were  always  used  as  a  reagent.  The
method  employed  was  the  same  in  all  cases ;  decreasing  amounts  of  Uie
various  blood  sera  were  mixed,  each  with  one-half  cc.  5%  cattle
blood  dilution  (in  0,89c  NaCl  solution),  the  mixture  was  kept  at
37°  C.  for  two  hours  and  tested  for  hiemolysis.  It  was  then  very
readily  proven  that  an  equivalence  between  immime  body  and  com-
plement does  not  at  all  exist.

If  such  an  equivalence  were  present,  the  immune  body  of  the
fresh  immune  senim  would  be  completely  aatiu-ated  with  complement
and  would  not  become  more  active  by  the  further  addition  of  com-
plement. The  experiments  demonstrated  the  contrarj',  for  in  some  cases
the  power  of  the  immune  sera  was  markedly  incraseed  by  the  addi-
tion of  normal  rabbit  serum,  which,  in  the  doses  employed,  was  not
itself  able  to  effect  the  slightest  solution  of  the  cattle  blood-cells,
For  example,  if  the  fresh  serum  of  a  rabbit  which  had  been  treated
with  cattle  blood  was  able  to  make  ten  times  its  volume  of  a  5%
cattle  blood  mixture  completely  laky,  the  same  serum  on  the  addi-
tion of  a  sufficient  amount  of  complement  was  able  to  dissolve  320
times  its  volume.  On  comparing  the  various  immune  sera  with  each
other,  it  is  seen  that  this  increase  in  the  hemolytic  action  on  the
addition  of  complement  is  in  direct  proportion  to  the  amount  of  im-
mime body  present.

The-  experimevls  therefore  prove  that  quantilatively  (he  immune
body  is  entirely  independent  of  the  complemetU.

We  can,  however,  go  further  and  determine  quantitatively  the
exact  amount  of  complement  contained  in  the  normal  serum  on  the
one  hand  and  in  the  immune  serum  on  the  other.

The  amount  of  complement  contained  in  the  various  normal
sera  was  determined  by  always  testing  with  the  same  amount  of  &
blood  immune  body.  In  fixinij  sHch  a  utandord  serum  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  take  as  a  measure  the  action  of  an  immune  body  saturated  mth


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMUNITY.  39

complement,  for  equal  amounts  of  immune  body  act  differently  with
different  amounts  of  complement.  In  all  my  tests  on  the  amount  of
complement  contained  in  a  serum,  I  used  so  much  inactivated  blood
immune  serum  that  the  inunune  body,  when  saturated  with  com-
plement, could  dissolve  sixteen  times  the  amount  of  blood  present.

The  experiments  demonstrated  that  the  amount  of  complement
contained  in  normal  rabbit  serum  is  fairly  constant,  and  even  in
different  animals  is  not  subject  to  great  fluctuations.  Proceeding
as  just  described,  it  was  found  that  complete  solution  took  place
in  all  cases  on  the  addition  of  V40  to  V20  cc.  normal  serum.  Within
definite  limits  therefore  the  complement  in  rabbit  blood  seems  fixed.

The  amount  of  complement  contained  in  immune  serum  could  be
determined  by  comparing  the  haemolytic  action  of  the  fresh  serum
with  its  action,  after  inactivation  (by  heating  for  twenty  minutes
to  56°  C), on  the  addition  of  various  amounts  of  normal  rabbit  serum,
the  complement  content  of  which  was  known.

The  serum  of  the  rabbits  treated  vnth  cattle  blood,  serum  which  had
been  shown  to  contain  such  a  large  excess  of  immune  body,  was  tested
i,  J^,  3,  4,  iif  and  H  days  after  the  injection  and  failed  in  all  of  the
numerous  cases  to  show  even  a  trace  of  increase  in  the  amount  of  com-
plement it  contained,  A  peculiar  state  of  affairs  is  thus  presented.
Since  haemolytic  action  is  dependent  on  the  immune  body  so  far
as  this  can  combine  with  the  complement,  we  see  that  the  haemolytic
action  of  fresh  immune  serum  can  be  increased  only  up  to  a  certain
point,  determined  by  the  amount  of  complement  contained  in  the
normal  blood  serum.  All  additional  amounts  of  immune  body
formed  in  the  course  of  the  immunity  reaction  therefore  remain
latent,  and  manifest  their  action  only  when  the  immune  body  is
brought  into  combination  with  greater  amounts  of  complement.
This  can  be  done  artificially,  in  test  tube  experiments,  by  the  addi-
tion of  normal  serum,  or  experimentally  by  injecting  the  immune
body  into  a  suitable  animal  body.^

Immune  serum  therefore  differs  from  normal  serum  only  in  its  con-
tent  of  inactive  immune  body.^"  Accordingly,  in  the  immunity  reaction,
only  inactive  immune  body  is  produced  by  the  cells  in  excess.    This


>  So  also  the  earlier  observations,  as  those  of  R.  Pfeiffer,  on  cholera  serum,
my  own  on  epithelial  immune  serum,  and  those  of  Moxter  on  antispermatozoa
serum,  in  which  the  immune  sera,  in  themselves  little  or  not  at  all  active,  showed
their  full  power  when  injected  into  fitting  animal  bodies,  are  to  be  explained
by  the  relative  poverty  of  these  sera  in  preformed  complement.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNir

result  is  easily  understood  on  the  basis  of  the  side-chain  theory,
if  we  assume  that  the  production  of  the  complement  is  enth^ly  inde-
pendent of  the  binding  of  the  mjected  substances  by  the  side-chaina,
and  !8  probably  referable  to  other  cells.  If  the  production  and
thrusting  off  of  the  particular  side-chains  exceeds  a  certain  limit,  these
side-chains  will  fail  to  find  in  the  blood  serum  any  more  complement
whose  haptophore  group  is  still  available.  The  disproportion  between
immune  body  and  complement  then  sets  in.  This  will  be  most
marked  in  those  cases  in  which  the  normal  serum  contains  but  little
complement  and  in  which  a  considerable  production  of  immune  body
can  be  effected.

2.  Certain  experiments  which  I  have  described  in  a  previous  com-
munication regarding  globulicidal  action  of  the  animal  organism  '  led
me  to  the  view  that  the  immune  body  combines  with  a  particular
group  of  the  blood-cells  and  thus  leads  to  their  solution.  This  con-
ception was  based  on  the  fact  that  a  specific  affinity  exists  between
erythrocyte  and  the  corresponding  immune  body,  which  affinity  must
be  the  same  in  the  production  as  in  the  action  of  the  immune  body.
According  to  the  side-chain  theory  just  this  affinity  is  the  driving
force  which  on  the  one  hand  anchors  the  corresponding  group  of
the  erythrocyte  to  the  preformed  side-chains  (such  side-chains  when
thrust  off  constituting  the  immune  body),  and  on  the  other,  in
hemolysis,  anchors  the  immune  body,  and  with  it  the  complement,
to  the  blood -cells.

It  must  always  be  conceded  to  the  opponents  of  this  view  that  the
evidence  to  prove  such  complicated  processes  as  wOl  develop  in  the
cells  after  inoculations  of  blood  into  an  animal  body  will  not,  perhaps,
be  absolutely  conclusive.  If  one  were  willing  to  forego  an  explana-
tion of  the  specificity,  one  could  assume  that  the  immunity  reaction
is  based  on  an  increase  of  the  normal  fimction  of  certain  cells  whose
products  are  formed  without  requiring  a  certain  group  to  fit  into  a
corresponding  one.

It  was  therefore  of  great  interest  to  be  able  to  show  experimentally
that  the  group  which  in  hemolysis  combines  with  the  inamune  body
actually  gives  rise  to  the  production  of  the  immune  body.  This
demonstration  was  effected  by  injecting  blood  together  with  iiuio>
tivated  blood  immune  serum.

If  the  development  of  the  antibody  is  independent  of  the  group


'  Munch,  med.  Wochenachrift,  1899,  Ndb.  13  and  14.


J


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMUNITY.


41


hich  the  immune  body  is  attached,  the  immunity  reaction
will  be  exactly  the  same  whether  the  injected  blood  is  loaded  with
immune  body  or  not.  If,  however,  the  production  of  the  immune  body
is  dependent  entirety  on  the  molecular  group  for  which  t!ie  immune
body  possesses  a  specific  affinity,  no  immune  body  will  be  developed
when  a  sufficient  amount  of  inactivated  blood  immune  serum  is
added  to  the  injected  blood,  since  the  group  is  already  occupied  by
immune  body  and  no  longer  offers  the  cells  a  point  of  attachment,
The  experiments  completely  confirm  the  latter  assumption.
When  the  blood  loaded  u-ith  ivimune  body  was  injected,  no  immune
body  vfluilever  icaa  developed  in  Ike  injeeied  animal:  whereas  in  a  con-
trol rabbit,  injected  with  exactly  the  same  amount  of  cattle  blood
(30  cc),  but  without  immune  body,  so  much  was  produced  that
the  serum  eleven  days  after  the  injection  was  able  to  dissolve  com-
pletely eight  times  its  volume  of  full  blood  provided  sufficient  com-
plement was  added.

This  fact,  like  many  others,  speaks  against  the  idea  that  the
lune  bodies  or  the  analogous  antitoxins  are  not  reaction  producta
of  the  organism  but  are  derived  by  modification  from  the  substances
introduced,  a  view  still  maintained  by  certain  high  authorities.  The
phenomenon,  however,  is  readily  explained  on  the  basis  of  the  side-
chain  theory.  Since  the  particular  groups  of  the  erythrocytes,
which  otherwise  give  rise  to  the  immunity  reaction,  are  already
occupied  by  immune  body,  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  be  bound
by  the  side-chains,  which  are  absolutely  similar  to  the  immune  body.
3.  According  to  the  researches  of  Ehrhch  and  Morgenroth,  the
rhrocytee  of  sheep  possess  no  affinity  whatever  for  the  complement
normal  goat  serum.  If  instead  of  sheep  blood-cells,  one  employs
those  of  cattle  and  allows  them  to  act  on  rabbit  blood  serum,  exactly
the  same  thing  will  be  observed;  the  rabbit  blood  serum,  centrifuged
after  prolonged  contact  with  the  bJood-cells,  shows  no  diminution
in  the  content  of  complement.  //,  however,  other  cells,  e.g.,  ciliated
epithelium  }rom  the  trachea  oj  cattle,  be  mixed  with  rabbit  serum,  the
reeult  is  directly  opposite,  the  complement  decreasing,  and  «ten  under
e  circumstances  disappearing  entirely.  In  like  manner  the  rabbit
im  may  lose  its  complement  through  the  action  of  other  cells.
the  case  of  various  mammals  and  birds,  every  one  of  the  organs
ited — liver,  spleen,  kidney,  testis,  lung,  and  brain — was  able  to
ibstract  more  or  less  complement  from  the  rabbit  serum.  Yeast
and  fission-fungi  were  also  able  to  effect  this.     Especially  remark-


able,  however,  is  the  fact  that  the  body  cells  of  the  same  animal
are  able  to  produce  tliia  phenomenon.

Exact  quantitative  examinations  showed  that  there  were  dis-
tinct differences.  The  spleen  and  kidney  of  a  rat,  for  example,  wae
more  strongly  active  than  the  same  organs  of  a  guinea-pig,  while
the  liver  tissue  of  the  two  species  possessed  equal  activity;  the
spleen  and  kidney  of  the  rat  abstracted  more  complement  from
rabbit  senim  than  did  the  same  quantity  of  liver  tissue,  whereas
in  the  guinea-pig  the  liver  acted  more  strongly  than  the  spleen,  and
the  latter,  again,  more  strongly  than  the  kidney.  Virulent  cholera
vibrios  acted  only  one-quarter  as  strongly  as  the  completely  avtrulent
"cholera  Calcutta."  (The  number  of  active  individuals  could  not,
of  course,  be  regarded.)  Yeast  cells  were  weakly  active,  anthrax
bacilli  strongly  so.  In  the  case  of  anthrax  bacilli  I  tested  the  action
of  heat  on  this  property  to  abstract  complement  from  rabbit  serum,
and  found  that  it  is  not  destroyed  by  heating  the  bacilU  for  twenty
minutes  to  56*0.,  but  that  it  is  destroyed  by  heating  them  for  only
a  short  time  to  98°  C.  But  the  property  of  the  cells  to  abstract
complement  from  rabbit  serum  is  lost  not  only  through  the  action
of  heat,  but  also  when  the  particular  cells  prefious  to  their  mixturt
with  rabbit  serum  have  been  allowed  to  remain  in  contact  with  another
serum.  For  example,  1  grm.  finely  crushed  kidney  tissue  of  cattle
is  mixed  with  2  cc.  cattle  serum,  allowed  to  act  at  37"  C.  for  half  an
hour  and  then  separated  from  the  serum  by  centrifuge.  If  2  cc.
rabbit  serum  are  now  added  to  the  sediment,  and  this  is  allowed
to  stand  for  half  an  hour  at  37°,  it  will  be  found  on  testing  with  cattle
blood  immune  body  that  there  is  no  diminution  of  complement
content;  but  such  a  diminution  does  occur  when,  with  exactly  the
same  procedure,  8  p.  m.  NaCI  solution  is  used  in  place  of  the  cattle
serum.

These  phenomena  are  best  explained  by  assuming  that  the  ceHa
in  question,  in  contrast  to  the  erythrocytes,  possess  groups  which
have  a  ver>-  close  chemical  relation  to  those  of  the  comiilement  which
reactivates  the  cattle  blood  immune  body.  The  affinity  of  the  cells
may,  in  fact,  be  greater  for  the  complement  than  for  any  immune
body  directed  against  other  cells  of  the  same  animal  species.  For
example,  if  we  add  ciliated  epithelial  cells  from  the  trachea  of  cattle
to  an  immune  serum  deri\'pd  from  a  rabbit  by  treatment  with  cattle
blood,  we  shall  under  favorable  circumstances  find  that  the  immune
body  has  been  partially,  but  the  complement  completely,  abstracted


racted    I

J


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMUNITY

from  the  eenim.  In  this,  therefore,  the  combining  relations  are
just  the  opposite  of  those  found  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  to  exist
between  blood-cells  and  their  corresponding  immune  body.  The
tracheal  epithelial  cells  must  therefore  possess  com  piemen  tophile
groups.  The  immune  bodies,  which  according  to  the  aide-chain  theory
are  only  the  side-chains  thrust  off  into  the  circulation,  are  similarly
supplied  with  complementophile  groups.  These  facts  speak  (or
the  correctness  of  the  views  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  eapecially
when  we  consider  that  a  cell,  corresponding  to  its  many-sided  func-
tions, possesses  not  merely  one  kind  of  side-chain,  but  side-chains
of  the  most  highly  developed  form.

Mammalian  erythrocytes  in  contrast  to  the  tissue  cells  seem
not  to  possess  complex  side-chains,"  and  this  is  readily  understood
when  we  consider  that  the  red  blood-cells  of  these  animals,  being
without  a  nucleus  and  unable  to  maintain  their  nutrition  independently
are  not  complete  analogues  of  the  tissue  cells;  and  further  that
their  conditions  of  nutrition,  corresponding  to  their  simpler  func-
tions, must  be  less  compUcated  than  those  of  the  typical  tissue  cell.
Among  the  hving  constituents  of  the  body,  the  red  blood-cells  con-
stitute the  simplest  case  and  are  therefore  particularly  adapted  to
the  solution  of  many  special  problems  in  immunity,  as  can  be  seen
from  the  course  of  the  last  experiments.

The  phenomenon,  that  body  cells  are  able  to  abstract  complement
from  the  serum,  furnishes  us  with  a  good  explanation  of  the  fact
that  immune  sera  are  often  so  little  active  in  an  organism  of  a  dif-
ferent species.  The  immune  body,  which  in  stronger  concentrations  is
not  saturated  with  complement,  even  when  the  immune  serum  is
perfectly  fresh,  can  lose  its  complement  entirely  in  the  body  of  an
animal  of  different  species;  it  will  therefore  become  active  only  when
it  finds  a  fitting  complement  in  the  new  organism.  Hence  in  serum
therapy  it  is  advisable,  as  Ehrlich  has  proposed,  to  employ  for  pur-
s  of  immimization,  animals  closely  related  to  man,  and  further^
femore  to  search  for  anthropostable  complements.

B,    Phagocytosis  and  Globullcldal  Immunltj'.

In  a  previous  communication  '  lexpressed  the  view  that  the  specific
icrease  of  the  globulicidal  function  of  the  organism,  following  the
JDtroduction  of  chicken  and  pigeon  blood,  is  due  to  the  action  of  the


44


COLLECTED  STTDIEa  IN  IMMUNITY.


serum  and  not  to  the  activity  of  the  phagocytes.  That  the  takit^
up  of  the  blood-cells  by  the  phagocytes  in  the  epecifically  treated
guinea-pig  is  necessary  for  the  solution  of  the  blood-cells  was  ex-
cluded by  the  fact  that  hEemolysis  is  also  effected  in  the  peritoneal
cavity  of  the  animals  apart  from  the  phagocytic  cells.  Furthermore,
a  transference  by  the  phagocytes  of  the  substances  necessary  for
solution  was  not  suggested  because  the  exudate,  rich  in  leucocytes,
which  was  produced  in  specifically  immunized  guinea-pigs  by  in-
jections of  an  aleuronat  mixture,  showed  a  much  smaller  content
of  both  immune  body  and  complement  than  the  blood  which  waa
poor  in  leucocytes.

Metchnikoff  has  objected  to  these  experiments.^  He  states  that
aleuronat  exudates  contain  principally  microphages,  whereas  the
blood  is  richer  in  macrophages,  and  that  the  latter  alone  are  con-
cerned in  haimolysis.  I  have  therefore  tested  the  spleen  (rich  in
macrophages)  of  normal  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  with  a  cattle  blood
immune  boily  derived  from  rabbits  in  order  to  determine  the  amount
of  complement  present.  The  experiments  have  demonstrated  that
the  spleen  also  contains  much  less  complement  than  the  blood  serum.
For  example,  1  grm,  finely  crushed  spleen  of  an  exsanguinated  rabbit
was  mixed  with  4  cc.  of  an  8  p.  m.  NaCl  solution.  This  fluid,  like
similar  mixtures  derived  from  liver  and  kidney,  when  tested  in  the
usual  manner  proved  from  eight  to  sixteen  times  weaker  than  the
blood  serum.  Moreover,  if  the  suspended  organic  particles  were
first  washed  with  physiological  salt  solution,  they  yielded  no  com-
plement whatever  to  the  immune  body.  The  spleen  of  a  guinea-pig
contained  still  less  complement,  although  the  serum  of  this  same
animal  completely  activated  the  cattle  blood  immune  body  derived
from  rabbits,  and  did  so  in  even  smaller  quantity  than  the  rabbit
serum.

We  must  therefore  in  conformity  with  the  side-chain  theory  look
to  the  blood  serum  as  the  chief  source  of  complement.

It  is  self-evident  that  the  complement  cannot  originate  in  the  blood
plasma;  it  must,  of  course,  be  derived  from  some  kind  of  cells.  How-
ever, that  it  is  especially  abundant  in  the  phagocytes  is  not  at  all
borne  out  by  the  above  experiments.

As  for  the  immune  body,  Metchnikoff  too  believes  this  to  circulate
free  in  the  blood  plasma.     According  to  his  conception  the  macro-


■  Annalea  de  rinst.  Pasteur


I,  No.  10.


\


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMUNITY.

phages  yield  this  to  the  blood  at  the  end  of  their  intracellular  diges-
tion. Metchnikoff  bases  this  view  chiefly  on  his  observations  that  the
destruction  of  avian  blood-cells  in  the  peritoneal  cavity  of  normal
guinea-pigs  is  effected  exclusively  by  the  macrophages.

This  statement  is  in  direct  opposition  to  mine,  according  to  which
even  in  imtreated  animals,  the  solution  takes  place  free  in  the  peri-
toneal exudate  independently  of  the  phagocytes.  I  believe,  however,
that  these  apparently  contrary  results  can  well  be  harmonized.

According  to  Metchnikoff  the  solution  of  goose  blood-cella  in
the  subcutaneous  connective  tissue  of  even  non-immunized  ardmab,
13  eftect€d  almost  exchisively  extraccllularly.  Hemolysis  in  this
case  must  be  due  to  a  passage  of  complement  and  interbody  from
the  blood  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues;  this  will  naturally  proceed
more  rapidly  when,  as  a  result  of  substances  exciting  inflammation,
a  stronger  exudation  ensues.

It  would  be  very  curious  if  the  same  conditions  for  the  passage
of  hieraolytic  substances  from  the  blood  were  not  present  in  the  peri-
toneal cavity.  We  know,  for  example,  that  Pfeiffer's  phenomenon
is  especially  marked  in  the  peritoneal  cavity.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
shortly  after  an  injection  of  avian  blood-cella  into  the  peritoneal
cavity  of  normal  guinea-pigs,  one  always  observes  free  nuclei,  even
when  the  serum  has  been  removed  from  the  cells  by  centrifugation.
Of  this  1  convinced  myself  by  repeated  observations.  If  one  employs
blood-cells  of  low  resistance  (chicken-blood),  and  these  in  small
doses,  they  will  be  degenerated  and  for  the  most  part  dissolved  before
they  are  taken  up  by  the  macrophages  in  any  considerable  number.
When  blood-cella  of  greater  resistance  are  employed,  and  these  in
larger  doses,  the  solution  effected  by  the  body  juices  will  be  com-
jmratively  slight  and  occupy  more  time.  The  taking  up  of  these
cells  by  the  macrophages,  which  Metchnikoff  in  his  splendid  experi-
.inents  was  able  to  follow  mto  the  organs,  will  then  come  more  to
'Ihe  front.

If  therefore,  a&  a  result  of  experiments  in  which  I  used  sensitive
■cells  in  small  doses,  I  underrated  the  significance  of  phago-

losis,  Metchnikoff,  through  the  conditions  in  his  experiments,  fell

ito  the  opposite  error.     The  truth  lies  between   these  views;    in

the  peritoneal  cavity,  according  to  the  prevailing  conditions,  tuemol-

ysis  can  be  effected  free  in  the  peritoneal  exudate  or  in  the  interior

of  the  macrophage.

In  any  case,  phagocytosis  is  not  essential  for  the  development  of


J


the  immune  body.  The  immunity  reaction  occurs  even  under  con-
ditions in  which  phfigocytosis  does  not  at  all  enter;  and  if,  accord-
ing to  the  observations  of  Jletchnikoff,  somewhat  less  immune  body
b  produced  after  subcutaneous  injections  than  after  equal  injection*
peritoneally,  this  may  be  explained  as  follows:  In  consequence  of
the  slower  absorption  from  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  fewer  cells
come  into  contact  with  the  group  of  the  erythrocytes  which  excites
the  immunity  reaction  before  an  excess  of  immune  body  is  thrust
oS  by  these  cells  into  the  blood.  This  immune  body,  of  course,
prevents  any  further  combination  of  the  group  in  question  with  other
cells.

To  what  extent  the  phagocytes  are  concerned  in  the  production
of  immune  bodies  must  be  determined  separately  in  each  case.  No
definite  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  the  expcrimentii  of  Metchni-
koff  on  guinea-pigs  with  goose  blood-cells,  for  at  no  time  did  the
organs  of  the  specifically  treated  guinea-pigs  show  a  stronger  glob-
ulicidal  action  than  those  of  normal  animals,  although  such  an
increase  in  hemolytic  power  was  exhibited  by  the  blood  serum.  But
the  observation  has  been  made  that  even  in  normal  animals  the
organs  rich  in  macrophages  are  able,  in  contrast  to  other  tissues,  to
dissolve  goose  blood-cells,  and  this  observation  is  well  adapted
in  this  ease  to  support  the  assumption  of  a  special  significance  of
the  phagocytes  for  this  function.  However,  that  organs  rich  in
macrophages  effect  hreraolytic  action  is  not  necessarily  the  case.  For
example,  the  spleen  of  a  guinea-pig  (1  grm.  finely  crushed  spleen
suspended  in  1  c.c  of  an  8  p.  m.  NnCl  solution),  in  contrast  to  the
blood  serum  of  the  same  animal  b  not  globulicidal  for  cattle  blood.
Considering  the  large  number  of  immune  bodies,  it  will  surely
often  occur  that  the  phagocytes  are  preeminently  concerned  in  the
production  of  the  immune  body,  especially  since  these  cells  frequently
come  into  intimate  relations  with  the  injected  substances.  On  the
other  hand,  it  b  extremely  improbable  that  the  phagocytes  alone
produce  immune  body.  After  all  that  haa  been  said  we  shall  have
to  bring  this  production  into  relation  with  the  general  conditions
of  nutrition.  The  most  varied  celb,  according  to  the  kind  of  side-
chajns  they  possess  and  the  affinities  thereby  brought  about,  are
probably  able  to  produce  immune  body.

Like  the  closely  related  antitoxic  immunity  reaction,  the  globu-
licidal and  bactericidal  reactions  rest  on  a  chemical  process  the
course  of  which  b  beat  expl^ned  on  the  basb  of  the  side-chain  theory.


J


By  Dr.  von  DnNQERN,  University  of  Freiburg,  Gennony,

A.   Receptors'  and  the  Fomiatlon  of  Antibodies.

AccxjRDiNG  to  Ehrlich'a  view  ^  the  antitoxins  are  formed  in  those
organs  whieli,  according  to  their  content  of  receptors,  have  bound
the  toxin.  Roux  and  Borrel  *  in  combating  to  this  view,  have  jiointed
out  that  rabbits  die  of  tetanus  following  an  intracerebral  injection
of  very  small  doses  of  tetanus  poison,  and  that  therefore  the  brain
of  these  animab  contains  no  active  antitoxin.  Weigert  ^  has  shown
that  this  phenomenon  entirely  supports  Ehrlich'a  theorj'.  Since
L  the  antitoxin  of  the  central  nervous  system,  so  long  as  it  has  not
B  been  thrust  off  into  the  blood,  still  functionates  as  receptor,  it  must
'  anchor  the  tetanus  poison  to  the  nerve  cells  and  is  therefore  not
at  all  adapted  to  protect  these  against  the  action  of  the  toxophore
group.  Furthermore,  the  fact  that  immunized  animals  behave
similarly  proves  merely  that  in  these  animals,  after  immunization,
the  ganglion  cells  still  possess  receptors.  According  to  the  side-
chain  theory  the  antitoxins  present  in  the  blood  act  merely  by  sat-
isfying the  toxins  which  gain  access  to  the  blood  and  deflect  these
from  the  organs  still  possessing  receptors  and  hence  still  sensitive.
The  observations  of  Roux  and  Borrel  are  therefore  in  entire  har-
nKiny  with  the  views  of  Ehrlich.

t'  Reprint  from  Munch,  med.  Woehenschritt,  No.  28,  1900.
'  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  designate  those  combining  groups  of  the  proto-
laamal  molecule  to  which  a  foreign  group,  when  introduced,  attaches  ilaelf
Rectbptors."     See  bIm)  page  24.
■  Klinischea    Jahrbuch,    1897,   Vol.    VI;    Werthbemeseung   dea   Diphtheria
Heil-eerum,  Jena.  Fischer,  1897.

'.\nnales  de  I'lnstitut  Pasteur,  1SS8.

*  ErgebnissQ  der  allgemein,  Fathologie,  etc.    IV.  Jahrgang,  uber  1S97

47


48


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMLTJITY.


Metchnikoff '  has  pursued  thi'i  question  as  to  the  origin  of  the
antitoxins  further,  fjince  a  positive  conclusion  did  not  seem  pos-
sible to  him  by  the  use  of  the  bacterial  poisons,  he  employed  a  6i>ecifio
cell  poison,  epennotaxin,  which  can  be  produced  by  treating  guinea^
pigs  with  the  testicle  and  epidiJymus  of  a  rabbit.  The  use  of  this
poison  has  the  advantage  thai  the  organs  against  which  it  is  directed
can  be  removed  from  the  animal  without  scriom  injurj-.  Aa  the
injection  of  this  poison  into  the  body  of  male  rabbits  is  followed
by  the  production  of  an  antiViody,  it  was  merely  necessary  to  repeat
this  procedure  on  castrated  rabbits  to  decide  the  question  whether
the  antispermotoxin  is  produced  only  by  the  sexual  cells  or  also
by  other  organs.

The  results  showed  that  the  sera  of  rabbits  which  had  been  inject«d
with  this  spermotoxin  would  protect  rabbit  spermatozoa  against
the  action  of  the  spermotoxin  no  matter  whether  the  rabbits  from
whom  these  sera  were  derived  had  been  castrated  or  not.

According  to  Mctchnikoff's  view,  thU  is  opposed  to  the  sidd-
chain  theory,  "since,"  as  he  says,  "  an  antitoxin  is  produced  with-
out the  presence  of  corresponding  receptors  in  the  organism."  In
this,  however,  Metchnikoffstarts  with  the  assumption  that  the  spermo-
toxin is  absolutely  specific  and  that  it  act«  exclusively  on  sperma-
tozoa. He  believes  that  the  li!£molytic  action  which  he  has  observed
in  the  spermatozoa  immime  serum  may  be  explained  by  assuming
that  with  the  injection  of  testis  and  epididymus  red  blood-cells  were
introduced,  and  that  thrae  produced  a  hEcmolysin  entirely  independ-
ent of  the  spermotoxin.  Further,  he  thinks  that  any  relation  of  the
spermotoxin  to  other  cells  is  excluded  by  the  fact  that  in  the  serum
of  guinea-pigs  which  have  been  treated  with  epermatozoa  these
cells  suffer  no  greater  change  than  they  do  in  normal  guinea-pig
serum.

Having  made  observations  in  the  course  of  my  investigations  on
epithelial    immimization,    which    contradict    these    assumptions    of   1
Metchnikoff,  I  feel  compelled  to  explain  my  \iews  in  order  to  clear
up  the  entire  matter.

As  I  have  mentioned  in  a  prc\-ious  commiinication  '  the  ciliated
epithelial  immune  serum  is  able,  besides  its  specific  action  on  ciliated
epithelium,  to  dissolve  the  red  blood-celLs  of  the  same  animal  species.


'  Annalea  de  I'lnstitul  Pasteur,  1900,  No.  1.
'Munch,  mod.  Wochenechritt.  1809,  No.  38.


J


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STl'DY  OF  IMMUNITY.


49


This  hiemolytic  property  can  in  no  way,  as  Metchnikoff  believes,
be  due  to  the  introduction  of  erythrocytes  with  the  injection  of  the
epitrhehal  celb  into  the  body  of  the  guinea-pig,^  which  introduction
would  then  lead  to  the  formation  of  a  specific  hemolysin  directed
against  the  red  blood-cells.  This  posaibility  is  at  once  excluded  by
the  method  of  procedure  in  this  experiment.  For  reasons  of  asepsis,
the  trachcEB  employed  were  scrupulously  cleansed  with  physiological
salt  solution  and  th\ia  all  traces  of  blood  adhering  to  the  surface
were  removed.  The  epithelium  itself  could  not  contain  any  erythro-
cytes, for  it  was  obtained  by  carefully  scraping  the  surface  layer,
which  contains  no  blood-vessels.  Errors  due  to  any  admixture  of
blood,  therefore,  do  not  enter  into  ray  experiments.  Besides,  such
a  strong  haimolytic  action  as  is  manifested  by  the  ciliated  epithelial
immune  serum  is  never  produced  by  the  injection  of  such  small
amounts  of  blood.  In  my  experiments  this  action  was  greater  than
that  following  the  injection  of  2  cc.  of  cattle  blood.

The  strongest  proof  that  the  blood-diesolving  property  of  the
ciliated  epithelial  immune  serum  is  independent  of  injected  blood-
cells  is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  the  hicmolytic  immune  body  of
this  serum  possesses  greater  affinity  for  the  ciliated  epithelium  than
that  specifically  derived  by  the  injection  of  blood.

There  is  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  pure  ciliated  epithelial  immune
serum  possesses  a  hiemolytic  action,  and  that,  furthermore,  the
hEraolysin  produced  by  epithelial  cells  is  different  from  that  pro-
duced by  bIood-«elk.

Moxter^  made  very  similar  observations  on  spermatozoa  immune
serum.  He  fotmd  that  the  serum  of  a  guinea-pig  which  had  been
treated  with  sheep  spermatozoa  dissolves  the  blood-cells  of  sheep;
and  he  demonstrated  that  the  immune  body  concerned  in  this
hemolysis  is  completely  boimd  by  the  spermatozoa  of  sheep.

An  absolute  specificity,  so  that,  for  example,  the  immune  body
[uced  by  means  of  ciliated  epithelium  is  bound  only  by  ciliated
epithelium,  that  produced  by  means  of  spermatozoa  bound  only  by
spermatozoa,  that  directed  against  red  blood-cells  only  by  erythrocytes,
without  the  existence  of  any  affinities  between  the  immune  body
and  other  cells  of  the  same  species,  does  not  therefore  obtain.


^prodi
^«pith


'  Just  an  with  giiinea-piea,  it  is  T^Rsihle,  by  injecl.iiiK  rahbil.s  with  tracheal
Apittieliiiffl  of  catl.le.  to  produce  a  senim  hipinolytic  for  cattle  blood.
'  Deutsche  med,  Worhensclir..  1900.  No.  1.


I


^  IS  pro


COLLECTED  STUDIES    IN  IMMUNITY.

This,  of  course,  is  readily  tindet3tood  by  means  of  the  side-chain
theory.  One  could  not  well  assume  that  all  the  side-chains  of  &
certain  group  of  cells  are  enlirdy  different  from  aU  the  side-chains
of  llie  rest  of  the  cells.  It  is  much  more  probable  that  certain  groups
which  serve  general  functions  of  nutrition  are  common  to  the  majority,
if  not  to  all,  of  the  cells  of  the  same  animal.

When,  therefore,  after  the  injection  of  ciliated  epithelial  cells
we  see  a  hiEmolytic  immune  body  develop,  we  may  aesume  that
among  the  groups  of  the  ciliated  epithelial  cell  which  effect  the
immunity,  there  are  some  which  are  identical  with  those  of  the  red
blood-cell  or  at  least  closely  related  to  them  chemically.

If  this  view  is  correct  wo  should  expect  that,  conversely,  the
immune  body  of  an  immune  serum  derived  by  treatment  with  blood,
would  be  bound  by  ciliated  epithelial  cells  of  the  same  species.  The
facts  corres^TOnd  entirely  with  this  assumption.  According  to  my
experiments,  epithelial  cells  from  the  trachea  of  cattle  are  able  par^
tially  to  bind  the  blood  immune  body  derived  by  treating  rabbits
with  cattle  blood,  The  affinity  of  the  ciliated  epithelium  for  the
blood  immune  body  is,  however,  as  already  mentioned,  less  than
that  for  the  hiEmolytic  ciliated  epithelial  immune  body  of  the  rabbit
immune  serum.

With  this  a  further  fact  of  considerable  importance  becomes
manifest.  Although  the  ciliated  epithelial  cells  are  destroyed  by
the  ciliated  epithelial  immune  body  (provided  sufficient  complement
is  present),  it  has  thus  far  been  impossible  to  demonstrate  any  injury
of  these  cells  resulting  from  the  binding  of  the  active  blood  immune
body.  The  epithelial  cells  thus  differ  from  the  red  blood-cells,  which
are  destroyed  even  by  the  antiepilhelial  serum.  We  shall  not  enter
into  an  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  which  point  to  a  multiplicity
of  antibodies  produced  in  response  to  cell  material.  It  will  suiBce
to  point  out  that  there  is  a  whole  series  of  substances  which  are
designated  as  blood  poisons,  because  they  attack  especially  the
red  blood-celk  while  they  have  little  or  no  effect  on  other  cells.

The  fact  that  the  blood  immune  body  when  supplied  with  com-
plement is  bound  by  the  ciliated  epithelial  cells  of  cattle  without
causing  any  apparent  injury,  proves,  at  least,  that  the  phenomenon
of  toxic  action  in  no  way  shows  whether  or  not  a  toxin  or  toxin-con-
taining substance  has  been  bound  by  the  cells.  The  appearance  of
toxic  symptoms,  to  be  sure,  in  the  case  of  antitoxin-forming  poisons,
is  proof  that  the  poison  has  been  boimd.     An  absence  of  toxic  symp-


J


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMUNITY.  61

toms  may  not,  however,  at  once  be  ascribed  to  an  absence  of  aflSnity
between  cells  and  the  poisonous  substance.

The  formation  of  an  antibody,  according  to  the  side-chain  theory,
follows  only  from  the  binding  of  the  haptophore  group  which  excites
the  immunity,  to  the  corresponding  side-chain,  and  hence  is  not
directly  dependent  on  the  toxophore  group.

As  to  which  cells  will  be  able  to  produce  an  antibody  depends,
therefore,  on  the  possession  of  a  receptor  for  the  haptophore  group
in  question.  A  highly  toxic  action  of  the  substance  bound  by  the
ceU  is  not  at  all  essential,  and,  is  in  fact,  often  injurious,  as  has  been
emphasized  especially  by  Knorr.^  This  action,  as  Ehrlich^  has
shown  in  his  experiments  on  toxoids,  is  produced  by  a  molecular
group  entirely  distinct  from  the  haptophore  group  and  having  no
relation  to  the  antitoxin.

If  this  law  applies  even  to  the  true  toxins,  we  shall  all  the  more
have  to  assume  that  it  applies  where  compound  substances,  such  as
hsemolysin,  epitheliotoxin,  or  spermotoxin  are  concerned.  In  these
the  toxophore  group  is  only  loosely  combined  with  the  haptophore
group;  it  is  nothing  but  the  complement,  which,  according  to  my
researches,^  can  be  bound  by  all  kinds  of  cells,  even  independently
of  the  immune  body,  and  can,  under  certain  conditions  of  affinity^
be  separated  from  the  inmiune  body.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  assumption  by  Metchnikoff,  that  the
spermotoxin  is  related  exclusively  to  the  spermatozoa,  is  incorrect.
As  against  it  I  have  here  shown  that  a  toxin  obtained  by  immuniza-
tion with  epithelial  cells  is  able  to  destroy  the  red  blood-cells  in  the
same  manner  as  a  true  hsemolysin.

In  the  following  short  communication  I  can  bring  forward  an
additional  instance  in  which  the  development  of  a  haemolytic  immune
body  results  although  the  co-action  of  the  red  blood-cells  is  com-
pletely excluded.  Even  this  demonstration  proves  that  the  assump-
tion on  which  Metchinkoff  based  his  objections  to  the  side-chain
theory  is  contrary  to  the  facts.  The  phenomenon  that  even  in
castrated  rabbits  an  antispehnotoxin  is  formed  is  therefore  readily
explained  according  to  the  side-chain  theory  by  assuming  that  re-


'  Munch,  med.  Wochenschr..  1898,  Nos.  11  and  12.

*Klin.  Jahrbuch,   1897,  Vol.  VI,  and  Deutsch.  med.   Wochenschr.,   1898,
No.  38.

'  See  page  41.


52  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

ceptors  for  the  immune  body  of  the  spermatozoa  immune  serum
are  present  not  only  in  the  organs  of  generation  but  also  in  other
cells  of  the  rabbit.  When,  in  addition,  we  come  to  consider  the
results  of  these  last  experiments,  we  find  that  the  demonstration
of  Metchnikoff  (that  even  in  castrated  animals,  in  response  to  treat-
ment with  spermotoxin,  a  body  is  developed  which  prevents  the
action  of  the  spermotoxin)  loses  all  value  as  proof  for  the  origin  of
a  si>ecific  antispermotoxin.

The  active  spermotoxin  employed  by  Metchnikoff  is  of  course  not
a  simple  poison;  it  consists,  just  Uke  a  hsemolysin,  of  the  specific
inunune  body  obtained  by  immunization  and  the  complement  present
in  all  guinea-pig  serum.  Now  it  has  been  shown  independently  by
Ehrlich  ^  and  Bordet  ^  that  when  the  complement  is  injected  into
foreign  species  it  excites  the  production  of  an  anticomplement  which
inhibits  the  action  of  an  active  immune  body  by  taking  away  the
complement,  and  that  it  does  this  without  possessing  any  specific
affinity  to  this  immune  body.

It  is  therefore  possible  that  the  action  of  the  antispermotoxin
obtained  by  Metchnikoff  is  to  be  explained  thus:  The  injected
guinea-pig  serum  by  virtue  of  the  complement  (Bordet's  alexin)
which  it  contains,  causes  the  production  of  an  anticomplement
serum  which  then  renders  the  complement  of  the  spermotoxin  (de-
rived from  guinea-pigs)  innocuous.  With  this  idea,  Bordet  has  ex-
amined an  antihaemolysin,  which  is  analogous  to  the  antispermo-
toxin, and  has  found  that  the  action  of  the  anticomplement  is  much
more  pronounced  than  that  of  the  anti-immune  body.  The  forma-
tion of  an  anticomplement  does  not,  of  course,  according  to  the  side-
chain  theory,  presuppose  the  presence  of  spermatozoa;  for  accord-
ing to  my  experiments  the  complement  may  possess  affinities  for  the
most  varied  cells  of  the  organism.

Ehrlich 's  theory,  that  the  antitoxins  are  produced  by  those
organs  which  possess  chemical  relations  to  the  toxins,  is  therefore
in  no  way  affected  by  the  observations  of  Metchnikoff.

B.    Milk  Immune  Serum.

After  it  had  been  found  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  a  specific
immune  serum  by  injecting  guinea-pigs  with  ciliated  epithelium  from


*  Croonian  lecture,  Royal  Society,  London,  March  1900.
*Annal.  de  PInstitut  Pasteur.  May  1900.


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  IMMTTNITY.  63  I

the  trachea  of  cattle  it  was  but  a  step  to  employ  epithelial  secretions  1
for  the  same  purpose.     In  conjunction  with  this  it  was  of  considerable
theoretical  interest  to  determine  in  thia  very  way  whether  the  specific   i
properties  of  cells  are  preserved  in  their  secretion  products.  I

I  have  therefore  employed  milk  for  immunization  and  have  first   i
treated    guinea-jiigs   and   rabbits    with   cow   milk.    The   cow    milk
immune  serum  thus  obtained  is  able,  so  far  aa  I  have  been  able  to
observe,  to  kill  ciliated  cells  in  the  peritoneal  ca^-ity  of  rabbits,  though
in  a  smaller  measure  than  the  specific  cihated  epithehal  immune  serum.

The  affinities  of  an  immune  serum  are  readily  determined  when
the  serum,  like  the  ciUated  epithelial  immune  serum  for  example,  acts
also  on  red  blood-cells,  for  then  this  can  be  used  as  a  reagent.  Cow
milk  immune  serum  possesses  the  property  to  dissolve  cattle  blood
in  a  not  inconsiderable  degree.  This  hfemolytic  action,  as  in  the
case  of  the  blood  immune  scrum  and  of  the  ciliated  epithelial  immime
serum,  is  due  not  to  any  increased  content  of  complement  but  to  the
presence  of  a  specific  immune  body.  Hence  here  also  it  was  pos-
sible to  compare  the  affinities  of  this  immune  body  (for  the  ciUated
epithelium  on  the  one  hand  and  for  the  red  blood-cells  on  the  other)
with  the  aiEnities  of  the  specific  blood  immune  body.

The  two  immune  sera  obtauied  by  injecting  rabbits  with  cow
milk  and  with  cattle  blood  were  therefore  inactivated,  equal  quan-
tities of  normal  rabbit  serum  to  serve  as  complement  were  added
to  them  in  excess,  and  the  nuxture  tested  tor  its  hiemolytic  propertio
on  cattle  blood.  The  cow  milk  immune  serum  usually  showed  such  a
degree  of  action  that  one  part  of  the  immune  serum  saturated  with  I
complement  was  able  to  dissolve  completely  20  parts  of  the  custom-
ary 5%  cattle  blood  nuxture.

Corresponding  to  thLs,  therefore,  the  much  stronger  ha^raolytic
ssttle  blood  inunune  serum  was  diluted  with  inactivated  normal
[Bbbit  serum  or  with  physiological  salt  solution  until,  with  an  excess
f  complement,  the  hiemolytic  action  of  the  two  sera  on  cattle  blood

J  exactly  equal.

When  the  two  iramime  bodies  have  in  this  way  been  made  entirely

iqual  so  far  as  the  hemolytic  property  is  concerned,  it  is  possible  to

[actly  compare  their  chemical  affinities  for  a  particular  group  of

_Jell9.     It  is  then  easily  demoastrated  that  the  two  ha^molytic  immime

bodies  differ  in  respect  to  their  chemical  relatioas  to  other  cells  of

the  same  species.

Thus  if  equal  quantities  of  ciliated  epithelium  are  added  to  the


54  COLLECTED  STUDIES  L\  IMMLTJITV.

two  sera  and  the  mixture  centrifuged  some  time  aft«r,  it  will  be
found  that  the  milk  immune  body  has  been  completely  abutracled
from  the  serum,  but  tlie  blood  immune  body  only  partially  so.  Qli-
ated  epithelium,  therefore,  combines  more  strongly  witli  the  milk
immune  body  than  with  the  blood  immune  body.

On  the  other  hand,  the  blood  immune  body  possesses  a  greater
affinity  to  the  eiythrocytori  than  doea  the  milk  immune  body.  TliuB
if  equal  amounts  of  cattle  blood  are  added  to  the  two  inactivated
immune  sera  (amounts  which  would  be  completely  dissolved  if  suf-
ficient complement  were  present),  it  will  be  found  after  a  certain  time  -
that  the  blood  immune  body  has  been  completely  bound  by  the
red  blood-cells,  whereas  the  milk  immune  body  can  still  parUoIly  be
demonstrated  in  the  serum.

If  one  tests  a  number  of  different  cow  milk  immune  sera  in  this
way,  the  results  will  show  marked  variation.-s.  My  experiments  were  .
conducted  on  four  different  cow  milk  immune  bodies  which  had
been  obtained  by  injecting  rabbits  with  cow  milk.  Three  of  these
showed  considerably  less  affinity  to  the  red  blood-cells  than  did
the  specific  blood  immune  body  obtained  by  treatment  with  blood.
The  fourth,  however,  was  bound  by  the  red  blood-cells  in  about  the
same  degree  as  was  the  blood  immune  body.  On  the  other  hand,
cases  were  observed  in  which  the  serum  of  rabbits  after  these  had
been  injected  with  cow  milk  showed  only  a  very  slight  harmolytic
action,  and  thb  only  on  the  most  sensitive  of  the  blood-cells.

All  of  these  differences  manifested  themselves  quite  indej^end-
ently  of  the  cattle  blood  employed  in  the  experiment  and  must  there-
fore be  ascribed  to  differences  in  the  immune  sera  themselves.  Pos-
sibly they  are  due  to  variations  in  the  kind  of  receptors,  sucli  as
were  found  in  a  marked  d^ree  in  the  experiments  of  Ehrlich  and
Morgenroth  on  isolysins.'  The  strong  affinity  of  the  hiemolytic
milk  immune  body  for  tracheal  epithelium,  however,  was  present
in  all  the  cases  examined  and  it  did  not  differ  materially  from  the
chemical  relationship  between  ciliated  epitheliiun  and  its  specific
ciliated  epithel  immune  body.

Hence  by  treatment  with  cow  milk  we  obtain  a  hsemolytic  immune
serum  which  differs  from  the  blood  immune  serum,  but  cannot  with
certainty  be  differentiated  from  the  ciliated  epithel  immune  senim.


1


CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDY  ^F  IMMUNITY.  55

The  cow  milk  immune  serum,  owing  to  the  character  of  its  affinities,
is  to  be  classed  with  the  epithel  immune  serum.

The  interesting  fact  to  be  deduced  from  this  is  that  milk  con-
tains the  same  specific  groups  as  the  epithelial  cells  which  produce
it;  and  this  agrees  very  well  with  histological  observations  accord-
ing to  which  the  protoplasm  of  the  gland  cells  is  itself  used  in  the
production  of  the  milk.

After  having  found  it  possible  to  produce  a  specific  epithel  immune
serum  by  injections  of  cow  milk,  it  seemed  to  me  that  immunization
with  human  milk  might  prove  useful  in  the  suppression  of  carcinoma,
especially  mammaiy  carcinoma.  Thus  far,  however,  the  treatment
of  dogs  and  rabbits  with  human  milk  has  not  yielded  an  immune
seriun  hemolytic  for  human  blood,  one  corresponding  to  the  cow
milk  inmiune  senmL


68  CJOLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

The  difference  between  these  two  views  is  considerable.  According
to  our  views  the  complement  (=Bordet's  alexin)  possesses  a  direct
affinity,  due  to  chemical  relationship,  to  the  immune  body,  while
according  to  Bordet  such  a  relation  is  excluded.  Since  this  question
concerns  our  scientific  understanding  of  hsemolysins  and  bacterioly-
sins,  and  concerns  also  a  basic  difference  affecting  the  practical  appli-
cation of  the  bacteriolysins,  we  shall  have  to  study  the  subject  more
closely.

I.    Conoeming  Alexins.

Buchner,  who  by  his  thorough  investigations  on  the  bactericidal
and  globulicidal  properties  of  normal  sera  laid  the  most  important
foundations  of  this  subject,  assumes  that  the  serum  contains  cer-
tain protective  bodies,  alexins,  which  act  equally  on  bacteria,  foreign
blood-cells,  etc.  These  alexins,  which  are  essentially  of  the  character
of  proteolytic  enzymes,^  are  of  most  imstable  (labile)  nature  and  lose
their  power  by  being  heated  to  55*^  C.  Bordet  also  seems  to  assume
the  presence,  in  normal  serum,  of  alexins  in  Buchner's  sense.

According  to  Buchner,  the  serum  of  a  given  species  always  con-
tains the  alexin  as  a  single  definite  substance.  Now  in  our  second
commimication  we  showed  that  the  matter  was  much  more  conu
plicated  than  this;  that  in  the  hasmolysins  of  the  normal  sera  examined
by  us  the  action  depends  on  the  combination  of  two  substances
which  correspond  entirely  to  the  two  components  of  the  hsemolysin
obtained  by  immunization.  Hence  an  "  alexin "  also  consists  of
an  interbody  which  withstands  heating,  and  a  complement  which
is  generally  thermolabile.^  The  interbody  is  in  every  respect  the
complete  analogue  of  the  immune  body,  and  the  only  difference
between  these  is  that  in  one  case  the  side-chains  of  the  protoplasm
are  thrust  off  in  the  course  of  normal  vital  processes,  in  the  other
•case  this  is  due  to  an  immunizing  procedure.

Since  our  second  communication  we  have  been  able  to  confirm
this  view  by  meaas  of  a  large  number  of  separate  cases.  Of  these
we  shall  mention  only  a  few  which  serve,  above  all,  to  support  the
immediate  consequences  of  our  view,  namely,  the  multiplicity  of  the
hcBtnolyains  of  normal  serum.

Goat  serum  dissolves  the  blood-cells  of  rabbits  as  well  as  those

*  Buchner,  Mvinch.  med.  Wochenschrift,  1900,  No.  9.

'Moxter  (Centralblatt  fiir  Bacteriologie,  Vol.   26)  has  demonstrated  this
4dso  for  a  normal  bacteriolysin.


STimiES  ON  HEMOLYSINS.

of  guinea-pigs.  Heating  the  senim  for  half  an  hour  to  55"  C.
causes  this  property  to  be  lost,  owing  to  the  destruction  of  the  com-
plements. On  the  other  hand,  one  frequently  finds  horse  sera,  by
themselves  unable  to  dissolve  the  erythrocytes  of  rabbits  or  guinea-
pigs,  which  are  able  through  their  content  of  complement  to  complete
the  inactive  interbody  of  the  goat  serum  and  make  this  a  complete
hemolysin.  According  to  Buchner's  views,  only  a  single  alexin  is
concerned  in  haemolysis.  We  therefore  next  studied  the  question
whether  the  interbodies  which  act  on  the  blood-cells  of  rabbits  and
guinea-pigs  are  identical.  For  this  purpose  we  first  determined  the
dose  of  inacliee  goat  serum  which,  on  reactivation  by  the  addition
of  sufficient  horse  serum,  was  able  to  dissolve  a  certain  amount  on
rabbit  or  guinea-pig  blood-cells.  On  the  basb  of  these  data  this
amount  of  rabbit  blood  in  physiological  salt  solution  was  mixed  with
the  required  amount  of  inactive  goat  serum  and  after  standing  a
short  time  at  room  temperature  the  mixture  was  centrifuged.  The
result  was  as  follows:  The  clear  fluid  mixed  with  additional  raiAU
blood  cella  and  the  activating  horse  serum  showed  no  trace  of  solvent
property;  the  red  blood-cells,  originally  separated  by  eentrifuging,
liissolved  completely  under  the  influence  of  horse  serum.  In  a
parallel  series  of  experiments  the  clear  fluid  was  mixed  with  guinea-
pig  blood.     In  this,  complete  solulion  ensued.

From  these  experiments  the  conclusion  follows  that  rabbit  blood
t'Oombines  with  an  interbody  present  in  goat  serum,  and  does  so.
■In  fact,  completely;  whereas  the  interbody  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood
mh  not  at  all  fixed  by  the  rabbit  blood.  By  means  of  this  elective
■Absorption,  therefore,  it  is  jmsitively  determined  that  normal  goat
Wtentm  contains  two  interbodies,  one  acting  on  rabbit  blood  and  Ike
r  on  guinea-pig  blood.
The  question  at  once  arose  whether  these  interbodies  possess
H  single  complement  in  common  or  whether  there  ia  a  special  comple-
ait  for  each.  Only  after  considerable  labor  were  we  able  to  decide
I  question  experimentally.  We  were  finally  able  to  determine
t  in  the  filtration  of  normal  goat  serum  through  Pukall  filters,
W^e  fiiBt  portion  (6-10  cc.)  possesses  a  markedly  different  solvent
1;  power  for  rabbit  and  guinea-pig  blood.  We  herewith  reproduce
I  experiment  of  this  kind.
).15  cc.  of  goat-serum  previous  to  filtration  was  able  to  dissolve
f  2  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  guinea-pig  blood,  while  0.2  cc,
I  was  able  to  dissolve  the  same  amoimt  of  rabbit  blood.    After


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


the  serum  was  filtered,  the  filtrate  showed  the  same  solvent  power
!  for  guinea-pig  blood,  whereas  the  solvent  power  for  rabbit  blood
had  almost  entirely  disappeared,  for  0.8  cc.  effected  only  a  traw  of
solution  and  0.23  cc.  none  at  all.  This  loss  of  solvent  power  could
be  due  only  to  an  absorption,  by  the  filter,  of  (1)  the  interbody
j  fitting  the  rabbit  blood,  or  (2)  the  complement,  or  (3)  both.  Since,
however,  the  solvent  action  of  the  filtrate  on  rabbit  blood  was  restored
by  the  addition  of  complement-containing  horse  serum,  while  the
addition  of  interbody  had  no  effect,  it  follows  that  the  filtration
had  removed  only  the  complement.  Fr^m  this  fact,  namely  that
a  serum  may  be  deprived  of  its  complement  for  rabbit  blood  while
the  complement  for  guinea-pig  blood  remains,  we  must  conclude
that  there  are  two  differed  complements  corresponding  to  these  tvxt
interbodies.  According  to  this,  then,  at  least  Jour  different  substances
are  concerned  in  the  case  in  question,  two  different  immune  bodies
and  two  complements  fitting  thereto.  One  pair  of  these  acts  on
guinea-pig  blood  and  the  other  on  rabbit  blood.  According  to
Buchner  only  one  singk  substance,  the  alexin  of  goat  serum,  would
be  concerned.  Further  details  of  these  experimenta  will  be  published
later.  We  should,  however,  like  to  observe  that  in  the  horse  serum
used  for  reactivating,  it  was  possible  to  prove  the  existence  of  two
complements.  This  proof,  moreover,  was  effected  in  two  ways,
by  means  of  filtration  and  by  the  production  of  anticomplements.
The  following  observation  will  show  that  a  still  greater  multi-
pUcity  of  normal  haemolysins  can  exist  in  the  serum.  In  our  second
communication  we  have  given  a  detailed  description  of  an  experi-
ment in  which  a  normal  interbody  of  dog  serum  was  caused  to
combine  with  guinpa-pig  blood  and  then  reactivated  by  means  of
guinea-pig  serum,  which  served  to  supply  the  complement.  In  this
experiment  the  interbody  contained  in  0.2  cc.  dog  serum  was  bound
by  a  certain  quantity  of  giunea-pig  blood-cells.  This  Ls  the  amount
of  dog  serum  which,  when  active,  just  suffices  to  completely  dissolve
-the  given  quantity  of  blood.  On  repeating  this  experiment,  but
employing  horse  serum  as  complement,  it  was  found  impossible  to
reactivate  the  dose  of  interbody  just  sufficient  for  solution  (0.2  cc).
By  systematic  trials,  in  which  multiples  of  the  dose  of  interbody
I  previously  used  were  employed,  we  finally  determined  that  it  required
'  six  tim®  the  amount,  i.e.,  1.2  cc,  in  order  that  the  interbody  would
be  completely  reactivated  by  the  horse  serum.  That  is,  the  first-
employed  dose  of  the  inactive  dog  serum,  which  contained  just  sufficient


I     employed  ■


A


STUDIES  OK  H.EMOLVSINS,  61

interbody  to  be  completely  activated  when  the  complement  of  giiinea-
pig  serum  was  used,  contained  only  one-sixth  the  amount  of  interbody
which  was  completely  activated  when  horse  serum  was  used  as
complement.  From  this,  however,  it  follows  that  all  the  interbody
present  in  dog-serum  and  possessing  specific  relations  to  the  guinea-
pig  blood-cells  is  iwt  ol  iJte  same  uniform  nature.  In  our  case  one-
sixth  of  the  interbody  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood  can  be  reactivated
by  horse  serum,  while  fully  five-sixths  can  be  reactivated  by  the
complement  of  guinea-pig  serum.  Therefore  the  goat  serum  con-
tains two  different  inierbodies  }or  the  same  species  of  bhod-cells,  and
these  can  be  positively  separated  by  means  of  the  difference  in  activa-
tion.

In  our  second  communication,  by  showing  the  existence  of  a
thermostabile  and  a  thermolabile  complement  in  the  goat  serum,
we  also  proved  that  the  complements  of  a  given  serum  need  not
be  of  uniform  nature.  At  that  time  we  showed  that  the  sera  of
two  bucks  treated  with  sheep  blood-cells,  as  well  as  the  sera  of  a
number  of  normal  goats,  contained  a  complement  which,  in  con-
tra-st  to  the  other  complements  of  the  same  sera  (for  rabbit  blood
and  guinea-pig  blood),  was  not  destroyed  by  heating  to  56°  C.
Buchner  finds  it  so  hard  to  emancipate  himself  from  his  views  that  he
seeks  to  explain  our  observations  by  assuming  we  made  a  gross  error
in  the  experiment.  He  supposes  that  the  sheep  serum  still  present
in  the  o%  mixture  of  sheep  blood-cells,  and  which  we  disregarded,
reactivated  the  inactive  serum  and  led  ua  to  mistake  it  for  a  resistant
complement.  We  were  well  aware  of  this  source  of  error  and  had
therefore,  even  in  the  first  communication,  stated  that  the  slight
amounts  of  sheep  serum  present  in  the  blood  mixture  caused  no  dis.
turbances  whatever.  How,  by  the  way,  could  it  be  explained  that
these  disturbances  occurred  only  in  the  serum  of  certain  animals
although  the  method  of  procedure  was  the  same?  Or,  that  digestion
of  the  serum  with  HCl,  which  does  not  injure  the  immune  body,  pre-
_  vented  all  solution  whatever?

After  wliat  iiaa  been  said,  we  shall  have  to  assume  that  in  gen-
I  et>CTT/  serum  which  acts  h<emolylicaUy  on  various  species  of  blood
osscsses  a  corresponding  multiplicity  of  interbodies,   to  which  again
different    complements    may   fit.     Against    the   unitarian    views   of
Buchner  and  of  Bordet  we  must  upliold  the  view  that  the  experi-
mental  results   positively   show  a  multiplicity  of   complements   in
HBormal  serum.     This  multiplicity  of  the  ha-molyfic  substances  will


vente


4


62


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


not  be  surprising  if  we  remember  that  normal  blood  serum  con-
tains, besides  the  hiemolysios,  a  number  of  other  active  substances
such  as  hsemagglutinins,  baeterioaggUitinins,  ant  iferments,  ferments,
cytotoxins,  etc. ;  and  further,  that  from  a  normal  serum  which  agglu-
tinates several  species  of  bacteria,  the  corresponding  agglutinin
can  be  isolated  and  abstracted  by  treating  the  serum  with  one  of
these  species  (Kordet) ;  and  that  the  same  holds  true  for  hfemagglu-
tinins  (Malkoff).  We  shall  quite  naturally  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that,  under  normal  conditions  of  the  cell's  nutrition,  a  large
number  of  simple  or  complex  side-chains  are  constantly  thrust  off
which  then,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  complements  simi-
larly thrust  off,  exert  specific  actions.  Hence  normal  serum  contains
an  enormous  number  of  such  substances.  To  these,  in  general,  we
^ve  the  name  haplins.

When  therefore  Buchner,  in  opposition  to  our  views,  believes
that  the  assumption  of  these  diSerent  substances  seems  unreasonable,
we  must  emphasize  that  our  conclusions  are  not  the  result  of  specu-
lation, but  simply  the  necessary  consequences  of  observations  which
are  not  to  be  harmonized  with  the  assumption  of  a  single  simple
alexin.  It  will  be  evident  also  why  we  have  completely  dropped
the  term  alexin  used  by  Buchner.  In  our  investigations,  in  all  the
cases  closely  analyzed,  we  never  found  a  simple  substance  (Buchner's
alexin),  but  always  a  complex  hsemolysin  consisting  of  interbody  and
complement.  This  ha?moIysin,  as  alreaady  emphasized,  completely
corresponds  in  its  properties  to  the  hiemolysins  developed  through
immunization.  We  shall  therefore  have  to  assume  that  also  in
their  development  the  normal  hiemolysins  correspond  exactly  to  the
artificial  hiemolysins.

In  regard  to  the  latter,  von  Dungem  has  already  shown,  by
demonstrating  a  great  disproportion  between  immune  body  and
complement,  that  these  two  substances  are  produced  quite  inde-
pendently of  one  another,  and  that  they  therefore  probably  oripnate
in  different  cell  domains,  von  Dungem  also  showed  that  in  the
extensive  formation  of  new  immune  body  which  occurred  when
rabbits  were  treated  with  cattle  blood-cells,  the  corresponding  com-
plement was  not  in  the  least  increaseti.  We  ourselvra  have  often
noted  an  analogous  independence  of  the  two  components  in  a
number  of  normal  hsmolysms.  One  of  us  will  discuss  this  at  length
in  a  subsequent  paper.  One  interesting  fact,  however,  we  shall  men-
tion here.


STUDIES  ON  H.«MOLYSINS.  63

If  rabbits  are  poisoned  with  a  dose  of  phosphorus,  of  which  they
die  on  the  third  day,  and  if  the  serum  of  the  animal  is  collected  on
the  second  day,  it  will  be  foimd  that  the  serum  has  lost  the  property,
previously  possessed,  to  dissolve  guinea-pig  blood.  This  inactive
serum  can  be  activated  by  the  addition  of  a  sufficient  amount  of
guinea-pig  serum.  It  behaves,  therefore,  like  a  serum  which  has
been  inactivated  by  heating  to  55®  C,  i.e.  it  has  been  deprived  of
its  complement.  It  is  probable  that  the  phosphorus  has  acted
especially  on  certain  cell  domains  which  furnish  the  complements
in  question.

II.    Concerning  Anticomplements.

In  accordance  with  the  views  already  discussed  in  detail,  we
assume  that  the  luemolytic  action  is  due  to  this,  that  the  interbody
(inmiune  body)  and  complement  unite  to  form  the  complex  hsemolysin.
We  can  understand  such  relations  only  when  we  regard  them  stereo-
chemically  and  must  therefore  assume  that  the  complement  possesses
a  haptophore  group  which  finds  in  the  interbody  a  receptor  group
into  which  it  exactly  fits.  With  this  conception,  however,  the  rela-
tions  existing  between  interbody  and  complement  at  once  assume
a  strictly  specific  character,  i.e.,  the  interbody  and  complement  become
strongly  specifically  related.  As  a  result  of  combining  experiments
we  have  already  ^  attacked  the  view  of  Bordet,  that  the  immune  body
merely  sensitizes  the  red  blood-cells  and  that  as  a  result  of  this  sen-
sitization the  alexins,  which  otherwise  are  unable  to  attack  the  blood-
cells,  now  have  access  to  them.  That  the  ''substance  sensibila-
trice  "  breaks  the  way  for  the  alexins  is  a  coarse  mechanical  con-
ception hardly  comprehensible  when  viewed  chemically  or  biologic-
ally. If  one  sought  to  explain  Bordet's  view  chemically,  one  would
have  to  assume  that  the  natiure  of  the  sensitization  is  this,  that  under
the  influence  of  the  sensitizor  a  whole  series  of  groups  are  developed
in  the  protoplasm  of  the  red  blood-cells  which  are  able  to  bind  the
various  complements.  Such  an  assumption,  however,  lacks  every
element  of  probability.  Bordet^  himself  arrives  at  a  contradiction
when  on  the  one  hand  he  assimies  a  direct  action  of  the  comple-
ments on  the  red  blood-cells  and  on  the  other  is  forced  to  admit
that    certain    relations    exist   between   interbody   and   complement

^  See  our  second  communication.

'  Bordet,  Annales  de  Tlnstitut  Pasteur,  May  1900.


(certains  rapports  convenables).  It  would  be  difficult  to  expresa
these  relations  in  a  form  chemically  comprehensible.

Based  on  the  conception  of  strictly  specific  relations,  such  as
follows  from  our  theory,  the  study  of  these  complements  acquirefi  a
high  practical  value.  Donitz '  has  already  called  attention  to  the
great  importance  for  the  therapy  of  infectious  diseases  of  finding
sources  yielding  suiHcient  complement,  von  Dungem  ^  has  further-
more shown  that  body  cells  are  able  to  bind  certain  complements  and
that  therefore  a  completed  bacteriolj-sin  derived  from  a  certain
animal  species  can,  when  it  is  injected  into  another  organism,  entirely
lose  its  complement  and  so  become  inactive.

In  the  Croonian  lecture  (March  22,  1900),  Ehrlich  pointed  out
that  the  baeteriolysins  and  hsmolj-sins  (interbody + complement)
possess  three  haptophore  groups,  of  which  two  are  on  the  interbody
and  one  on  the  complement.  It  is  conceivable  that  for  each  ot
these  groups  there  is  a  corresponding  antigroup  which  binds  the
haptophore  concerned  and  so  inhibits  the  action  of  the  lysin.  For
each  lysin  therefore  three  antibodies  are  possible,  the  action  of  any
one  of  which  is  able  to  put  the  lysin  out  of  action.  At  that  time
Ehrlich  called  particular  attention  to  the  important  r6Ie  of  one  ot
these  antibodies,  namely,  the  one  which  fits  into  the  haptophore
group  of  the  complement  and  so  prevents  this  from  combining  with
the  interbody  (immime  body).  He  stated  further  that  together
with  Morgcnroth  he  had  succeeded  in  the  experimental  production
of  such  anticomplements  by  means  of  immunization.^

Our  observations  in  this  direction  were  made  on  the  serum  of
a  goat  which  for  a  long  time  had  been  injected  with  large  amounts
of  horse  serum.  Horse  serum  was  used  because  our  extended  ob-
servations had  shon-n  that  this  constitutes  a  particularly  rich  source
of  most  varied  complements,  and  becaiL'se  it  was  therefore  to  be
expected  that  a  plentiful  amount  of  anticomplements  would  be
obtained.  This  expectation  was  fully  rejilized,  and  we  have  come
to  know  a  large  number  of  interbodies  of  different  origin  which  can
be  reactivated  by  the  complements  for  different  varieties  of  blood
contained  in  horse  serum.  As  an  example  the  following  combina-
tions may  be  mentioned:   Rabbit  blood — inactive  dog  serum;  guinea^.

'  DiinitK,  KliniBches  Jahrbuoh,  ^'ol.  7.
'  See  page  36.

'  In  the  meantime  Dordet  (loc.  cit.)  independently  ban  also  produced
■complenietits  by  mean;


L


duced  ll^^l


a    coir


STUDIES  ON  H.F.MOLYSINS.  65

lood — inactive  goat  serum;  sheep  blood — inactive  dog  serum;
leep  blood  and  inacti\'e  senim  of  goats  treated  with  sheep  blood.

ail  these  cases  we  have  been  able  to  determine  that  the  rcactivat-

action  of  the  horee  serum  can  be  prevented  by  the  addition  of

amounts  of  anti complement  serum  (previously  inactivated).

In  one  case  a  very  minute  analj-sia  of  this  action  was  made.  The
factors  in  this  case  were  rabbit  blood  and  an  interbody  acting  on
this,  prtsent  in  normal  goat  serum  and  obtained  by  heating  the
serum  to  56"  C.  The  rabbit  erythrocytes  were  first  treated  with
considerable  amoimts  of  this  interbody  and  the  excess  of  inter-
body was  then  separated  by  centrifuging  the  mixture  and  pouring  off
the  clear  fluid.  The  erythrocytes  thus  loaded  with  interbody  were
next  digested  with  large  amounts  of  the  inactive  anticomplement
serum  and  this  likewise  separated  by  centrifuging,  The  sedimented
blood-cells  thus  obtained  dissolved  completely  on  the  addition  of
horse  serum.  The  same  result  was  attained  when  the  process  just
described  was  performed  in  one  act  instead  of  in  two;  i.e.,  by  mLxing
the  goat  serum  containing  the  interbody  with  the  anticomplement
serum  brjore  the  addition  of  the  blood-cells.

From  tliis  it  follows  that  the  antibody  stands  in  relation  neither
to  the  blood-cells  thenisei\-es  nor  to  the  interbody.  Even  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  antibody  the  interbody  is  anchored  in  normal  fashion  by
the  en-throcytcs,  and  is  furthermore  not  disturbed  in  its  receptive
property  for  the  complement.  The  antibody  therefore  has  no
relation  to  either  of  the  two  haptophore  groups  of  the  interbody,  and
it  can  only  act  by  influencing  the  complement.

Tiie  complement,  however,  according  to  our  A'iew,  also  possesses
two  groups:  one,  a  haptophore  group,  and  a  second  which,  in  order
to  express  the  analogy  to  the  enzymes  and  toxins,  we  shall  term  the
zymoloxic  group.  Hence  it  still  remained  to  determine  into  which
of  these  two  groups  the  anticomplement  fits.  In  either  case,  though
of  course  by  a  different  mechanism,  the  action  of  the  complement
would  be  inhibited;  in  one  case  by  pre\'enting  the  combination  of
complement  and  interbody,  in  the  other  by  preventing  the  zymo-

,ic  action.

If  we  assume  that  the  anticomplement  combines  with  the  zymo-

toxic  group,  then  the  haptophore  group  of  the  complement  will  remain

free  and  must  still  be  able  to  combine  with  the  corresponding  group

of  the  interbody.     It  would  be  expected,  then,  that  the  haptophore

pup  would  combine  with  the  interbody  and  "plug,"  so  to  speak.


66


COLLECTED  snTDIES  IN  IMMTTSITY.


II  repiac*


the  binding  group  of  the  latter  against  any  further  combinEtion  with
complement.  If,  on  the  contrarj',  the  anticomplement  combines
with  the  haptophore  group  of  the  compIemeJit,  the  interbody  is
left  free  and  must  therefore  still  be  capable  of  reactivation.  The
tvperimental  solution  of  this  question  was  very  easy.  The  erythro-
cytes, loaded  with  interbody,  were  subjected  to  the  action  of  a
mixture  of  complement  and  anticomplement  which  had  1>een  neu-
tralized to  complete  inacti^'ity.  After  centrifuging  it  was  found  that
the  blood-cells  dissolved  readily  on  the  further  addition  of  coitq>Ie-
ment.  Solution  also  occurs  if  a  small  amount  of  complement  is
excess  is  added  to  the  exactly  balancetl  mi.tture  of  complement  and
anticomplement.  These  experiments  indicate  that  the  anticomple-
ment acta  by  fUtiTig  into  (he  haptophore  group  of  the  complement  and
side-tracking  this  group.

We  have  also  convinced  ourselves  that  it  is  possible  to  produfe
anticomplements  not  only  with  horse  serum  but  also  with  other
sera,  such  as  the  sera  of  goats,  dogs,  cattle,  rabbits,  and  guinea-pigs,
by  injecting  the  serum  into  foreign  species.  In  these  experiments  the
choice  of  animals  employed  for  purposes  of  immunization  also  plays
an  important  rflle.  For  example,  a  rabbit  treated  with  goat  serum
very  readily  yields  an  anticomplement,  whereas  when  a  dog  was
similarly  injected  no  anticomplement  (at  least  in  the  two  casts
examined  by  us)  could  be  demonstrated.  So  far  as  we  were  able
to  determine,  the  protection  afforded  by  the  anticomplement  extends
to  all  the  species  of  blood-cells  on  which  the  serum  used  for  immuni-
zation exerts  its  action.  Since  the  sera  in  question,  so  far  as  lysin
action  is  concerned,  contain  a  plurality  of  complements,  the  anti-
complementary senmi  must  contain  a  whole  series  of  anticomple-
ments  which  correspond  to  the  different  complements  present  lu
the  immunizing  serum.  Perhaps  tliis  jiolyvalence  of  the  anticom-
plementary serum  accounts  tor  the  phenomenon  that  certain  anti-
sera  produced  by  means  of  a  particular  blood  serum  are  able  to
inhibit  the  injurious  action  of  many  other  kinds  of  blood  serum.
These  facts  indicate  that  this  interchange  of  protection  is  due  to
the  preseTice  in  the  two  sera  of  a  certain  number  of  common  com-
plements. In  fact  there  seem  to  be  cases  in  which  certain  species
have  the  majority  of  their  complements  similar.  Such  a  case  in
all  probability  is  that  of  the  goat  and  the  sheep,  as  is  evidenced  by
the  fact  that  in  the  reactivating  action  goat  scrum  can  be  completely
replacW  by  sheep  serum  and  vice  versa.     This  at  least  is  true  for


I


STUDIES  ON  HEMOLYSINS,

all  the  cases  observed  by  us.  Still  more  convinring,  however,  is  the
fact  that  neither  the  injection  of  a  sheep  with  goat  serum  nor  of  a
goat  with  sheep  serum  results  in  the  production  of  anticomplenients.
All  experiences  indicate  that  the  complements  normally  present  in
the  eerura  of  a  certain  species  of  animal  are  nol  able  to  excite  the
formation  of  anticoraplements  in  such  an  animal's  ovm  body.  Per-
haps this  may  be  explained  thus,  that  the  relation  between  com-
plement and  complementophile  group  is  extremely  slight  (as  was
shown  by  the  binding  experiments  previously  described  by  us)  and  that
therefore  one  of  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  thrusting  off — a  per-
manent and  firm  union  with  the  receptor — is  not  in  this  case  fulfilled.
We  reahze  that  we  have  been  able  here  merely  to  point  out  some
of  the  principles  applying  to  this  subject.  Their  closer  analysis
encounters  extraordinary  difficulties  in  consequence  of  one  of  the
facts  demonstrated  by  us,  namely,  the  multiplicity  of  interbodies,
complements,  and  anticoraplements.  Thus  far  these  difficulties  have
been  overcome  in  only  a  few  favorable  instances,

III.    One  ot  Bordet's  Objections  CoDtroverted.

Bordet,  in  his  most  recent  work  (loc.  cit.)  has  described  the  follow-
ing interesting  experiment,  by  means  of  which  he  believes  to  prove
that  our  views  concerning  the  mechanism  of  hEBmolysis  are  incor-
tect.  As  hsemolysin,  Bordet  employed  the  serum  of  guinea-pigs  after
these  had  been  treated  with  rabbit  blood.  This  then  possessed  a
high  degree  of  solvent  power  for  rabbit  blood.  If  this  heemolysin
is  inactiviated  by  heating,  it  is  possible  to  restore  the  h^emolytic
action,  as  well  by  the  addition  of  normal  guinea-pig  serum  as  by
that  of  normal  rabbit  senmi.  These  two  sera,  therefore,  contain
complements  (alexins)  which  make  the  reactivation  possible.  Bordet
now  sought  to  discover  whether  the  "alexin"  of  rabbits  is  identical
with  that  of  guinea-pigs.  For  this  purpose  he  treated  rabbits  with
the  serum  of  the  inmiunized  guinea-pigs  and  obtained  an  antiserum
which,  while  it  contained  a  small  amount  of  anti-iromune  body,
contained  considerable  anticomplement.  He  then  determined  that
this  "antialexin"  acted  only  against  the  "alexin"  of  the  guinea-
pig  and  not  at  all  against  that  ot  rabbits  and  some  other  animals.
At  the  same  time  a  certain  degree  of  action  against  the  complement
of  pigeon  serum  wa.?  noted,  so  that  this  antiserum  was  not  absolutely
specific.  From  this  Bordet  concludes  that  his  theory  of  sensitiza-
must  be  correct,  namely,  that  the  variotLs  alexins  dcrivcfl  from


[


ss


COLLECTED  STUDIES  TN  IMMTNTTY.


different  species  act  direcUy  injuriomly  on  the  Rensitized  blood-cell';.
Against  each  of  these  alexins  an  antialexin  exists  which  protects
the  t^ensitized  blood-celLs  against  just  this  particular  alexin.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  at  first  sight  this  experiment  appears
to  speak  strongly  in  favor  of  Bordet's  theory.  If  one  assumes,  aa
Bordet  of  course  does,  that  in  the  immune  aenim  produced  by  hitn,
one  single  immune  body  comes  into  play,  then  since  this  can  be  reac-
tivated as  well  by  rabbit  serum  as  by  guinea-pig  serum,  the  com-
plement contained  in  these  two  species  of  sera  must,  according  to
our  theory,  possess  the  same  haptophore  group.  If  thb  were  the
case,  however,  the  aame  anticomplement  should  protect  against  holh
complements,  and  this  it  does  not  do.

We  have  therefore  subjected  Bordet's  experiment  to  an  exact
reexamination  and  have  been  able  to  determine  that  an  exhaustive
quantitative  analysis  presents  the  experiment  in  an  entirely  different
light,  A  hiimolytic  serum  was  produced  by  treating  guinea-pi^
with  rabbit  blood.  A  preliminary  trial  of  this  serum  showed  that
when  inactivated  it  could  be  reactivated  in  large  amotmts  as  well
by  guinea-pig  serum  as  by  rabbit  serum.  Tlie  an ti complement,
derived  from  other  rabbits  by  treatment  witli  norma!  guinea-pig
BCrum,'  was  able  in  the  inactive  state  to  completely  inhibit  the  reacti-
vation with  guinea-pig  serum,  although  the  same  anticomplement
serum  in  its  active  state  reactivated  the  inactive  immune  body.

We  next  proceeded  to  examine  these  facte  quantitatively  and
found  that  the  simple  solvent  dose  of  the  serum  for  0.5  cc.  of  a  5%
rabbit-blood  mixture  amounted  to  0.075  cc.  Then  we  tried  von
Dungem's  experiment  {loc,  cit.)  to  increase  this  action,  by  adding
to  the  native  immune  serum  normal  guinea-pig  serum  in  amounts  so
small  that  they  did  not  themselves  exert  any  solvent  action.  We
found  that  the  full  solvent  dose  had  thus  been  decreased  to  0.025  cc.
This  proved,  as  in  von  Dungem's  case,  that  in  the  immunization  a
large  excess  of  free  immune  body  was  present  which  could  not  nearly
be  satisfied  by  the  amount  of  complement  normally  present.  Now
we  could  expect  that  this  same  increase  in  power  would  be  effected
by  the  addition  of  rubbit  serum,  but  we  Jound  instewt  that  rahbU
serum  even  in  large  amounts  did  not  produce  any  increase  whatever.

According  to  Bordet's  view  such  a  deviation  is  al>soluteIy  incom-
prehensible, and  this  led  us  to  pursue  the  case  further.     We  first

'  In  contrast  to  lioriiet  ne  chose  nnrnini  guinea-pig  serum  for  iintnuniiatioil
.in  order  to  avoid  the  disturbing  action  of  an  immune  body,


J


■  STUDIES  ON  H.HMOI.VSINS.  69

mactivated  the  immune  serum  and  determined  the  minimal  amoimt
of  the  inactive  serum  which  would  cause  complete  solution  in  the
presence  of  (1)  normal  rabbit  serum,  or  (2)  of  guinea-pig  serum.
We  found  that  it  required  0.25  cc.  of  the  inactive  immune  serum  to
effect  complete  solution  of  the  given  amount  of  rabbit  blood  when
rabbit  complement  was  employed,  whereas  only  0.025  cc.  of  the  immune
serum  was  required  when  guinea-pig  complement  was  employed.

This  result,  however,  cannot  be  harmonized  with  Bordet's  theory  of
sensitization.  According  to  his  view  one  would  expect  that  a  blood-
cell  which  is  sensitized  by  the  presence  of  the  immune  body  is  subject
equally  to  the  action  of  variom  alexins.  In  both  cases  the  same
amount  of  inamune  body  should  then  suffice  to  make  the  blood-cells
sensitive  to  the  alexins  (complements).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  how-
ever, it  requires  t^n  times  as  much  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,
if  one  desired  to  hold  to  Bordet's  theory  one  might  possibly  say  that  it
requires  ten  times  as  strong  a  sensitization  nith  the  same  immune  body
in  order  to  make  the  cells  sensitive  lo  the  alexin  of  rabbit  seriim.

If  this  highly  compUcated  a.ssumption  were  correct,  the  relation
as  above  determined,  1  :  10,  should  rcpre3cnt  a  constant  ratio.  Owing
to  a  lack  of  animal  material  we  were  unable  to  study  this  question
of  constant  ratio  on  the  example  selected  by  Bordet.  However,
in  an  analogous  series  of  cases  for  which  we  had  abundant  material,
we  were  able  to  pursue  this  question  further.

We  made  use  of  a  goat  which  had  been  treated  with  sheep  blood
and  whose  serum  therefore  dissolved  sheep  blood-cells.  The  inac-
tivated serum  of  this  goat  could  be  reactivated  by  two  complements,
that  of  normal  goat  serum  and  that  of  horse  serum.  The  anticom-
plement  obtained  by  treating  a  goat  with  horse  serum  inhibited,
even  in  small  amounts,  the  action  of  the  horse  complement;  whereas
its  action  on  the  goat  complement  was  so  slight  as  to  be  practically
negligible.  The  conditions  here,  therefore,  are  exactly  the  same
as  in  the  ease  described  by  Bordet.

In  the  beginning  of  the  observations  it  was  found  that  1  cc.  of
a  57c  niLxture  of  sheep-blood,  mL\ed  with  normal  horse  serum  to
serve  as  complement,  was  completely  dissolved  on  the  addition  of
0.35  ee.  immune  body  (inactivated  immune  serum) ;  whereas  when
normal  goat  serum  was  used  as  complement  only  0.025  cc.  of  the
immune  body  was  required.  This  corresponds  to  a  ratio  of  14  : 1.
On  repeating  the  test  a  week  later  with  serum  freshly  drawn  from
^)£   immunized  goat   we   found   that   the   constituents  which  were


I


70  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

reactivated  by  horse  serum  were  unchanged  (0.35),  but  that  it  required
considerably  more  immune  body  when  goat  serum  was  used  for
reactivation  than  it  had  before,  namely,  0.1  cc.  This  corresponds
to  a  ratio  of  3.5  : 1  as  compared  to  the  former  ratio  of  14  : 1.  This
shows  that  a  constant  ratio  does  not  as  a  matter  of  fact  exist.  We
must  rather  assume,  as  we  did  for  a  normal  hsemolytic  serum,  that
two  entirely  independent  immune  bodies,  A  and  B,  are  present  in
the  immune  seruni  and  that  these  differ  in  the  ratio  of  their  quan-
tities and  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  reactivated.  The  amount
of  immune  body  A  contained  in  the  immune  serum  has  remained
constant,  while  B  after  a  short  time  has  considerably  decreased
(to  one  quarter).  This  divergence  would  in  fact  indicate  that  the
two  immune  bodies  are  formed  independently  of  each  other.

We  have  thus  demonstrated  that  in  the  phenomenon  observed
by  Bordet  not  a  single  immune  body,  but  two  different  ones,  come
into  play,  one  of  which  is  related  to  a  complement  found  only  in
guinea-pig  serum,  while  the  other  is  related  to  a  complement  found
in  rabbit  serum.  Through  this  demonstration  Borders  objection
loses  all  its  force  and  his  experiment  becomes  in  fact  a  new  argu-
ment far  our  theory.

The  occurrence  of  different  immune  bodies  in  a  hsemolytic  serum
obtained  by  immunizing  with  red  blood-cells  is  not  at  all  surprising
in  view  of  our  experiments  on  isolysins  described  in  our  third  com-
munication. We  have  obtained  a  whole  series  of  different  isolysins
by  injecting  goats  with  goat  blood.  At  present  they  number  twelve.
In  the  red  blood-cells  not  merely  a  single  group  but  a  large  number
of  different  groups  must  be  considered,  which,  provided  there  are
fitting  receptors,  can  produce  a  corresponding  series  of  inmiune
bodies.  All  of  these  immune  bodies  again  will  be  anchored  by  the
blood-cells  employed  in  immunization.  We  may  assume  that  when
an  animal  species  A  is  immunized  with  blood-cells  of  species  B  a
haemolytic  serum  will  be  produced  which  contains  a  great  host  of
immune  bodies.  These  immune  bodies  in  their  entirety  are  anchored
by  the  blood-cells  of  species  A.

We  are  convinced  that  the  duality  found  by  us  in  the  two  cases
examined  is  much  below  the  actuality,  and  that  thorough,  though
to  be  sure  arduous,  studies  will  succeed  in  discovering  a  multiplicity
heretofore  unexpected.  For  the  present,  however,  this  duality  of
the  immune  body  should  sufRce  to  controvert  the  objections  made
by  Bordet   from  the  unitarian  standpoint.


Vn.    STUDIES  ON  ILEM0LYSINS.1
Fifth  Communication.

By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  J.  Moboenroth.

In  the  few  years  since  its  formulatioa  the  side-chain  theory  has
exercised  a  marked  influence  on  the  direction  of  the  investigations
in  immunity.  The  subject  of  toxins  and  antitoxins  has  to  a  certain
extent  been  concluded,  at  least  for  the  present.  Several  objections
raised  by  Roux  and  BorreP  in  connection  with  their  splendid
work  on  cerebral  tetanus,  as  well  as  those  made  by  Metchni-
koflf  2  and  Marie,^  rested  on  a  misconception  of  the  theory,  and  the
facts  on  which  these  are  based  serve  rather  as  a  complete  confirma-
tion of  the  theory.^  The  attempt  of  Pohl*  to  place  the  doctrine
of  antitoxins  purely  on  the  basis  of  inorganic  chemistry  has  been
completely  controverted  by  Bashford.^

Thus  the  facts  proved  themselves  thoroughly  in  harmony  with
the  theory,  and  the  latter  furthermore  proved  its  inventive  value
in  many  directions.  It  was  but  natural  that  the  side-chain  theory
originally  formulated  for  the  antitoxins,  if  it  had  any  general
biological  significance  at  all,  should  also  include  the  complicated
phenomena  of  immunity  which  result  from  the  introduction  of
bacteria  or  tissue-cells.  Hence  we  began  two  years  ago  to  investigate
experimentally  the  applicability  of  the  doctrines  resulting  from  this
theory  to  the  specific  haemolysins  obtained  by  immunization,  which
had  been  discovered  by  Bordet  a  short  time  previously.    These  studies

^  Reprint  from  the  Berliner  klin.  Wochenschrift,  1901,  No.  10.

'  Annales  de  Tlnstitut  Pasteur,  1898.

'See  Weigert,  Lubarsch's  Ergebnisse  der  Pathologie,  1897;  also  Levaditi
Press  mddlcale,  1900,  No.  95.

*  Arch,  intemat.  de  Pharmacodyn.,  1900.

•Arch,  intemat.  de  Pharmacodyn.  et  Therapie,  Vol.  VIII,  fasc.  I  and  11,
1901.

71


served  to  demonstrate  the  complete  harmony  of  the  theory  with  the
facta  on  this  subject.  Furthermore  aft«r  overcoming  considerable
experimental  difficulties  we  succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  same
behavior  for  the  hemolysins  of  normal  aenim  and  thus  brought  ihsse
also  under  the  laws  of  tlie  aide-chain  theory.  Reexaminations  from
various  directions  confirmed  the  correctness  of  our  fundamentftl
experiments  and  we  may  say  that  at  present  the  majority  of  workere
in  thb  field,  partly  as  a  result  of  their  own  experiments,  have  accepted
our  viewa  and  regard  the  side-chain  theory  as  a  justified  hypolheoa
which  beat  explains  most  of  the  phenomena  thus  far  observed  m  the
subject  of  immunity.  Since  this  in  part  concerns  processes  in
which  the  animal  organism  acts  with  all  its  highly  complicated  con-
ditions, it  is  no  wonder  that  now  and  then  a  fact  has  appeared  in
the  course  of  the  investigations  which  at  firet  seemed  to  be  irrecon-
cilable with  the  theory.  The  latter,  however,  is  in  no  way  injured
thereby,  for  the  solution  of  such  apparent  contradictions  results
in  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  subject  and  makes  for  progress.
An  instructive  example  of  this  was  recently  afforded  in  physical
chemistry.  As  is  well  known,  several  at  first  inexplicable  contra-
dictions to  van't  Hoff's  theory  of  solutions,  resulting  from  certain
deviations  in  osmotic  tension,  found  their  explanation  in  the  theory
of  electrolytic  dissociation  of  Arrhenius,  and  this  theory  served  to
again  obtain  general  acceptance  for  the  theory  of  solutions  itself.
We  have  therefore  endeavored  to  analyze  carefully  the  objections
urged  against  our  views  by  high  authorities.

The  objection  raised  by  Metchnikoff '  against  the  specific  formation
of  the  toxins  was  based  on  the  fact  that  e\*en  castrated  rabbits  j-idd
an  antispermotoxin.  In  a  recent  study  ^  from  the  laboratorj'  of
Metchnikoff,  this  objection  is  withdrawn.  It  was  found  that  in  this
antispermotoxin  an  anticomplement  is  principally  concerned  and
not  an  anti-immune  body,  for  it  was  produced  even  by  treatment
with  normal  aerum.^  It  is  therefore  especially  gratifying  that  Metch-
nikoff also  has  recently  accepted  our  view  that  the  complement
is  anchored  to  the  immune  body  by  means  of  the  latter's  complement-
ophile  group.

An  important  objection  made  by  Bordet  *  based  on  some  extremely


■  Annales  de  I'lostitut  Pasteur.  1900,  So.

'  Ibid.,  No.  9.

'See  von  Dungern,  page  47.

'Annales  de  I'lnstilut  Paslcur,  1000,  No.


A


STUDIES  u.\  u.l;moly8I-\s.


^


interesting  experiments,  by  which  he  believed  to  refute  our  theory
of  the  meclianiam  of  hiemolysia,  has  been  discussed  Ijy  us  in  our
fourth  communication  ^  and  controverted  by  means  of  extended  quan-
titative experiments.

It  is  necessarj-,  however,  once  more  to  thoroughly  discuss  the
binding  of  immime  body  to  the  erythrocyte,  for  on  this  point  the
views  seem  not  at  all  clear,  because  the  purely  chemical  conception  is
denied  ixy  some  authore  or  is  regarded  as  unimixirtant.

I.    The  Manner  In  which  the  Immune  Body  Combines  with  the

ErythrocytfiB.

In  our  first  communication  we  had  already  shown  that  the  ery-
throcytes as  such  behave  quite  differently  toward  the  two  components
which  effect  hseraolysis.  The  blood-cells  abstract  the  immune  body
from  its  medium  with  great  a-vidity,  whereas  they  do  not  take  up  tlie
slightest  trace  of  complement.  When  loaded  with  immune  body,
however,  they  are  able  to  anchor  the  complement  also.  From  this
we  have  concluded  primarily  that  the  immune  body  possesses  two
combining  groups  of  different  afTinity,  of  which  the  one  combines  with
a  corresponding  group,  the  receptor  of  the  blood-cell;  the  olhir  com-
bines with  the  comptemcnt.  But  according  to  our  view  these  combi-
nations are  pure  cliemical  phenomena  proceeding  between  immune
body  and  blood-cells  and  between  immune  body  and  com|Diement.

The  function  of  the  immune  body  can  be  elucidated  by  means  of
a  chemical  example,  that  for  instance  afforded  by  the  beha\ior  of
diazobenzaldehyd.  Through  its  diazo  group  this  substance  can
unite  with  a  series  of  bodies,  especially  with  amines,  phenols,  keto-
methylen  groups,  whilst  the  aldehyd  group  on  its  part  can  effect  a
of  syntheses — e.g.  with  hydrazins,  hydrocyanic  acid,  etc.  It
thus  becomes  easy  by  means  of  diazobenzaldehyd  to  effect  a  com-
bination between  substances  which  by  themselves  do  not  combine,
as  phenol  and  hydrocyanic  acid.  Such  a  combination  includes  bolk
substances.  In  order  to  make  the  comparison  still  closer  let  us  imagine
that  certain  constituents  of  the  living  cell,  say  by  means  of  an  aro-
matic group,  are  able  to  unite  with  the  diazo  combination.  In
this  case  it,  follows  that  by  means  of  the  aldehyd  group  of  the  diazo-
benzaldehyd a  second  highly  toxic  nucleus — e.g.  that  of  hydrocyanic
acid — can  be  joined  to  the  combination  in  such  fashion  that  the  proto-

■mal  raoleciile  is  now  subjected  to  the  action   of  the  strongly

'  See  page  56.


74  COLLECTED  STUDIES' IN  IMMUNITY.

acting  nitril  group.  In  this  schematic  example  the  diazo  group  which
fits  directly  into  the  protoplasm  would  correspond  to  the  haptophore
group  of  the  immune  body  which  fits  into  the  receptor  of  the  blood-
cells;  the  aldehyd  remnant  would  correspond  to  the  complemento-
phile  group  of  the  immune  body.  The  complement,  which  as  we
know  possesses  toxic  properties,  would  then  be  compared  to  the  hydro-
cyanic acid.^

The  facts  described  by  us  have  been  confirmed  from  various  sides
(v.  Dimgem,  Buchner,  Bordet)  by  experiments  on  blood-cells.  Bor-
det  2  and  also  Nolf  ^  showed  that  the  stromata  of  the  blood-cells,  which
represent  the  protoplasma,  effect  the  anchoring  of  the  inmiune  body,
while  the  haemoglobin,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  paraplasma,  takes
no  part  whatever  in  this  binding.  This  fact  corresponds  entirdy
to  the  views  expressed  by  Ehrlich  in  an  earlier  study  on  blood-cell
poisons.*  Furthermore,  it  has  been  shown  by  von  Dungem  *  that  the
power  of  the  blood-cells  to  excite  a  specific  hemolysin  by  immuniza-
tion can  be  entirely  inhibited  by  completely  loading  the  receptors
of  the  blood-cells  with  the  immune  body  in  question.  These  addi-
tional facts  were  well  fitted  to  still  further  support  the  chemical  con-
ception of  these  processes.

Now,  however,  Bordet  has  described  an  experiment  which  he
believes  shows  that  the  fixation  of  the  immune  body  is  not  a  chemical
process  in  the  strict  sense,  but  that  this  phenomenon  is  to  be
classed  rather  with  surface  attraction  and  similar  actions,  and  that
it  is  completely  analogous  to  staining  processes.  These  views  are  also
shared  by  Nolf  ^  and  Nicolle.*^

Bordet's  experiment  in  the  main  is  as  follows:  By  treating  a
guinea-pig  with  rabbit  blood  a  hjpmolytic  serum  is  obtained  specific
for  rabbit  blood-cells.  A  certain  amount  of  the  serum  dissolves  an
absolutely  definite  amount  of  rabbit  blood-cells  if  all  the  cells  are
added  to  the  serum  at  once.     If,  however,  to  the  same  amount  of  serum

^  One  could  designate  substances  which,  like  the  immune  bodies,  are  supplied
with  two  different  combining  groups  as  ainhoceptors.  This  name  would  indicate
the  double  binding  function  as  well  as  the  fact  that  they  correspond  to  thrust-
off  receptors.

'  Loc.  cit.

>  Annal.  de  Tlnstitut  Pasteur,  1900.

*  Charity  Annalen,  Vol.  X.
» See  page  36.

•  Loc.  cit.

'  Revue  g<»n^rale  des  Materies  Colorantes,  1900,  Nos.  43  and  44.


STUDIES  ON  HEMOLYSINS.


75


only  one-half  the  Amount  of  blood-cells  is  first  added,  sufficient  time
allowed  lor  these  to  completely  dissolve  and  the  second  half  of  the
biood-cella  added,  it  will  be  foimd  that  these  are  no  longer  dissolved.
It  appears,  therefore,  as  though  the  blood-cells  were  capable  of  com-
bining with  double  the  amount  of  immune  body  necessary  for  their
solulion.  In  order  to  explain  this  result  Bordet  describes  the  follow-
ing staining  ex|)criment:  If  one  dissolves  methyl  violet  in  water,  it
is  possible,  by  means  of  a  strip  of  filter-paper  dipped  into  the  solution,
to  abstract  all  the  coloring-matter  from  the  solution.  The  strip  will
assume  a  color  of  very  definite  intensity.  If,  howe\'er,  the  strip  is
divided  into  several  smaller  atrii«  and  these  are  dipped  into  the
fluid  oTie  after  Ike  otlur,  the  first  strip  will  assume  a  considerably  deeper
color,  whereas  the  strips  last  introduced  will  be  unable  to  abstract
any  color  from  the  now  colorless  fluid.  From  this  Bordet  draws
the  following  conclusion:

"On  peut  admettre,  par  comparaison,  que  les  premiers  globules
introtluits  dans  I'h^motoxine  sont  d6'^k  susceptibles  de  perdre  leur
h^moglobine  lorsqu'ils  ne  sont  encore  que  "  faiblements  teints"  par
les  princijwa  actifs,  mais  qu'ull^rieurement  ils  peuvent  absorber  une
dose  beaucoup  plus  grande  de  cea  substances,  i?puiser  ainsi  le  .s(;nira
et  empScher  la  destruction  de  nouveaux  globules  introduits  dans  la
suite."

Phenomena  such  as  those  here  described  have  long  manifested
themselves  in  our  experiments  on  the  binding  of  the  immune  body
by  the  erythrocytes  although  these  experiments  were  of  somewhat
different  form.     But  before  we  proceed  to  discuss  these  results  and
our  conclusions,  we  should  like  to  describe  the  facts  observed  by  us.
In  order  to  determine  the  combining  ability  of  the  erj-throcytes
for  an  immune  body,  especially  when  quantitatively  accurate  results
are  desired,  it  ia  best  to  proceed  as  follows;     The  immune   body
L^hsemolysin  heated  to56^  C.}  h  added  to  the  red  blood-cella  and,  after
Rft  certain  time,  the  mixture  is  centrifuged.    The  clear  fluid  so  obtained
"ia  tested  for  free  immune  body  by  adding  an  excess  of  complement
and  allowing  this  mixtiue  to  act  on  the  same  quantity  of  fresh  blood-
cells.     If  one  proceeds  in  thb  marmer  in  a  large  series  of  cases,  employ-
ing varj-ing  multiples  of  the  solvent  dose  of  immune  body,  it  is  possible
-  to    determine    accurately   the   combining  power  of  the  cells.    The
tiollowing  experiment  will  very  readily  make  tliis  clear.

Tlie  immune  body  was  present  in  the  serum  of  a  sheep  which
1  been  treated  with  dog  blood.     When  tliis  serum  was  inactivated


1


COLLECTED  aTlIDIES  IN   IMMirNITY

by  heating  to  56°  C,  it  could  be  reactivated  either  with  the  com-
plement of  sheep  serum  or  of  goat  serum.  To  begin,  the  exact
quantity  of  immune  body  was  determined  which  would  just  com-
pletely dissolve  2  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  dog  blood-cells  when  suf-
ficient complement  was  present.  This  dose  was  found  to  be  0.15  re.
To  ft  number  of  separate  portions  of  blood  mixture  (each  of  2  cc.)  mul-
tiples of  this  dose  were  then  added,  thus,  1,  H,  U,  I},  2,  24,  3  time-
the  solvent  dose,  and  the  mixtures  kept  at  room  temperature  for  an
hour  and  frequently  shaken.  Since  the  complement  was  absent,
haemolysis  could  not  occm'.  After  centrifuging,  the  clear  fluid,
which  had  the  appearance  of  water,  was  again  mixed  with  the  corre-
aponding  amount  of  blood  (0,1  cc.  of  undiluted  blood)  and  with
complement.^  It  was  found  that  even  the  last  trace  of  .the  single
solvent  dose  had  disap[>eared  from  the  fluid;  whereas  in  the  case
where  double  the  dose  had  been  added,  the  fluid  still  contained  just
a  solvent  dose,  i.e.,  it  completely  dissolved  the  freshly  added  blood-
cells.  In  tiiis  case,  therefore,  tlie  blood-cells  were  able  to  combine
with  only  a  single  dose  of  ike  immurie  boilij.

This,  however,  is  not  at  all  the  general  rule,  for  by  extendiny
our  experiments  to  other  eases  we  found  tliat  there  is  a  verj'  Urge
variability  in  this  binding  of  the  immune  l»dy,  and  that  frequently
a  larger  or  smaller  multiple  of  the  solvent  dose  is  bound.  The  follow-
ing case  will  illustrate  the  extreme  in  the  other  direction,  in  whidt
aimost  a  hundred  limes  the  solveTit  dnse  0}  immune  body  iras  taken  up
by  the  hlood-ctills.  A  rabbit  had  been  treated  with  goat  blood,  and  its
serum  therefore  contained  an  immune  lK>dy  fitting  to  goat  blood.  Nor-
mal guinea-pig  serum  ser\-ed  as  complement  and  0.2  cc,  represented
considerably  more  than  .sufficient  for  2  cc.  of  the  goat  blood  mixture.
When  this  amount  of  complement  wa.s  employed,  the  solvent  doee
of  the  immune  body  for  2  cc,  of  the  blood  mixture  amounted  to
O.OOS  cc.  On  allowing  0.48  cc.  (sLxty  times  the  solvent  dose)  to
act  on  the  blood-cells  in  the  manner  previously  described,  and  then
centrifuging,  it  was  found  that  the  clear  fluid  did  not  contain  even
a  trace  of  immune  body.  When  eighty  times  the  dose  was  employed
the  clear  fluid  showed  a  very  faint  solvent  action,  corresponding  to
about  i  to  1  of  a  solvent  dose.     Not  until  one  hundred  times  the  dose

'  Ab  a  counter  test  tlie  blood-cells  separated  by  ceatriruge  were  mixed  with
ealt  solution  and  with  the  complement.  Those  BpecUneiiB  in  which  just  the
solvent  doae  (0.15  cc.)  of  the  immune  body  or  more  was  present,  disaolved
completely.


STUDIES  ON  H-EMULYSINS.  (7

was  employed  did  the  centrifuged  fluid  contain  a  full  solvent  dose
and  effect  complete  solution.  Hence  out  of  one  hundred  solvent
doses  about  ninety-nine  had  been  bound  by  the  blooil-t^elb,  for
only  about  one  solvent  dose  of  immune  Iwdy  remained  in  the  fluid.
By  meana  of  parallel  experiments  we  have  found  that  one  hour's
contact  of  immune  body  with  blood-cells  results  in  the  maximum
amount  of  binding,  for  the  experiments  at  45°  C.  anrl  room  tem-
perature yielded  results  exactly  alike.  Between  the  extremes  repre-
sented by  these  two  experiments  ft  great  variety  of  figures  was
obtained.

The  significance  of  these  experiments  offers  no  difficulties  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  side-chain  theory.  The  facts  are  readily
understood  when  we  stop  to  consider  the  pecuLarities  of  the  receptor
apparatus  of  the  blood-celk.  As  a  result  of  our  pre\nous  experiments
on  the  isolysins  of  goats  we  assume  that  a  given  blood-cell  contains  a
large  number  of  different  types  of  receptors  which  in  general  fit  to
different  immune  bodies  and  hjemotoxina.  Referring  ttie  reader  to
an  exhaustive  study  by  Ehrlich,'  we  shall  content  ourselves  here
[by  remarking  that  certain  kinds  of  receptors  may  be  present  in  the
id-cell  in  great  excess.  This  excess  cannot  only  be  demonstrated.
Kit,  by  means  of  the  method  just  described,  can  be  exactly  measured.
In ti rely  analogous  conditioas  arise  \mder  other  circumstances.
:  interesting  fact  discovered  by  Wassermann,  that  the  central
r\'ou3  system  of  various  animals  binds  much  more  tetanus  pobon
I  viiro  than  is  necessary  to  fatally  poison  tlie  animal,  b  probably
[lie  to  such  an  excess  of  receptors  for  tetanas  poison.

From  this  point  of  view  the  experiments  alxive  mentioned  are

isily  explained  without  departing  from  the  side-chain  theory.    Thus,

t  us  assiune  that  with  a  certain  jjoison  a  it  is  necessary  that  x  n-re-

iptors  are  boimd  in  order  that  a  blood-cell  be  completely  dissolved,

and  let  us  further  assume  that  the  blood-cell  jjosseses  a  much  greater

number,   say   2x   n-receptors.    ^Vhen   Bordet'a   experiment   ia   now

carried  out,  the  conditions  arising  will  be  exactly  those  descrilred

mhy  Bordet,     It  Is  at  once  apparent  that  the  red  blood-cell  in  this

;  will  combine  with  just  twice  Ihe  amount  of  jioison  necessary

^r  its  solution.    If  therefore  double  the  solvent  dose  of  immune

»dy  is  added  to  a  given  amount  of  such  blood-cells,  the  entire  receptor


'  Speeielle  Patholagie  und  Thempie,  edited  by  Notlinage!,  Vol.  VIIJ,  seo-

I.  pages  l(i3-lS4,


78  COLLECTED  OTCDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

syst<?m  of  these  cells  will  Iw  occupied.  On  adding  now  an  equal
portion  of  fresh  blood,  the  latter  will  fail  to  find  any  free  immune
body  and  cannot  therefore  l>e  attacked.

Such  phenomena  are  exceedingly  plentiful  in  chemiatrj-,  and  it
may  pay  us  to  glance  at  some  of  them.  Napthalin,  as  is  well  known,
consists  of  two  benzole  nuclei  joined  together.  When,  now,  a  salt-
forming  group,  hijdroxyl  or  amido  group,  is  introtlueed  into  each  of
the  two  benzole  nuclei,  the  heteronuclear  substitution  products,  e.g.,
dioxynaphlhalin,  amidonapkllwl,  and  naphtkylenediamine,  or  thdr
sulfo  acids,  will  be  able  to  combine  with  either  one  or  with  two  mole-
cules of  a  diazo  combination.  When  two  molecules  of  dioxynajth-
ihalin  are  mixed  with  Ueo  molecules  of  diazobcfisol,  the  result  is  ex-
clusively the  mono-azo  combination;  when  however  two  molecules
of  diaiobemol  are  added  to  one  molecule  of  dioxynaphthalin,  the  result
J  is  the  diazo  combination.  If  an  additional  molecule  of  dioxi/iuiph-
I  thalin  is  added  to  the  finished  diazo  combination,  this  molecule  will
be  unable  to  dissociate  the  latter,  and  the  two  substances,  the  dituo
combination  and  the  unchanged  dioxi/naplUhalin,  will  exist  side  by
side.  This  example,  to  which  others,  such  as  the  esterification  of
dibasic  acids,  the  methylation  of  anilin  with  iodomethyl,  could
easily  be  added,  corresponds  entirely  to  the  relations  between  im-
mune body  and  erythrocytes  as  described  by  Bordet.

It  may  at  once  be  admitted  that  where  the  binding  of  small
multiples  of  the  immune  body  is  concemetl,  it  b  very  natural  to
think  of  a  mechanical  absorption  due  to  the  degree  of  concentration;
j  and  that  therefore  the  circumstances  in  Bordet'a  case,  in  which  the
j  binding  was  merely  doubleil,  justified  the  comparison  with  i^taining
I  processes.  The  cases  examined  by  us,  however,  in  which  at  one  time
I  just  the  solvent  dose  of  immune  body,  at  another  an  extraordmarily
j|  large  multiple  of  the  dose  was  bound,  weigh  heavily  against  ttis
j        assumption.

j  Our  decision,  however,  is  especially  determined  by  certain  general

I  considerations.  Thus,  charcoal,  the  type  of  siu^ace-attractive  agents
1  attracts  thousands  of  substances  of  the  most  varied  kind.  A  dye  can
j  stain  a  large  number  of  different  substances,  as  is  shown  in  every
I  stained  microscopic  preparation.  In  marked  contrast  to  this  is
j  the  specificity  of  the  numerous  antibodies,  which  primarily  ar«
always  directed  against  the  exciting  bacterial  or  other  oeQ
species.
)  In  the  cases  in  which  apparent  deviations  from  this  rulg  TO^^


►


STUDIES  ON  H-EMOLYSms.

noted,  exsct  investigation  has  shown  '  that  these  are  due  to  the  pres-
ence of  one  and  the  same  receptor  group  in  various  elements.  Thus
we  have  shown  that  the  isolysias  produced  by  injecting  goats  with
goat  blood-ceUa  act  also  on  sheep  blood-cells.  We  have  further
shown  that  these  sheep  blood-celly  possess  certain  kinds  of  receptors
which  bind  the  goat  lysin  just  as  the  receptors  wliich  are  present  in
the  goat  blood-cells  do.  We  produced  the  strongest  proof  for  this
community  of  receptors  by  means  of  crossed  immunization,  for  we
succeeded  in  producing  a  typical  isolysin  by  injecting  goats  with
sheep  blood.

Since  all  experiences,  therefore,  lead  us  to  assume  that  each  par-
tjeidar  complex  produces  just  the  specific  antibody,  and  since  this
agrees  exceedingly  well  with  the  assumption  of  a  chemical  union,
it  would  be  a  distinct  backward  st*p  to  adopt  so  vague  a  conception
as  that  of  mechanical   surface  attraction.

Were  we  to  assume  that  the  immune  body  enters  the  cell  merely
mechanically,  it  ^ould  be  necessary  to  drop  the  entire  unity  of  tlie
immunization  phenomena  which  follows  from  the  side-chain  theory.
It  is  probably  quite  generally  conceded  that  the  antitoxin  acts  on
the  toxin  in  a  purely  chemical  manner.  Hence  so  far  as  dissolved
Bubstances  developed  by  the  immunity  reaction  are  concenierl,  the
chemical  conception  applies.  Why  then  should  this  chemical  action
suddenly  cease  when  the  substances  instead  of  l>eing  in  solution  are
present  within  the  cell,  and  a  new  principle  be  assumed  for  this
case?  This  leads  to  the  contradiction  that  in  one  case  (when  com-
bining with  the  erythrocytes)  the  immune  body  is  bound,  specifically
to  be  sure,  but  tnechanicfiUy,  while  in  the  other  case  (when  anchored
to  an  artificially  jtroduced  anti-immune  body  in  solution)  it  is  bound
iBpecifically  but  chemically.

These  considerations,  and  they  could  readily  be  greatly  extended,
will  suffice  to  show  that  the  above-mentioned  experiments  are  not
at  all  capable  of  shaking  the  side-chain  theory,  for  by  it  alone  is
a  single  uniform  conception  of  the  phenomena  of  immunity  rendered
possible.

n.  Concerning  Complementoids.

The  complements,  which  effect  the  activation  of  the  normal
^immune  bodies  and  of  those  produced  by  immunization  (amboceptors)
do  not  possess  great  theoretical  or  practical  importance  in  the  study


80


OOLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  WMrNITY.


of  immunity.  They  seem  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  uonnal
processes  of  cell  nutrition.  As  a  result  of  experiments  already
described  we  must  assume  that  in  the  blood  serum  of  a  particular
animal  species  not  merely  a  single  complement  exists  but  a  laige
number  of  different  complements.  It  is  understood,  of  course,  that
not  all  the  complements  occurring  in  a  large  number  of  species  differ
from  one  another.  On  the  contrary  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  certain
that  particular  types  find  a  wide  distribution  extending  over  several
animal  species.  This  explains  why,  for  example,  a  hasmolytic  or
bacteriolytic  immune  body  can  be  reactivated  by  the  sera  of
different  animal  species.

We  have  previously  explained  that  a  complement  b  to  be  con-
ceived as  possessing  iwo  characteristic  groups,  a  haptophore  group
wliich  fits  into  the  complementophile  group  of  the  immune  body,
and  a  zymotosic  group  which  is  the  actual  carrier  of  the  specific
action.  A  complement  therefore,  to  a  certain  extent,  corresponds  to
a  toxin,  which  possesses  a  haptophore  and  a  toxophore  group.  Hence
by  the  immunization  of  suitable  animals  it  is  easy  to  obtain  anti-
complements  whose  behavior  corresponds  exactly  to  that  of  anti-
toxins. For  example,  if  a  goat  or  rabbit  is  injected  with  horse
serum,  an  an  tic  om  piemen  t  will  be  formed  which  is  able  to  specifically
inhibit  the  action  of  the  complement  contained  in  hotse  serum.  We
have  already  shown '  that  this  is  due  to  a  deflection  of  the  comple-
ment.

We  ha\'e  now  tried  to  follow  this  analogy  (between  complements
and  toxins)  further.  We  take  it  for  granted  that  it  is  generally
known  that  toxins,  either  through  spontaneous  changes  or  through
the  action  of  chemical  agents,  become  modified  into  loToids,  whose
distinguishing  character  is  that  they  no  longer  possess  a  toxophore
group  although  the  haptophore  group  remains.  These  toxoids,  then,
are  relatively  non-toxic  substances  which  are  nevertheless  able  to
cause  the  formation  of  antitoxins  in  the  animal  body.  Now  vn
know  that  the  zj-motoxic  group  is  extremely  sensitive  to  the  most
varied  influences;  hence  the  attempt  to  study  modifications  of  the
complements  analogous  to  the  toxoids  seemed  to  promise  favorable
results.  Such  modified  complements  would  then  be  designated
comjAemenioids.  The  first  step  was  to  see  whether  the  well-known
inactivation  of  a  serum  by  heating  to  56°  C.  completely  destroyed

'  See  Fourth  Communicaticiu,  page  £6.


STUDIKS  ON  H.'EMOLYSlNS.  81

Xe  complements  or  merely  changed  tiiem  into  inactive  derivatives,
jomplementoids,'

In  order  to  be  certain  of  tlie  destruction  ot  the  zymotoxic  group,
fve  heated  the  sera  for  fifty  minutes  to  60°  C,  a  procedure,  as  shown
t>y  numerous  subsequent  examinations,  which  absolutely  destroj-s
;very  trace  of  complement  action  in  the  sera  so  treated.

By  treating  animals  with  the  sera  thus  prepared,  it  is  actually
I'erj'  easy  to  obtain  anticomplements.  We  injected  rabbits,  guinea-
pigs,  and  dogs  with  inactive  goat  serum,  and  goats  and  numerous
rabbits  with  inactive  horse  serum.  A  parallel  series  of  animals
ft-aa  treated  with  active  serum.  The  anti complement  action  of
the  senun  from  the  animals  treated  with  compIemeJitoids  proved
[ully  as  strong  and  often  stronger  than  that  of  the  control  animals
treated  with  active  serum.  By  means  of  the  procedure  described
in  detail  in  our  Fourth  Comnmni cation  it  was  readily  shown  that
these  were  really  anticomplements.

The  injection  of  the  heated  serum,  therefore,  possesses  the  same
value  as  that  of  the  unchanged  serum.^  Since,  however,  accord-
ing to  otu-  view  it  is  the  haptophore  group  which  causes  the  immu-
nity reaction,  it  follows  that  inaclivalion  of  (he  complement  has  de-
stroyed only  the  zymotoxic  group,  having  the  haptophore  group  intact.

The  important  question  now  arises  as  to  how  the  presence  of
complementoids  influences  the  activation  of  the  immune  body;
for  whenever  a  serum  is  inactivated  by  heating  a  formation  of  com-
plcmentoid  ensues,  and  it  is  well  known  that  such  a  mixture  of  immune
body  and  complement  is  reacti\-atGd  without  any  trouble  by  the
addition  of  complement.  It  seems  therefore  as  though  the  presence
ot  the  complementoid  does  not  hinder  the  union  of  inunune  body
and  complement.

On  this  point  we  have  made  special  experiments  by  alternately

'  At  about  tlio  same  time,  exactly  aimilar  consi derations  led  Paul  Miiller
{CcntrnB'lalt  f.  Barteriolngie,  Vol.  29,  No.  5)  to  attempt  the  produgtion  of
antitomplement  by  the  injection  of  Eerum  which  had  been  heated.  In  his
ease,  however  (immunization  with  chicken  blood),  anti-interbody  was  prin-
cipally developed,  while  anti  complement  could  not  positively  be  demon-
etrateil.  It  is  possible  that  this  negative  result  indicates  that  not  all  tlie  com-
plements of  the  different  animal  species  are  able  to  undergo  tliis  metamorphosis
into  complementoid.

'  We  should  like  lo  mention  that  in  addition  to  this,  in  the  case  of  the  goat
treated  with  inactive  horse  eerum,  we  observed  the  development  ot  a  oowerful
fcnilin.


82


COLLECTED  STTOIES  IN  IMMUNTTY.


inactivating  and  adding  complement  without  finding  that  the  con-
stantly increasing  amount  of  complementoid  hindered  the  aiition
of  the  complement.  This  phenomenon  can  be  explained  only  by
assuming  that  in  Ihe  change  to  complementoid,  the  haptophore  groiiji
of  the  complemenl  suffers  a  diminution  of  its  affinity  for  the  comjJt-
menlophile  group  of  lite  immune  body.

In  the  toxoids  of  diphtheria  poisons  the  circumstances  are  some-
what different,  tor  Ehrlich  found  that  in  the  hemitoxin  zone  of  the
poison  spectrum  the  afUnily  suffers  no  change  through  the  forma-
tion of  toxoid.  On  the  other  hand,  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  in
another  case,  namely  that  of  staphylotoxin,  have  been  able  to  demon-
strate a  decrease  in  affinity  occurring  with  the  change  into  toxoid.
This  behavior  is  analogous  to  that  of  the  compiementoids  observed
by  us.  Hence  no  general  rules  governing  the  affinities  in  toxoid
and  complementoid  formation  can  be  laid  down:  the  circumstances
must  be  investigated  separately  in  each  case.  From  what  slight
differences  in  the  constitution  of  the  moleciile  enormous  differences
in  affinity  may  arise  is  seen  by  studying  certain  organic  acids.  Thus,
for  example,  a  and  fi  resorcyiic  acids  differ  from  each  other  merely  in
the  position  of  the  two  hydroxyl  groups;  the  constants  of  their
affinities,  however,  differ  from  each  other  by  over  a  hundred  times.
We  may  therefore  perhaps  assume  that  in  our  special  case  it  depends
on  the  relative  positions  of  the  haptophore  and  hoxophore  group
and  the  corresjjonding  relations  thereby  determined  whether  any
change  in  one  group  can  retroactively  affect  the  other.


ni.    Concerning  Autoantlcomplements.

In  the  third  communication,  on  isolysins,  we  pointed  out  that
the  organism  possesses  certain  contrivances  by  means  of  which
the  immunity  reaction,  so  easily  produced  by  all  kinds  of  cells,  is
prevented  from  acting  against  the  organism's  own  elements  and
so  give  rise  to  autotoxins.  Further  investigations  made  by  us  have
confirmed  this  view,  so  that  one  might  be  justified  in  speaking  of
a  "horror  auiotoxicus"  of  the  organism.  These  contrivances  are
naturally  of  the  highest  importance  for  the  existence  of  the  indi-  i
vidual.  During  the  individual's  life,  even  under  physiological  though  J
especially  under  pathological  conditions,  the  absorption  of  all  material
of  its  own  body  can  and  must  occur  very  frequently.  The  formation
of  tissue  autotoxins  would  therefore  constitute  a  danger  threatening
the  organism  more  frequently  and   much  more  severely   than  all


STUDIES  ON  H.W10LYSINS.  83

US  injuries.     We  believe  that  the  study  of  these  regulating

nces  is   of  the  greateflt   importance  and  according  to  our

investigations  either  the  disappearance  of  receptors  or  the

presence  of  atitoantitoxins  ia  foremost  among  these  contrivances.

It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  subject  all  the  factors  which  are  of

importance  in  this  r^pcct  to  a  thorough  analysis.'

We  shall  now  mention  a  few  observations  relating  to  the  com-
plements which  seem  to  point  to  a  regulatory  contrivance  a^  yet
und  escribed.

Normal  rabbit  serum  possesses  a  number  of  properties  which
are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  complements.  First  to
be  mentioned  is  the  property  by  means  of  which  freshly  derived
labbit  serum  is  able  to  dissolve  guinea-pig  blood-cells.  This  is  due
to  the  combined  action  of  a  complement  and  an  inmiune  body  which
is  present  in  the  serum  in  comparatively  small  amounts.  Further-
more, rabbit  serum  is  regularly  able  to  activate  an  immune  Ijody
derived  by  treating  rabbits  with  ox  blood.

Now  we  noticed  that  rabbits  which  a  week  previously  had  been
treated  with  goat  senim  (whether  active  or  inactive  is  immaterial)
had  completely  or  almost  completely  lost  these  properf.ies,  and  that
these  changes  persisted  for  weeks  after  the  injection.  Hence  it  fol-
lows that  owing  to  the  injection  of  goat  serum,  complement  nor-
mally present  had  been  made  to  disappear.  It  was  therefore  essen-
tial that  the  cause  of  this  remarkable  phenomenon  be  determined.
We  could  ne,\t  show  that  frequently  the  serum  of  these  rabbits  in
its  native  state,  though  more  surely  after  heating  to  56"  C,  ia  able
to  prevent  the  above-described  complementary  action  of  normal
rabbit  serum.  Hence  in  the  above  case  normal  complement  lias
evidently  disappeared  from  the  rabbit  treated  as  described,  and
has  been  replaced  by  an  anli-complemenl  which  we  shall  have  to
term  an  auloanlicomptemmt.^

'  MetalnikolTs  interesting  obsenation  is  only  apparently  a.  contradiction
of  these  r^ulatitig  phenomena.  He  found  that  n  typical  avlmpermolaxm  is
developed  in  the  blood  of  guinea-piga  which  have  been  treated  with  guinea-pig
Epennatozoa,  and  that  this  ix  able  in  vUto  to  kill  the  fpermatozoa  of  the  unimal
itself.  But  such  an  injurioua  action  ou  the  Hpermatoxoa  does  not  take  place,
even  in  the  slighMet  degree,  in  the  living  animal,  tiecause,  as  Metalnikofl'a
reaearcheB  show,  only  the  immune  body  combines  with  the  spemiafozoa,  not
the  complement.     In    this  ea«e,  therefore,  an  autotoxin  within  our  meaning.

ttfuU  destroys  the  crlln  of  iU  avn  l-ody.  does  not  exiRt.
'  Aocoiding  to  the  investigations  of  T)r.  M.  Neither  and  Dr.  Wechsberg  still


\


84  CXJLLBCTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITV.

It  has  previously  been  shown  that  such  a  rabbit  serum  is  rich  in
antigoat  complement.  We  observed  an  analogous  phenomenon,
whose  nature  may  perhaps  be  identical  with  the  above,  in  a  rabbit
which  had  been  treated  with  ox  blood  (blood-cells  and  seniin)  in
order  to  produce  a  specific  hfemolysin.  Ten  days  after  the  injection
of  ox  blood,  the  serum  failed  to  show  any  solvent  action  whatever
on  ox  blood,  in  direct  contrast  to  numerous  previous  cases.  At
first  we  thought  it  possible  that  no  inunune  body  had  been  formed
in  this  case,  tor  even  the  addition  of  an  excess  of  complement
in  the  form  of  rabbit  serum  produced  no  solution.  However,  on
centrifuging  the  ox  blood-cells  after  treatment  with  this  abnormal
eerum,  and  mixing  them  with  salt  solution  and  complement,  we
found  that  oven  slight  doses  of  immune  serum  caused  marked  so-
lution. The  serum  therefore  contained  plenty  of  immune  body,
and  this  had  been  anchored  by  the  blood-cells.  The  presence  of
this  immune  body  was  obscured  not  only  because  the  complement
was  absent,  but  because  this  had  been  replaced  by  an  antJcom-
piement  which  neutralized  the  complement  subsequently  added.
Because  of  the  anticomplcment  which  it  contained,  this  rabt^
serum  manifested  a  marked  inhibitory  action  on  the  strongly  hasn-
olytie  serum  of  another  rabbit  (one  which  had  been  treated  with
ox  blood).

But  what  happened  in  this  case  after  injection  of  ox  blood  rarely
occurs  in  such  a  conspicuous  manner.  Jlore  frequently  it  is  found
that  the  scrum  in  its  active  state  j.x>ssesaea  an  exceedingly  slight
solvent  action,  corresponding  to  a  very  small  content  of  complement,
and  that  after  heating  it  manifests  a  distinct  anticomplementary'
action.  This  evidently  leads  to  the  extreme  case  above  described,  as
is  readily  seen  when  the  relations  are  expressed  by  means  of  a  diagram.
(See  figure.)

In  .studying  the  question  as  to  how  these  autoanticomplements
are  formed,  we  must  constantly  bear  in  mind  that  normal  scrum
abvays  contains  complements  in  excess.  Now  it  is  difficult  to  see
what  purpose  would  be  served  if  at  any  time  the  normal  comple-
ments, so  important  in  cell  economy,  were  paralyzed  by  autoanticom-
plements.    We  shall   therefore   have   to   assume   that    the    normal

in   progress,  this  eenim  also  lacks  the   power  to   ai'tivatc  certain  harlmeidiU
bodies.     The  animals  at  the  same  time  seem  to  suffer  a  decrease  in
resisting  power  ftgainst  certain  infections,  a  fact  which  may  perbapa  sen-s

hibit  in  the  purest  form  the  fuiiclioii  of  eertain


'UM.  ^^^


STUDIES  ON  aSMOLYSINB


If-    II     I
i8-St.


a  =.2.    K  "  '=^~'-p  3    «  5


l-iiH|r  1  g


a.  frl

I  si


r?  ri


§=3

Sr3

86  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  UnfUNITY.

complements  circulating  in  the  serum  do  not  cause  the  formation  d
autoanticomplement.s.  Confirmation  of  this  view  is  furnished  by
the  fact  that  even  in  animal  species  possessing  identical  complemente
it  is  impossible  to  produce  anticomplements  by  means  of  serum
injections.  Thas,  neither  sheep  when  injected  with  goat  serum,  nor,
conversely,  goats*  when  injected  with  sheep  serum  produce  any  anti-
complement,  for  these  two  species  manifest  an  extensive  similarity
in  their  complements  as  well  as  in  other  serum  constituents.

When,  then,  in  spite  of  this  rule,  we  find  that  in  our  case  auto-
anticomplements  have  developed,  only  one  explanation  remains:
that  one  or  the  other  complement  present  in  the  goat  serum,  althaugk
related,  is  not  identical  with  the  complement  of  the  rabbit.  If  we  assume
that  a  certaih  goat  complement  possesses  the  same  hajdophare  group
as  does  a  certain  rabbit  complement,  but  that  it  differs  in  ihe  rest  of
its  constitution,  then  the  assumption  that  identical  complements  do  not
form  anticomplements  will  not  apply.  In  this  case,  by  means
of  the  hapto]ihore  group  of  the  particular  receptor  of  the  rabbit  cell,
a  foreign  complex  would  be  anchored  which  exerts  a  sufficient  stimulus
on  the  cell  to  cause  an  increased  production  and  thrusting  oflf  of  the
corresponding  side-chains  which  can  fimctionate  as  anticomplements.

We  shall  have  to  assume  that  the  particular  goat  complement,
because  of  its  identical  haptophore  group,  can  be  anchored  at  the
name  places  as  the  idiocomplements  with  the  same  haptophore  group.
Foremost  among  these  places  we  may  consider  the  complex  receptors
which  possess  two  haptophore  groups  (amboceptors).  In  this  case,
contrar\'  to  what  we  asually  observe,  the  thrusting^ff  of  an  amboceptor
v:oiM  be  effected  through  the  anchoring  of  its  complementophile  group,
and  we  sliould  then  have  additional  proof  for  our  xiew  that  the  com-
plex receptors  i)Ossess  two  binding  groups.

In  any  case  it  would  seem  to  be  of  the  greatest  importance  to  gain
an  insight  into  the  conditions  governing  the  disappearance  of  the
i(liocomi)lements.  That  they  can  be  caused  to  disappear  through
injection  of  anticomplements  produced  by  immunization  follows  as
a  matter  of  course  from  our  definition  of  anticomplements.  This,
however  occurs  only  under  artificial  experimental  conditions  and
so  ixwsesses  but  little  significance  pathologically.  Of  considerable
importance  for  these  occurrences  under  natural  circumstances  are
the  vital  conditions  governing  the  disappearance  of  complement
through  internal  metabolic  processes.  The  origin  of  the  autoanti-
complements  as  it  has  jast  been  presented  by  us  surely  belongs  here,


STUDIES  ON  HiEMOLYSINS.  87

and  it  has  perhaps  some  practical  significance,  viz.,  that  in  the  fre-
quent injection  of  various  ciu'ative  sera  into  man  and  animals,  the
possibility  of  autoanticomplement  formation  should  be  borne  in
mind.  Another  case  belonging  here  has  previously  been  described
by  us — the  disappearance  of  part  of  the  complements  in  a  rabbit
poisoned  with  phosphorus.  In  connection  with  this  the  following
observation  of  Metalnikoff  (1.  c.)  is  of  interest.  He  was  immimizing
a  rabbit  with  spermatozoa  and  noticed  that  in  consequences  of  a
purulent  process  which  developed  during  the  course  of  the  immuni-
sation, the  complement  which  activated  the  spermotoxin  disappeared
from  the  serum  and  did  not  reappear  for  a  considerable  time.

These  isolated  observations  seem  to  indicate  that  the  com-
plements can  disappear  during  pathological  conditions  in  conse-
quence, perhaps,  of  a  more  rapid  destruction  or  of  a  slower  formation.
The  same  holds  true  for  the  immime  bodies  (amboceptors)  which
in  bacteriol3rsis  as  well  as  in  hsemol3rsis  have  at  least  as  great  a  sig-
nificance as  the  complements.  Which  of  these  two  factors  prevails
in  any  single  case  cannot  be  decided  by  any  general  rule,  but  each  case
must  be  examined  separately.  Only  through  such  investigation  will
we  gain  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  "natural  predisposition"  and
its  changes,  "increased  resistance,"  "loss  of  resistance,"  etc.


The  Bteady  progress  of  the  investigations  in  immunity  is  rendered
extremely  difficult  by  the  fact  that  in  the  inununizatioii  with  living
cells  and  in  the  study  of  the  immune  sera  thus  obtained  a  large  number
of  different  substances  which  exist  simultaneously  is  concerned.
In  our  second  communication  we  pointed  out  that  the  hfcmolyslns
present  in  normal  serum,  which  act  on  different  species  of  blood,  are
not  a  single  substance  in  the  sense  of  Buchner's  alexin ;  and  in  our
fourth  communication  we  showed  that  this  could  be  demonstrated
experimentally  by  means  of  elective  absorption.  It  is  possible  that
just  as  many  interbodies  come  into  action  as  the  varieties  of  blood
affected.  We  have  also  been  imable  to  accept  Bordet's  unitarian
view  of  the  complements.  On  the  contrary,  as  a  result  of  our  own
experiments  we  have  become  convinced  that  a  large  nimiber  of  com-
plements exLst  together  in  blood  serum,  In  like  manner  Bordet's
absorption  experimente  indicate  a  plurality  of  the  bacterial  agglutinins
and  those  of  Malkoff  a  plurality  of  the  normal  hsemagglutinins.
The  results  of  these  experiments  have  been  gathered  together  by  M.
Neisser  '  in  a  study  in  which,  on  the  basis  of  the  same  principles,  he
demonstrates  the  variety  of  the  aniiloxic  antibodies  occurring  in  nor-
mal serum.  In  conformity  to  this,  the  reactive  antibodies  produced  by
injections  of  senim  of  foreign  species  are  most  varied  in  their  nature,
and  we  are  only  just  beginning  to  gain  an  insight  into  their  constitution.
Aside  from  the  numerous  coagulins  and  antifermenta  thus  produced,
it  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  so  far  as  the  discussion  of  immunity
problems  is  concerned,  to  recognize  the  fact  that  the  complements


'  Reprinted  from  the  Berliner  klin,  Wochenschr.,  1901,  Nob.  21  and  22.
'Deutsche  med.  Wochenaohr.,  ISOO,  No.  49.


J


ffrUDIES  ON  H-EMOLYSms.

formed  through  immunization,  corresponding  to  the  multiplicity  of
the  complements  present  in  the  serum,  are  exceedingly  manifold.

Especially  significant,  however,  is  the  fact  that  the  cells  possess
a  great  number  of  different  kinds  of  groups,  which  groups  can  lead
to  the  production  of  numerous  different  amboceptors  (immune
bodies).'

Hence  in  immunzing  an  animal  with  cell  material,  the  organism
is  injected,  not  with  a  single  uniform  substance,  but  with  a  multitude
of  the  most  varied  receptors,  each  of  which  is  more  or  less  able  to
produce  an  antibody.  In  our  fourth  communication  we  defined  our
point  of  view  on  this  basis  as  follows:

"In  view  of  our  experiments  on  isolysins  described  in  our  third
commimication  the  occiurence  of  different  immune  bodies  in  a
hiemolytic  serum  obtained  by  immunizbg  with  red  blood-cells  is
not  at  all  surprising.  We  have  obtained  a  whole  series  of  difJerent
isolysins  by  injecting  goats  with  goat-blood.  At  present  they  number
twelve.  In  the  red  blood-cells  not  merely  a  single  group,  but  a  large
number  of  different  groups,  must  be  considered,  which,  provided
there  are  fitting  receptors,  can  produce  a  corresponding  series  of
immune  bodies.  All  of  these  immune  bodies,  again,  will  be  anchored
by  the  blood-cells  employed  in  immunization.  We  may  assume
that  when  an  animal,  species  A,  is  immunized  with  blood-cells  of
sf>ecies  B,  a  hsemolytic  serum  will  be  produced  which  contains  a  great
host  of  immune  bodies.  The  immune  bodies  in  their  entirety  are
anchored  by  the  blood-cells  of  species  A."

Durham^  has  adopted  the  same  view  for  the  bacterioagglutinins.
3  a  number  of  "components  "  {corresponding  to  our  reccp-
riors)  ra  the  body  substance  of  the  bacteria,  which  can  cause  the
production  of  a  corresponding  number  of  agglutinins.  In  this  way
each  agglutinin  which  acts  on  a  certain  species  of  bacteria  represents
the  sum  of  different  kinds  of  single  agglutinins,  a  view  entirely
analogous  to  our  asaumijtion  of  a  plurality  of  immune  bodies.  This
view  permits  Durham  to  offer  a  sufficient  and  natural  explanation
of  the  var>'ing  degree  of  action  of  typhoid  agglutinins  on  typhiod

Elli  of  different  origin,  and  of  the  extension  of  the  agglutinating
jn  of  specific  sera  to  related  species  of  bacteria.     It  would  be


anc

■  tOTf


Compare  the  thorough  exposiiion  by  Ehrlich  in  VoL  Vlll  of  Not
[pecielle  Pathologie  und  Therapie,  Holder,  ^'ie^na,  1901.

Durham,  Journ.  of  Experimental  .Medicine.  New  York,  Vol.  V,  No.  4,  1901.


00


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


verj-  interesting  to  see  these  as  yet  purely  theoretical  suggestions
of  Durham  proved  by  means  of  experiments.

The  pluralistic  standpoint  adopted  by  us  creates  numerous
difficulties  for  thorough  analytical  work  in  this  field,  but  it  leads  to  a
deeper  insight  into  the  complicated  problems  and  may  perhaps
also  prove  of  value  in  the  practical  applications  in  immunity.

I.  Observations  on  the  PEuralhtlc  Conception  ot  the  Cellular
Immunft}'  Reaction.

To  begin,  we  shall  briefly  sketch  one  of  the  points  of  view  yielded
by  the  plurimistic  conception,  which  seems  to  be  of  some  practical
value.  Let  us  assume  that  a  cell,  e.g.,  a  bacterial  cell,  possesses
twenty  different  groups ;  then  twenty  different  antibodies  correspond-
ing to  these  will  be  possible.  Each  haptophore  group  of  the  bacterial
cell  will  then  represent  an  isolated  point  of  attack  for  one  particular
immune  body.  It  is  certainly  most  logical  to  conclude  that  the
possibility  of  successfully  combating  a  certain  bacterial  infection
increases  directly  with  the  number  of  kinds  ot  immune  bodies  which
act  on  the  bacterial  cell.^  The  ideal  effect  would  obviously  be  attained
if  it  were  possible  to  produce  a  serum  so  constituted  as  to  contain
inmiune  bodies  for  all  the  groups  present  in  the  bacterial  cell.

The  phenomenon  of  antibody  formation  as  it  proceeds  according
to  the  side-chain  theory  is  a  very  complex  one,  and  is  composed
of  a  number  of  phases  (binding,  super-regeneration,  thrusting-off)
which  arc  partly  independent  of  each  other.  Hence  a  variety  of
circumstances  may  arise  which  exert  an  inhibitory  action  at  certain
points.

To  begin,  the  cell  may  be  so  severely  damaged  by  the  anchoring
of  certain  poisonous  substances  that  the  formation  of  antibody
does  not  occur  at  all,  or  occurs  in  only  a  very  slight  degree;  for  this
antibody  production,  which  is  a  kind  of  regeneration  process,  pre-
supposes a  certain  degree  of  cell  efficiency.^

This  damaging  effect  will  result  especially  with  highly  toxic  sub-

'  It  ia,  in  fact,  conceivable  that  the  occupation  of  n  single  group  only  produces
a  certain  amouBt  of  injury  to  the  cell  without  being  able  to  cause  its  death.  The
danger  to  the  life  of  the  Ijacterial  cells  would  increase  in  proportion  to  the  number
of  partial  injuries,  which  again  would  correspond  to  the  increase  in  the  Dumber
of  typos  of  receptors.  It  is  possible  that  the  potent  bacl«ricidal  sera  so  far
obtained  owe  their  success  to  a  certain  plurality  of  the  immune  bodies

'  Weigert  has  already  called  attention  to  this.  See  Lubarsch-Ostertag,
Ergcbnisse  der  Pathologie,  1897,  page  138.


I
I


STUDIES  0?J  H.EMOLYSINS.

stances,  provided  the  receptors  fitting  these  are  present  exclusively
in  vitally  important  organs,  e.g.,  the  central  nervous  system.  This
perhaps  explains  the  circumstance  that  it  is  exceedingly  difficult
lo  prodxice  an  antitoxin  in  mice  and  guinea-pigs  with  unchanged
tetanus  poison,  while  this  is  easily  effected  when  toxoids  are  used.
On  the  other  hand,  an  immunization  of  rabbits  by  means  of  unchanged
tetanus  poison  ia  very  easy  to  attain,  because  in  these  animals,
as  is  shown  by  the  investigations  of  Donitz  and  of  Roux,  the  greater
part  of  the  receptors  lies  outside  of  the  poison-endangered  central
nervous  system.

However,  even  without  any  development  of  illness  it  is  not  at
all  necessary  that  antibodies  should  be  produced  in  every  case  in
which  an  anchoring  occurs.  Metchnikoff,  for  example,  has  called
attention  to  the  fact  that  with  frogs  in  whom  every  trace  of  illness
is  avoided  by  keeping  them  cool  (as  we  know  from  Courmont's  beau-
tiful observations)  it  is  impossible  to  produce  any  tetanus  antitoxin.
Investigations  bj'  Morgenroth  have  confirmed  this  result  and  shown
further  that  even  by  treatment  with  toxoids  under  various  conditions
it  is  impossible  to  produce  a  trace  of  immunity.  Probably  in  this
particular  case  these  results  indicate  that  the  regenerative  powers
of  the  frog's  tissues  are  not  equal  to  these  extraordinary  demands.

Such  an  explanation  for  failure  of  the  antibody  to  develop  is,  how-
ever, much  less  probable  in  the  case  of  warm-blooded  animals;  and
as  the  number  of  experiments  increases,  these  cases  are  becoming
more  frequent.  Probably  all  who  have  busied  themselves  with  the
subject  will  have  found,  particularly  with  the  artificially  produced
cell  poisons,  that  in  some  caaea  it  is  extremely  difficult  if  not  impoa-
fflble  to  effect  the  production  of  anli-immune  bodies.  Thus,
Metchnikoff  injected  a  scries  of  guinea-pigs  with  specific  spermo-
toxin,  a  substance  which  certainly  finds  receptors  in  the  guinea-pig'a
organism.  Despite  this,  he  found  but  two  cases  in  which  even  a
euggestion  of  antispermotoxin  could  be  demonstrated,  In  the
case  of  a  dog  injected  with  a  specific  dog  blood  immune  body  derived
from  a  sheep,  we  have  failed  despite  long-continued  treatment  to
produce  any  anti-immune  body.  With  this  series  of  phenomena
must  also  be  classed  the  fact  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  if  not  impoB-
sible  in  a  number  of  animal  species  to  produce  antienzymes  by  the
continued  injection  of  certain  enzymes.

The  explanation  of  these  facts  presents  two  possibilities:  First,
the  receptors  concerned  in  the  particular  case  may  be  of  peculiar


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMinjNITY.

constitution  in  one  respect,  i.e.  in  being  firmly  bound  to  the  proto-
plasm, so  that  a  thrusting-off,  which  is  essential  for  the  formation
of  antibodies,  does  not  occur  even  with  an  increased  regeneration
{sessile  receptors).  This  leads  to  the  conception  that  the  regenera-
tion of  the  receptors  may  take  two  courses;  (n)  a  thrusting-off
of  the  receptors  ensues,  and  with  this  a  formation  of  antibody;
(b)  in  the  case  of  sessile  receptors,  a  hj-pertrophic  process  sets  in
comparable  perhaps  to  a  simple  muscle  hypertrophy,  according  to
Weigert's  conception.  Second,  it  is  concdvable,  as  Morgenroth '
has  sliowTj  in  the  immunization  against  rennin,  that  normal  pre-
formed regulating  contrivances  come  into  action,  for,  in  the  case  of
enzymes  {in  contrast  to  toxins)  we  are  dealing  with  substances  nor-
mally produced  by  the  organism  itself.  Hence  it  is  possible  that  the
formation  of  an  antienzyme  is  followed  by  the  production  of  the
enzyme  itself,  in  consequence  of  an  internal  regulating  contrivance.

In  any  event  these  observations  will  show  how  the  factors  just
discussed  can  make  it  possible,  when  cells  possessing  numerous
different  receptors  are  injected,  that  only  a  small  number  of  the  anti-
bodies theoretically  possible  is  actually  produced.  It  is  therefore
very  likely  that  the  immunization  of  one  animal  species  with  a  certain
kind  of  cell  or  bacterium  results  in  the  production  of  only  part  of  the
possible  antibodies.  When,  however,  the  same  kind  of  cell  or  bac-
terium is  injected  into  a  second  animal  species,  it  is  highly  probable
that  in  tliis  species  the  haptophore  groups  of  the  cells  will  find  a
receptor  apparatu-s  which  in  part  at  least  is  different  from  that  of
the  first  species  The  prerequisite  for  such  a  difference  is  the  obvious
assumption  that  the  receptor  apparatus  of  one  species  is  not  identical
with  the  receptor  apparatus  of  a  second  not  very  closely  related
species.  For  example,  it  is  possible  that  a  certain  haptophore  group
a  of  the  typhoid  bacillus  finds  fitting  receptors  in  the  organism  of  the
rabbit,  but  not  in  that  of  the  dog,  whereas  another  group,  b,  finds
just  the  reverse  conditions.  If  these  presumptions  are  correct  an
important  principie  for  the  practical  production  of  curative  sera  VA&
follow,  namely,  titat  in  any  single  «ise  one  would  immunize  a  number
of  different  animal  species,  select  the  sera  containing  different  immune
bodies,  and  by  mixing  these,  produce  a  curative  serum  containing  differ-
ent types  of  receptors  in  as  complete  a  form  as  possible.

Owing  to  the  importance  of  this  subject  we  have  first  under^


'  CenlralbUtt  fiir  Bscteriologie,  Vol.  26,  1899.


STUDIES  ON   II.-EMOLYSINS.  93

taken  the  experimental  study  of  the  preliminary  question  whether
mmune  sera  derived  by  treating  two  different  animal  spcrips  with  the
same  cells  are  identical  so  far  as  their  antihodies  are  concerned,
or  whether  they  are  partly  or  wholly  different.  Of  these  antibodies
the  most  important  are  the  bacteriolytic  and  hemolytic  immune
bodies.  According  to  our  conception,  as  is  well  known,  these
possess  two  haptophore  groups,  one,  the  complemcniophile  group,
and  the  other  (which  anchors  itaelf  to  the  receptors  of  the  cells
causing  the  immunity)  which  we  can  briefly  designate  the  q/topkUe
group.  According  to  what  has  been  said  above  it  is  this  second
group  which  possesses  sjiecial  significance  in  the  question  under
discussion,  and  we  may  therefore  formulate  our  problem  as  follows:
To  determine  whether,  in  tlie  immunizulion  of  difftrcnl  animal  species
with  cells  of  one  kind,  amboceptors  (immune  bodies)  possessing  different
cylophile  groups  arise.

The  experimental  study  of  this  question  can  be  pursued  in  the  main
in  two  different  ways:  1,  by  means  of  the  absorption  test  which,
Although  it  is  very  difficult,  is  applicable  to  bactcriolj'sina  as  well
ss  to  hemolysins;  2,  by  neutralization  with  antiamboceptors  (anti-
immune  bodies).

The   latter  way,    the   more   el^ant    of   the  two,    ia,   howe\-er,

I  presumably   applicable    only    to  those    immune    bodies  which    are

I  directed    against   cells   of   the  oi^nism.     A  henmohjtic  or  cytotoxic
mune  body,  as  is  to  be  expected,  alwaj-s  finds  points  of  attack

[  in  the  organism  of  the  corresponding  animal  species,  for  this  is
the  first  preref|uiaite  for  the  possibility  of  an  anti-immune  body.
As  a  matter  of  fact  also,  such   anti-immune   bodies   have  already

I  Tjeen  observed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  immune  bodies  of  bacteri-
cidal sera,  since   their   natural   counter  groups  are   found    in   the

'  bacterial  cells,  will  in  all  probability  not  find  these  groups  in  the
cells  of  the  higher  animals.  Hence  it  seems  improbable,  unless  by
chance  they  occur  in  an  isolated  case,  that  anti-immune  bodies
directetl  against  the  haeiericidal  immune  bodies  will  be  produced.

I

^H  Wo  selected  immunization  with  ox  blood-cells  as  being  especially
^H  Adapted  for  these  experiments.  Huch  immunization  had  already
^Hbeen  carried  out  by  von  Dungern  on  rabbits.  The  production  of
^H  immune  bodies  in  high  concentration  succeeds  particularly  well  in


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

this  case,  so  that  later  investigators  (Buchner,  Rehns,  Bulloch)
have  also  employed  this  useful  combination.  In  many  cases,  meet
easily  by  means  of  intraperitoneal  injections  of  the  ox  blood,  a  potent
hiemolysin  is  produced  of  which  0.005-0.0005  cc.  suffices  to  dissolve
1  cc.  of  the  5%  ox-blood  mixture.  Since  the  production  of  the
immune  body  is  unaccompanied  by  any  increase  in  complement  (as
von  Dungem  showed  in  just  this  case)  it  is  always  necessary,  in
order  to  bring  the  total  amount  of  immune  body  into  action,  to
add  extra  complement.  This  is  found  in  large  amounts  in  the  serum
of  rabbits  and  especially  in  that  of  guinea-pigs.

Now  we  have  obsejred  that  the  serum  of  these  rabbits  which  had
been  immunized  with  ox  blood  is  able  to  dissolve  not  only  the  biood-
oells  of  oxen,  but  also  those  of  goals.  The  following  table  shows  a
comparison  of  the  solvent  action  of  several  of  these  sera  on  the  blood-
cells  of  oxen  and  of  goata.  Guinea-pig  senmi  (0.1  or  0.15  cc.)  was
used  as  complement  since  rabbit  serum  itself,  in  the  doses  required,
often  exerted  a  hmmolytic  action  on  the  goat  blood-cells.

TABLE  I.


■"-'-A%"l».-^'^

CompleW  SolvBDl
Doae  (or  1  oc,

of  Ox  Blood.

Cooipteta  SalYBDt
DoH  Tor  1  m
o(  Gout  Blooti.

CO.

Ratio  or  tlH
Solvent  OoM

0.^1 1.

0,0042

0.0035

0.002

0.003

0.0017

0.0014

0.00088

0,0051

0.00073

0.0035

0,0061

0.0061

0,0035

0,01

0.0061

0  0051

0.0042

0  05

0.0073

O.Ofl

1:1.5

1:1.7

1:1,8

1:3.3

1:3.6

1:3.6

1:5

1:9,8

1:10

1:17

'  xn-17-00

This  table  shows  that  the  hiemolytic  action  of  the  immune  body
is  always  less  on  goat  blood  tlian  on  ox  blood,  and  that  the  ratio
of  the  solvent  doses  tor  the  two  species  of  blood  is  not  constant  but
varies  within  fairly  wide  limits,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  last  column.


STUDIEB  ON  HEMOLYSINS.


95


Hub  variable  ratio  indicates  that  the  s<^vent  action  on  the  two
species  of  blood-cells  is  not  the  simple  function  of  one  and  the  same
immune  body,  but  that  two  fractions  of  immune  bodies  are  pres-
ent in  the  serum,  of  which  one  acts  exclusively  on  ox  blood-cells,
while  the  other  fraction  acts  both  on  ox  blood  and  on  goat  blood-
cells.

These  relations  can  be  studied  directly  by  means  of  elective  ab-
sorption. If  the  immune  body  is  treated  with  a  sufficient  amount  of
ox  blood  cells  and  the  fluid  is  then  separated  by  centrifuge,  it  will
be  found  that  the  serum  has  lost  its  solvent  action  for  both  species


Blood-oell  of  a


t  and  of  a  goat,  showing  epooi&s  and  oommou  reoeptora


of  blood;  for  by  means  of  the  ox  blood-celk,  which  as  the  original
excitants  of  the  immunity  are  carriers  of  all  the  receptors  in  question,
both  fractions  of  immune  body  have  been  bound.  When  the  same
experiment  is  performed  with  goat  blood-cells,  it  can  be  shown  that
the  fluid  has  hat  its  solvent  pouxr  far  goat  blood,  wkiU  thai  for  ox  blood
remains.  In  favorable  cases  the  solvent  power  for  ox  blood  may
remain  almost  unchanged.  The  conditions  present  can  be  readily
understood  by  reference  to  Fig.  1.

Let  this  represent  schematically  three  portions  of  the  combin-
ing groups  of  the  blood-cells,  of  which  the  first,  a,  is  present  only  in


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNHY.

the  ox  blood-cells,  the  Becond,  ;-,  only  in  goat  blood-cells,  and  the
third,  ^,  in  both.  If  a  rabbit  is  injected  with  ox  blood,  the  ambo-
ceptors (immune  bodies)  corresponding  to  groups  a  and  ^  will  be
formed.  Ox  blood-eella,  by  means  of  their  a  and  /3  groups,  will
then  be  able  to  anchor  all  the  immune  bodies,  whereas  goat  blood-
cells  will  anchor  only  the  immune  body  of  portion  ^,  leaving  the
immune  body  of  portion  a  in  the  solution.

If,  as  this  explanation  assumes,  the  goat  blood-cells  possess  a
certain  portion  ofr  eceptors  which  are  common  to  goat  and  ox  blood-
cells,  it  is  essential  that  by  treating  rabbits  with  goat  blood  an  immune
body  should  be  obtained  which  likewise  would  act  on  both  species
of  blood.  This,  in  fact,  is  the  case.  And  here,  as  in  the  first  case,
the  solvent  power  for  the  two  species  of  blood-cells  usually  diffras,
though  of  course  the  relations  are  reversed  from  those  in  that
as  can  be  seen  by  reference  to  Table  II.


Action  of  the  InratTfJE  Boot
Goat  Blood,
CRucilv

TABLE  IL

or  THE  Rahbit  which  had  been
N  Goat  Blood,  and  Ox  Blood.

alian  with  guinM-pig  wrum. )

TBEAISD-Wa

Number  of  tbe  Rabtal  Treated

"^ITb'i^

cc.

Compleu  Solvent
Dwe  lot  Goal

No.  1  of     11-28-01

0.01
0,0061
0,0012
0.0071

0.024
0.025
0.025
0,25
(almost  complete)

1:2.4       _

liao      1

"    4  "  Xll  18-00

'  On  employing  the  Bame  serum  on  a  dilfernd  ox  blood,  0.05  co,  produced
no  solution  at  all,  ajid  O.I  cc.  merely  a  trace.    This  is  evidently  due  to  a  caEual,
individual  lack  of  receptors  in  the  ox.  blood-cells  in  ([uestion,  such  as  ah<
itself  BO  frequently  in  goat  blood  when  we  studied  isolysins.


!  Because  of  these  ratios  we  shall  have  to  assume  that   the

blood-cells  in  this  case  possess  a  second  system  of  binding  groups

which   is  peculiar  to  them  and  represented  in  the  above  diagram

by  y.    They  possess  these,  of  course,  in  addition  to  the  receptors,  ^

I     which  they  have  in  common  with  the  ox  blood-cells.     In  accordance

i     with  this,  in  the  elective  absorption  test  in  this  case,  the  goat  blood-

L    cells  will  bind  the  entire  lot  of  immune  bodies;  whereas  when  ox


a


>at  blood-
when  ox

J


STUDIES  ON   HyKMOLYSINS.  97

•lood-cells  are  used,  the  group  y  will  be  left  behind,  for  this  possesses
flinity  only  for  the  goat  blood-cells.

The  following  protocol  shows  the  results  of  two  series  of  experi-
aents,  which  exhibits  the  effect  of  such  reciprocal  binding:

To  each  5  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  ox  blood-cells  or  goat  blood-
ells  (freed  from  serum  by  centrifuge)  varying  amounts  of  the  immune
lody  of  a  rabbit  which  had  been  immunized  with  ox  blood  are
dded.  The  amount  of  immune  body  is  seen  in  the  first  column
f  the  table;  in  the  second  and  third  columns  the  complete  solvent
OSes  (for  ox  blood  and  for  goat  blood)  contained  in  each  specimen
re  given,  as  they  were  determined  by  tests  made  at  the  same  time.
Tie  mixtures  are  made  up  to  6  cc.  with  physiological  salt  solution,
:ept  at  37®  C.  for  IJ  hours  and  then  centrifuged.  Two  equal  por-
ions  of  each  of  the  decanted  fluids  are  then  taken  and  again  mixed
rith  corresponding  amoimts  of  blood-cells.  Finally  guinea-pig
erum  is  added  to  activate  the  mixtures.  The  haemolytic  action
rhich  the  decanted  portions  exerted  on  ox  blood-cells  and  on  goat
Jood-cells  is  seen  in  the  table.     (See  Table  III.)

The  imion  of  the  inmiune  body  with  the  ox  blood-cells  has  resulted
n  a  considerable  abstraction  of  both  portions  of  immune  body.  On
he  other  hand,  the  imion  with  goat  blood-cells ,  by  which  the  action
•f  the  fluid  is  considerably  decreased  for  goat  blood-cells,  causes  very
ittle  decrease  in  the  solvent  power  for  ox  blood.

In  contrast  to  this  experiment  we  here  reproduce  an  analogous
xperiment  which  shows  a  directly  opposite  behavior  of  the  two
factions  of  inmiune  body  of  a  rabbit  inmiunized  with  goai  blood.
See  Table  IV.)

Here  the  goat  blood-cells  bind  both  portions  of  the  immune  body,
vhile  after  treatment  with  ox  blood-cells  the  fraction  adding  on  goai
load  is  left  almost  iniact.

Hence  by  means  of  this  crossed  immunization  and  reciprocal  elec-
ive  absorption  we  succeed  in  demonstrating  that  in  the  case  of  the
abbits  treated  respectively  with  goat  blood  and  ox  blood  two
arge  fractions  of  immune  bodies  can  be  separated.  Of  these,  one
faction  is  common  to  both  sera;  the  other  is  peculiar  to  each  of
hem.  The  main  groups  of  receptors  shown  in  the  above  illustra-
ion  and  designated  a  and  /?  for  ox  blood,  and  ^  and  y  for  goat  blood,
,re  thus  to  be  differentiated.

We  have  deemed  it  important  to  supplement  this  analysis  by
ixperiments  on  a  second  species  of  animal,  and  have  therefore  treated


^^^^^■^^■PIIV^^

9S                         COLLECTED  STITDIES  TN  IMMtTOTTr.

a  goat  with  ox  blood.     Naturally  the  serum  of  the  goat  so  treated

dissolves   ox   blood-cells.     Besides   this,   however,  it   manifests   the

ability  to  dissolve  the  blood-cells  of  a  few  other  goals,   and  therefore

contains  true  isolysins  such   as  we  have  previously    produced  by

treating  goats  with  goat   blood.     Thus  0.025  cc,  of   the  serum  of

T.\BLE  III.

BlNDINQ  OF  THB  ImMCNE    BoDT  OP  A    RaUHIT  TREATED   UTITH   Ox  BlOOD,   WITH      J

Ox  Bloor-cells,  and  Ghat  Blood-cellb.                                      j

Solvenl  Power  al  the  Decmnled  Fliud..

Atnousl  of  At

Number  of  Solv-

(KS.

L^e.]  Therein.

On  BlnotJ,

'■■'S.?SiS3.-"'

'^IrS

BJ<^,

m

ona.

(i)On

oiiau.

(b)On

OoBl  Blood.

Go.(  Blood.         1

No.       m.
1      0.001

iV

0

0

0

0

2      0.002

s

0

0

trace

0

3      0  003

A

0

0

veiy  little

0

4     0,004

I

0

0

very  little
lo  little

0

5      0.005

1

0

0

mod,  to  little

0

6      0.006

1

0

0

modera<«

0

7      0  007

1

0

0

0

8     0,008

1

0

0

aim' Hi  comp

0

g    0.01

1

j

0

0

complele

0

10      0  012

2

0

0

faint  trace

n    0  016

2i

0

0

faint  trace

12     0.02

3i

faint  trace

vep-  little

verj-  litlJe.top

13      0.024

4

U

very  Uttle

little,  top

14     0  032

51

It

lit,  W  mod.

little  10
very  little

little

15     0.048

8

21

little

16     0.06

10

3

dm' 8t  com  p.

moderate

17     0.08

13*

4

complete

fair

18     0.1

m

5

complete

strong  to  al-
moHt  com  p.

litUetomod.

J9     0,14

231

7

mod,  toUttta

1

one  o£  our  goata,  on  the  addition  of  complement,  dissolved  the  usual

amount  of  ox  blood-eella.    This  serum,  however,  dissolved  but  two

out  of  five  different  specimens  of  goat  blood,  and  the  isolysin  con-   ]

stituent  was  present  in  only  very  small  amomifs,  so  that  it  reqiured

0.75  cc,  serum  (thirty  times  the  above  amount)  to  effect  complete

hemolysis   of  sensitive  goat   blood-cells.     Hence  in  this   case  also

the  development  of  all  such  amboceptors  as  could  find  a  point  d

STUDIES  ON  ILEMOLYSINS.


attachmfflt  (receptor)  in  the  blood-cella  of  the  individual  goat  its^
has  been  avoided,  and  the  phenomenon  which  we  have  previously
designated  as  a  "horror  aulotoxicm  '"is  again  presented.


TABLE  IV.

BnroiKoofTB«  Ininna

BoDT  or  A  Rabbit  Iiutonizbd  wrra  Goat  Blood.

ON  Ox  Blood  and  Goat  Biooi>-CBLLa.

Number  of
Solvect  l>o««

Sulvent  Po«er  of  Ii»  D««Dlod  Fluids

AmouDlof

ConHiDKl

A.  Aftaf  BindiDgwili

"■  ^^if-sa""

(Denvsd  from

TbereiB,

O.  Blood.

.  Ksbbit  by

Tn»lingwi[h
Goal  Bibod.)

(o)  For

(blFor

O^^S,

(WFor

{Q)For

(b)  For

BWl.

iiSSS.

Gont  Blood

Ox  Blood.

G«I  Blood.

No.        «.

1     0.038

A

1

0

(air  to  mod-
erate

0

0

2     0.05

1

0

0

0

3     0062

iii

0

complete

0

0

4     0.074

2

0

0

0

5     O.l

t

21

0

0

minimal  ttsco

6     0,13

31

0

0

7     0.15

4

0

0

8     0.2

5

0

0

very  little

little

9     0  25

2

61

0

n

0

10     0.3

8

0

0

11      0.38

.1

10

0

0

lair  to  strong

From  this  experiment  we  can  at  once  conclude  that  this  receptor
system  ^  actually  consists  of  different  components,  of  which  only
those  separate  amboceptors  (immune  bodies)  are  found  in  the  serum
of  goats  treated  with  ox  blood  whose  receptors  are  absent  in  the
blood-cells  of  the  goat  itself.

The  most  important  result  of  these  investigations — investigations
i^omplete  in  themselves — is  this:  By  treating  animalawith  ox  blood,  two
fractions  of  immune  bodies  are  formed,  of  which  one  acts  only  on  ox  blood
and  the  other  also  on  goal  blood ;  whereas  by  treatment  with  goat  blood
the  contrary  though  entirely  analogous  result  ensues.     These  two  frao-

■  We  were  also  &ble  to  observe  that  the  immune  body  of  the  rabbits  which
had  been  immunized  with  ox  blood  and  goat  blood  acted  also  on  sheep  blood.
Ooaer  iaveetigatioo  would  probably  show  that  this  behavior  is  analogous  to
its  action  on  goat  blood.  This  corresponds  entirely  to  our  earlier  obaervationa
on  the  extensive  similarity  of  the  receptor  apparatus  of  goat  and  sheep  blood
«s  it  was  manifeatod  particularly  by  the  experiments  on  isolysins.


100


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


lions  do  not  correspond  to  two  different  single  immune  bodies,  btd  mcA
fraction  includes  several,   perfuips  an  entire  host  of  immune  bodies.

The  experiments  also  lead  to  conclusions  of  considerable  impor-
tance ID  another  direction,  namely,  as  affecting  our  conception  of
cellular  specificity  and  of  the  specificity  of  nacHon  products.  Here-
tofore it  has  been  held  that  the  injection  of  blood  of  species  a  results
in  a  specific  immune  serum,  i.e.  one  acting  only  on  a;  and  even
Metchnikoff '  has  recently  expressed  this  view.  We  had  already
become  acquainted  with  certain  exceptions  to  this  principle.  The
isolysin,  for  example,  produced  by  injecting  goata  with  goat  blood,
also  dissolves  sheep  blood;  and,  in'ce  versa,  the  immune  body  of
goats  which  have  been  injected  with  sheep  blood  acta  also  as  an
isolysin.  At  that  time  we  emphasized  that  these  results  are  onij
to  be  explained  by  assuming  that  certain  tj'pes  of  receptors  are  com-
mon to  both  species  of  blood.  The  same  holds  true  in  the  case
under  discussion,  von  Dungem  ^  has  come  to  the  same  conclusion
as  a  result  of  his  experiments.  He  found  that  the  immune  body
produced  by  injection  of  cihated  epithelium  acts  also  on  the  blood-
cells  of  the  same  species,  and  that  conversely  the  hemolytic  immune
body  produced  by  injection  of  blood-cells  is  partially  bound  by
ciliated  epithelium.

All  these  circumstances  indicate  that  we  must  not  regard  the  spe-
cificity of  the  immune  bodies  from  the  conception  of  specificity  employed
in  systematic  zoology  and  botany.  The  immune  sera,  as  we  have  often
mentioned,  are  not  of  simple  unitarian  nature,  but  consist  of  a  series
of  single  immune  bodies  whose  cytophile  haptoj>hore  groups  cor-
respond to  the  receptors  of  the  exciting  cclb.  Hence  sv£h  an  immune
scrum  will  be  able  to  affect  all  such  elements  which  possess  any  one  of
the  receptors  whose  type  is  common  to  those  elements  and  the  original
ceU  "a."  The  influence  exerted  by  the  immune  serum  will  be  power-
ful in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  this  correspondence  of  receptors.
Now  we  have  reason  to  believe  (cf.  Ehrlich's  deductions,  1.  c.,  and
Woigert's  in  Lubarsch-Ostertag's  Ergebnisse  der  Pathologic,  1887,  p.
141}  that  certain  receptors  are  very  widely  distributed  among  various
animal  species,  Thus  the  blood-cells  of  a  large  number  of  species
possess  receptors  fitting  ricin,  abrin,  crolin,  and  tetanolysiit ,  and  gan-
glion cells  of  the  most  divergent  animals  possess  receptors  for  letano-


'  Revue  g«''nif-ra]e  des
'  See  page  47.


STUDIES  ON   B.F.MOLYSINS.  101

'  Bpasmin  or  for  sausage  poison.  Within  the  animal  organism,  in  like
manner,  certain  receptors  are  evidently  widely  distributed  in  the
most  varied  organs,  as  is  shown,  for  example,  by  the  experiments
with  tetanus  poison.  Looked  at  from  this  standpoint,  the  apparent
deviations  in  specificity  are  comprehensible.  We  are  convinced
that  in  this  field  the  near  future  will  furnish  us  with  extensive  ma-
terial of  immense  value  in  the  analysis  and  study  of  the  distribution
of  receptors.  We  are  led  to  conclude,  therefore,  that  in  the  produc-
tion of  immune  bodies  by  immunizing  with  cells  we  can  speak  of
apecificUt/  only  in  the  sense  that  there  is  always  a  specific  relation
between  the  separate  types  of  immune  bodies  and  the  receptors.


The  foregoing  experiments  constitute  conclusive  proof  of  the
plurality  of  the  immune  bodies  produced  by  injections  of  ox
blood  and  goat  blood.  We  next  endeavored  to  extend  these  results
by  effecting  a  differentiation  of  various  groups  of  immune  bodies
by  means  of  the  anli-immune  bodies.^  The  highest  concentration  of
inmaune  bodies  at  our  disposal  was  the  serum  of  a  rabbit  which  had
been  immunized  with  ox  blood.  For  various  reasons  we  chose  goats
for  these  immunizing  experiments,  for  we  knew  that  their  blood-
cells  already  contained  receptors  capable  of  binding  a  portion  of  the
mixed  immune  bodies.  In  treating  these  goats  we  used  the  inactive
serum  of  a  rabbit  immunized  with  ox  blood.  This  serum,  which
was  of  the  highest  possible  strength,  was  injected  subcutaneously.
During  the  course  of  two  months  we  had  thus  injected  120  cc.  of
an  immune  body  serum,  of  which  0.005  cc.  sufficed,  when  reactivated
with  guinea-pig  serum,  to  completely  dissolve  1  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture
of  ox  blood-cells.  At  the  end  of  that  time  we  were  able  to  demon-
strate the  existence  of  an  anti-immune  body  of  considerable  pro-
I  tective  power.  That  this  was  really  an  anli-immune  body  which
Hinhibited  the  anchoring  of  the  immune  body  to  the  red  blood-cells,
Bis  seen  by  the  following  combining  experiment.

0.5  cc.  of  the  anli-immune  body  {inactive  serum  of  a  goat  treated
as  just  described)  are  mixed  with  varjHng  amounts  of  the  immune
body  (inactive  serum)  of  a  rabbit  treated  with  ox  blood.  Thereupon
I  cc.  of  a  5%  mixture  of  blood-cells  is  added  to  each  specimen.  These
are  then  kept  at  40T.  for  one  hour  and  centrifuged.  The  various
sediments  are  then  mixed  with  salt  solution  and  0,15  cc.  normal

Kinea-pig  serum.     A  parallel  experiment  (control  test)  b  made  i
'  See  EhrlitU'ri  recent  atudy,  jia^e ,


102


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


which  the  anti-immune  body  is  replaced  by  the  same  amount  (0.5  cc.)
of  inactive  normal  goat  serum.  The  degree  of  solution  is  shown  in
Table  V.

TABLE  V.


Dflgree  of
of IbgBed


ths  Conlnil  T»t.


io.    1

0.00125

"      2

0-0025

0-00375

"      4

0,003

"      5

0.0075

"      6

0.01

"      7

0,025

complete  solution


trace  solution

little  solution

almost  complete  solutioD

completo  tolution


From  these  figures  we  see  that  a  single  solvent  dose  becomes
available  for  combination  with  the  red  blood-cells  only  after  eight
times  the  solvent  dose  has  been  added,  and  that  a  triple  dose  is  com-
pletely neutralized,  i.e.,  prevented  from  combining  with  the  blood-
cell.  The  control  test  shows  that  0.5  cc.  of  a  normal  inactive  goat
serum  does  not  prevent  the  combination  of  a  single  solvent  dose  of
mmune  body  (0.00125  cc).  The  sediment  in  this  case  is  competeJy
dissolved  on  the  addition  of  com|3lemenl.^  By  this  experiment  the
inhibiting  substance  is  definitely  characterized  as  an  anii-immune
body.  The  following  example  will  show  the  exact  quantitative
relation  of  this  anti-immune  body.

Each  0.4  cc.  inactivated  serum  (anti-immune  body)  of  the  goat
treated   with    immune  body  are  mixed  with  the  given  amount  of
inactive  serum  (immune  body)  of  a  rabbit  treated  with  ox  blood.
The  specimens  are  made  up  to  the  same  volume  by  the  addition  of     ,
salt  solution,  kept  at  room  temperature  for  half  an  hour,  and  then     |
mixed  with  1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension  of  ox  blood,  and  with  0,15  cc,     i
normal  guinea-pig  serum  (complement).     A  control  test  is  made  in
which  normal  inactive  goat  serum  is  used  instead  of  the  anti-immune
body.     (See  Table  VI.)


'  We  should  liko  to  remark  that  in  the  course  of  numerous  experiments
hax-e  now  and  then  found  normal  goat  sera  containing  slight  amounts
an  anti-immune  body  acting  on  the  immune  body  of  rabbits  treati^  with
blood.  This  is  to  be  brought  into  connection  with  the  law  (see  also  Neiaaer-
•.)  tliat  the  artificially  produced  antibodies  frequently  represent  only  on
"  normal  functions.


STUDIES  ON  HiEMOLYSma


103


TABLE  VI.


Experiment  with  0.4  co.  Anti-immune  Body.

Control  Test  with  0.4  co.  Normal
Cioat  Serum.

Amount  of

Immune

Body.

Solvent  Action.

Amount  of

Immune

Body.

cc.

Solvent  Action.

•

0.0175

0.0145

0.012

0.01

0.0085

0.007

0.006

0.005

0.0044

0.00375

0.003

0.0025

0.002

0.0018

complete  solution

strong           '*

fairly  strong  solution

moderate  solution

little  solution
it         tt

trace  solution

small  trace  solution
tt        tt          ft

tt        tt          tt

minimal  trace  solution
tt          tt          tt

tt          tt          tt
0

0.001

0.00085

0.0007

0.0006

0.0005

complete  solution
almost  complete  solution

strong  solution

tt           tt

moderate  solution

•

This  shows  that  0.2  cc.  of  the  anti-immune  body  are  able  to  com-
pletely inhibit  the  action  of  1.8  times  the  solvent  dose  of  immune
body  as  determined  by  the  control  test,  and  that  it  almost  neutral-
izes the  action  of  five  times  such  a  dose.  If,  however,  we  measure
the  protective  power  by  comparing  the  complete  solvent  doses  in
the  two  cases,  this  appears  much  stronger.  The  ratio  of  the  com-
plete solvent  doses  in  the  presence  of  immune  body  and  in  the  control
test  is  then  1:17.5.     We  shall  discuss  the  reason  for  this  later.

Since  the  inactive  rabbit  serum  employed  in  immimization  con-
tained complementoids,  the  presence  of  anticomplements  along  with
the  anti-immune  body  is  easily  understood.  The  anticomplements  at
first  were  directed  against  rabbit  serum.  After  the  immunization
had  continued  for  some  time  longer  anticomplements  appeared
directed  against  certain  complements  of  guinea-pig  serum.  In  these
experiments,  therefore,  in  order  to  overcome  the  anticomplement
action  (in  reality  insignificant)  du^cted  against  the  reactivating
guinea-pig  serum,  it  was  merely  necessary  to  employ  a  considerable
excess  of  the  latter.

In  contrast  to  these  results  are  those  obtained  in  an  analogous
series  of  experiments,  in  which,  however,  the  complement  wm  in  the
Jorm  of  goat  serum  instead  of  guinea-pig  serum.     (See  Table  Via.)


EiperitOBOt  with  0.4  «.  ADti-immUDe  Body.

Control  Teal  with  0.4  ce.  Monii«l

^

SolVBUt  Action.

Amount  ol

.,,„,.„„.

0.051
0.042

0.029
0.02
0.017
0-014

complete  solution  ^

aJmoHt  complete  Eolution

moderate  solution

trace  aolution

faint  trace  aolutioD

0

0.051
0,042
0.029
0.02
0  017
0.014

complete  solution

almost  complet«  solution

moderikte  solution

very  little  solution

trace  solution

0

In  this  combination  the  anti-immune  body  exerts  no  action.  Ifcticr
we  must  here  be  dealing  with  a  particuloT  type  of  immune  body  which
effects  a  combination  with  a  comj^emeni  present  in  goat  serum.  This
immune  body  enters  into  no  relation  with  the  complex  of  immune
bodies  here  present;  it  must  therefore  possess  a  haptophore  groui>
which  finds  no  fitting  counter  group  therein.

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  completion  by  means  of  goat  serum  occu-
pies a  special  position,  for  the  quantitative  relations  of  the  immune
body  are  entirely  different  from  those  observed  when  guinea-pig
serum  is  used.  In  order  to  effect  complete  solution  when  goat  serum
is  used  as  complement,  it  is  necessary,  as  a  rule,  to  use  from  ten  to
thirty  times  the  amount  of  immune  body  that  would  be  required
if  guinesrpig  serum  were  used  as  complement.  This  ia  well  shown
by  Table  VII.

TABLE  Vn.


No.

Complete  Soii-enl  Don
of  li^une  Body  when

Coinpele  Solvent  Don
GoBt  Serum  0.6.

R.lio  of  t

«  Two  Do^.

2
3
4

0,005
0,0075
0,0075
0,0025

0.05
0.07.5

0.07.5

1:10
1:10
1:13
1:30

That  this  behavior  is  not  due  fo  a  smaller  content  of  complement
in  the  goat  serum  can  readily  be  determined  by  suitable  esperiments
especially  by  increasing  the  dose  of  the  latter.


I


STITDIES  ON  H-KMOLVSINS.  105

This  can  only  be  explained  by  assuming  that  only  part  of  the  total
number  of  immune  bodies  find  fitting  complements  m  goat  serum,
and  that  this  partial  number  varies,  but  is  always  less  than  the  number
of  immune  bodies  activated  by  guinea-pig  serum.  The  diagram
presented  below  will  best  make  this  relation  clear.

We  have  made  a  further  series  of  experiments  in  order  to  com-
plete these  studies,  and  have  discovered  that  our  anti-immune  body
also  protected  goat  blood-cells  against  the  immune  body  derived
from  a  rabbit  treated  with  ox  blood.  This  of  course  is  quite  natural,
for  we  have  already  shown  that  this  action  on  a  strange  species  of
blood  depends  on  a  concordance  of  certain  haptophore  groups.
Similarly,  the  anti-immune  body  protects  ox  blood-cells  against  the
immune  body  of  a  rabbit  immunized  with  goat  blood.

These  experiments  lead  us  to  the  following  conclusions:  The
aTiti-immune  body  derived  by  injecting  goats  with  immune  bodies  of
rabbits  is  not  a  simple  uniform  [einheUHch]  substance,  but  is  madt  up
of  a  whole  series  of  partial  immune  bodies.  In  the  ox  blood  used  to
immunize  the  rabbits  we  have  already  distinguished  two  main  portions
of  receptors  to  which  again  two  main  portions  of  the  resulting  immune
body  correspond.  Each  of  the  latter  portions  in  all  probabilili/  con-
tains a  host  of  partial  immuTie  bodies,  and  we  must  assurne  that,
corresponding  to  this,  the  anti-immune  bodies  also  possess  a  complex
constitution.

In  the  following  diagram  it  is  not  sought  to  expresB  that  the
immune  bodies  which  can  be  activated  by  guinea-pig  serum  are  all
identical.  On  the  contrary  each  group  may  represent  a  different
kind  of  immune  body.

We  have  seen  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  dose
of  immune  body  which  is  completely  neutralized  by  a  certain  amount
of  anti-immune  body,  and  that  which  in  the  presence  of  anti-immune
body  causes  complete  solution.  This  can  be  understood  when  we
:recall  the  above-mentioned  distribution  of  partial  immune  bodies,
and  examine  the  diagram,  Fig.  2.

In  order  to  choose  a  simple  illustration  let  us  assume  that,  corre-
sponding to  the  diagram,  the  immune  serum  of  the  rabbit  unmu-
nized  with  ox  blood  contains  only  two  different  types  of  immune
bodies  and  these,  ftirthermore,  in  unequal  amounts.  Let  the  main
irtion  be  represented  by  immune  body  type  a,  which  is  activated

a  particular  complement  present  in  the  animal's  own  (rabbit's)
Further,  let  the  second  portion,  present  in  much  less  amount,


J


106


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


be  represented  by  immune  body  type  b,  which  b  activated  by  a
different  complement  also  present  in  rabbit  serum  but  found  in
goat  serum  aa  well.  Iiet  the  proportion  of  a:  6  be  as  10:  l;i.e.,  a  quan-
tity of  immune  serum  containing  one  complete  solvent  dose  of  &
will  contain  ten  solvent  doses  of  a.  In  this  case  then  it  will  require
ten  times  as  much  of  the  immune  serum  to  effect  complete  solution
by  means  of  immune  body  b  (which  ia  the  case  when  goat  serum,
which  contains  complement  only  for  b,  serves  for  reactivation)  used
when  immune  body  a  is  employed.  The  composition  of  thia  immune
serum  can  be  represented  by  the  formula  10a +  16.


Diagram  to  show  the  tun  types  of  imniuoe  bodies  preaent  in  the  iiumuiw
Berum  ot  a  rabbit  treated  with  ox  blood.  Each  immune  body  symbol  corre-
sponds to  ojK  solvent  dose  for  the  amount  of  ox  lilood  employed  in  the  eJi-
periment.  Immune  body  type  a  ia  present  in  ten  times  the  amount  of  type  6.
The  tomplementophile  groups  ot  a  and  b  differ;  hence  also  the  complement*
differ.      Tbs    anti-immune   body    serum    possesseB    anti-immune    bodies    only


As  is  seen  by  the  experiments,  an  anti-immune  body  exists  only
against  immune  body  type  a.  If  therefore  to  an  amount  of  immune
body  which  contains  one  solvent  dose  of  immune  body  b  and  ten
solvent  doses  of  immune  body  a  (i.e.,  10a +  16}  &  large  quanlily  of  anti-
immune  body  serum  is  added,  and  then  sufficient  suitable  complement
it  will  be  found  that  solution  always  occurs,  for  the  reason  that  a
single  solvent  dose  of  b  is  present  which  is  unaffected  by  the  anti-
immune  body  although  this  was  able  to  neutralize  ten  solvent  doses
■of  a.     One-tenth  of  the  above  amoimt  of  immune  body,  on  the  other


STUDIES  ON  ILEMOLYSINS.


hand,  will  be  completely  inhibited  m  ita  action.  For  this  contains
one  complete  solvent  dose  of  immune  body  a  which  is  neutralized
by  the  anti-immune  body,  and  only  one-k-nth  of  a  solvent  dose  of  6
which,  although  not  affected  by  the  anti-immime  body,  is  bo  slight
as  not  to  cause  any  appreciable  solution.  Only  when  larger  amounts
of  immune  body  are  employed  in  which  6  becomes  active  docs  solution
occiy,  and  this  becomes  complete  only  when  that  quantity  is  reached
which  contains  lOa+lii.  Naturally,  if  the  ratio  is  1:20,  a  quantity
will  be  required  which  can  be  represented  by  the  formula  20a  +  1ft.

These  explanations  will  perhaps  suffice  to  make  the  above-men-
tioned peculiarities  in  the  action  of  the  anti-immune  body  com-
prehensible. They  will  perhaps  also  make  clear  that  between  the
dose  of  immune  body  whose  action  is  completely  inhibited  by  the  anti-
immunt-body  seruvi  and  the  dose  which  cavtes  complete  solution  a  large
number  of  intermediary  stages  exist  in  which  the  degree  of  solution
graduaily  increases.

In  reality  the  circumstances  are  much  more  complicated  than
this;  for  with  the  increase  in  the  dose  of  immune  body  a  large  number
of  new  immune  bodies,  similarly  superposed,  come  into  action —
immune  bodies  which  find  few  or  no  corresponding  anti-immune
bodies  in  the  antiserum.

This  brings  us  to  another  important  question:   Is  it  possible  by

eans  of  the  anti-immune  body  to  demonstrate  the  difference  of  the

I  immune  bodies  produced  by  injections  of  ox  blood  into  different  species  f

Our  first  experiments  were  undertaken  with  the  serum  of  goats

I  which  had  been  immunized  with  ox  blood.     As  will  be  seen  by  the

I  following  figures,  our  anti-imraune  body  (derived  by  injections  of

an  immune  body  obtained  from  rabbits)  in  this  ca.se  exerta  no  action.

The  varying  amounts  of  immune  body  mentioned  are  mixed  with

0,4  cc.  anti-immune  body  and  then  with  1  cc.  5%  ox  blood  suspension

1  and  0.5  cc.  normal  active  goat  senim  to  activate  the  mixture.     In

I  the  control  test  0.4  cc,  inactive  normal  goat  serum  are  used  instead

I  of  the  anti-immune  body.     (See  Table  VIII,)

That  this  serum  differed  markedly  with  respect  to  its  content  of
I  )ndi^■idual  immime  bodies  was  already  shown  by  the  fact  that,  in
I  contrast  to  the  serum  of  immunized  rabbits,  it  did  not  possess  &
I  Wmolysin  acting  on  all  goat  blood-cells  in  general,  since  such  a  hffimoly-
i  Bin  would  have  exerted  a  most  injurious  action  in  the  form  of  an  auto-
I  lysin.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  law  already  mentioned  under  the  name
1  "  horror  autotoxicus  "  applied  here  also,  and  hence  merely  an  isolysin


lOS


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


was  de\'eIop«i  which  acted  only  on  goat  blood -cells  of  a  few  individuals
and  which  therefore  possessed  only  a  few  individual  special  groupe
in  its  immune  bodies.  Against  this  isolysin,  which  represented  a
relatively  small  portion  of  the  types  of  immune  bodies  found  in  the
goat,  our  anti-immune  body  also  proved  entirely  ineffective,  as
Been  in  Table  IX.


TABLE  VIII.


Etperirnant  with  Anti-immuiui  Body.

Owlrol  T«t.                          1

AmauDt

Solvent  Action.

lS?y.

^1

Solvent  Action.

0  051
0,043
0.035
0.029
0.02
0.017
0.014

complete  Holution
almost  complete  aoIutioD

moderate  solution

trace  solution

doubtful

0

0.051
0.042
0.035
0.02fl
0.02
0.017
0.014

complete  Bolutioo
almost  completely  disaoU-ed
almost  dissolved
moderate  solutioii
very  little  solution
trace  solution

I


In  this  experiment  the  method  was  exactly  dmilar  to  tliat  of  ti
previous  ones.    The  blood  was  from  goat  No.  Ill,  1  cc.  of  a  J

suspension  being  used.

TABLE  IX.


Cnntrol  Tut  with  0.4  cc.  NonnkI  Inutiia

^^A.

Solvent  Action.

Immi^B^y.

Solvent  ActloD.

1,5
1.0

0^61
0..51
0.42
0,35

complete
slrong
strong
moderate
little
trace
0

1.5
1.0

0  88
0.61
0.51
0,42
0.35

complete
strong
strong
moderate
little
trace
0

We  see  from  this  that  by  treating  a  goat  mlh  ox  blood-cells,  immune
bodies  hare  been  formed  the  main  portion  of  which  differs  from  those
obtained  by  immunizing  rabbits  wilk  ox  blood  or  goal  blood.

A  second  species  of  animal  in  which  we  have  been  able  to  demon-
strate a  difference  in  the  immune  bodies  is  the  goose.  The  immune
bodies  obtained  by  injecting  a  goose  with  ox  blood-cells  are  also  not  in


L


A


STUDIES  ON  iL'EMOLYSINS.

the  least  affected  by  our  anti-immune  body.    It  may  be  that  an  entirely

different  receptor  apparatus  is  present  in  the  goose  and  that  this

effects  a  combination  with  different  haptophore  groups  wliicli  leada

to  the  formation  of  immune  bodies  of  entirely  different  character.

Our  further  experiments  concerned  themselves  with  the  action

exerted  by  our  anti-immune  body  on  immune  bodies  derived  from

rats,  guinea-pigs,  and  dogs  by  treatment  with  ox  blood.     We  found

that  the  anti-immune  body  exerted  a  distinct  protective  action  against

all  three  sera,  but  that  this  was  less  strong  than  that  against  the

immune  body  of  the  rabbit.     The  protection  was  least  against  the

serum  of  the  rat,  for  it  did  not  even  suffice  to  absolutely  protect  against

one-half  or  one-third  of  the  fatal  dose.     Complete  solution  ensued

in  the  presence  of  0.3  cc.  anti-immune  body  even  when  only  double

the  usual  solvent  dose  of  immune  body  was  employed.     This  indicates

that  this  serum  contains  a  relatively  large  amount  of  the  non-noutraliz-

able  types  of  immune  bodies,  in  any  case  an  amount  far  greater  than

I  fe  contained  in  the  rabbit  serum.     In  the  guinea-pig  the  case  is  very

I  similar,  the  proportion  of  double  the  solvent  doses  being  as  1:3,

I  The  nearest  approach  to  the  ratio  as  found  in  the  rabbit  ia  seen  in

l>the  serum  of  a  dog  treated  with  ox  blood.     In  tliis  it  required  six

rtimes  the  usual  solvent  dose  to  effect  complete  solution  in  the  presence

■  of  the  anti-immune  body.'

All  this  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  immime  serum  of
Bthese  three  species  the  eytophile  group  of  certain  portifins  is  identical
|*ith  the  eytophile  group  of  certain  immune  bodies  in  the  rabbit.

■  Certain  particular  groups  of  the  ox  blood-cells  therefore  must  fit
I  equally  into  the  receptors  of  these  different  animals.  In  view  of
I  this  fact,  the  entire  alisence  in  the  goat  of  that  portion  of  immune
I  body  which  can  be  neutralized  by  the  anti-immune  body  is  of  special
I  interest.  As  already  stated,  we  are  here  dealing  with  an  exception
iwhich  is  connected  with  the  impossibility  of  autolysin  formation.

We  must  therefore  conclude  that  in  conformity  with  our  assump-
(tion,  the  immune  bodies  formed  in  any  single  case  by  treating  various


'  It  is  perhaps  of  interest  to  know  that  tho
I  thefle  Ihree  species  (guinen-pig,  rat,  and  dog)  differed
H-fonJ  blnod-crUs.  It  was  found  that  while  the
1  sod  lats  acted  on  goat  blood,  those  of  the  dog  did
Vltiie  dog,  in  contrast  to  rabbits,  guinea-pigs,  and  rati


■  lor  the  groups  (^  of  the  diagram,  Fig.  1)


bodies  derived  from

their  behavior  toward

bodies  of  guinea-pigs

Thifl  indicates  that

receplorB


to  the  blood-celiB  of  oxen


COLLECTED  OTUDIES  IN  IMMUNiry.

tophile  groups  come  into  play.  With  the  means  at  present  at  oiir
disposal  it  13  impossible,  except  in  a  few  favorable  cases,  to  deter-
mine whether  this  plurality  of  complementophile  groups  corresponds
exactly  to  a  like  plurality  of  cytophile  groups.  A  case  in  point
is  that  of  the  partial  immune  body  which  is  reactivated  by  goat
serum,  for  which  we  could  show  that  it  was  not  diverted  by  our
anti-immune  body.'

The  difficulty  of  a  full  analysis  of  these  cases  is  due  especially
to  the  many  possibilities  that  must  be  considered.  It  is  possible
that  immune  bodies  with  different  cytophile  groups  possess  the  same
complementophile  group,  or  that  those  with  the  same  cytophile
group  possess  different  complementophile  groups;  and  finally  it  is
possible  that,  besides  a  particular  cytophile  group,  an  Immune  body
may  possess  two,  three,  or  more  complementophile  groups  (triceptor,
quadriixploT).

In  any  case  it  may  be  considered  a  fact  that  in  the  immune-body
mbfture  different  kinds  of  complementophile  groups  come  into  play.
^^'ere  we  to  assume  that  the  serum  of  an  animal  species  contains
only  a  single  complement,  we  should  have  to  regard  such  a  plurality
of  complementophile  groups  as  evidently  a  useless  arrangement.
It  seems  incredible  that  a  given  organism  should  form  haptophore
groups  in  its  cells  (for  the  immune  bodies  are  merely  thrust-off  cell
derivatives)  if  these  groups  were  never  during  life  to  come  into  action,
but  were  only  to  be  of  se^^'ice  in  case  the  organism  were  injected
with  foreign  celb.  It  is  much  simpler  and  more  natural  to  view
these  circumstances  from  our  standpoint,  namely,  thai  the  comple-
ments of  an  animal  are,  from  the  first,  of  manifold  variety.

This  assumption  best  harmonizes  the  results  of  the  various  experi-
ments which  we  have  made  from  the  beginning  of  our  studies  in
hiemolysis.  By  filtering  goat  and  horse  sera  through  I'ukall  filters
we  were  able  to  demonstrate  two  complements.     One  of  these,  fitting


'  In  our  fourth  communicatioo  we  have  clisfus.-ied  analogous  caeea  in
detail,  subjecting  them  to  thorough  experimental  inieBtigatlons.  At  that
time,  however,  our  sttidicn  were  directed  only  to  the  com  piemen  I  ophite  groups.
In  that  case  the  serum  of  guineo-piga  immunised  with  rabbit  blood  contained
two  immune  hodies,  of  which  one  found  ita  complement  In  guinea-pig  senun
but  not  in  rabbit  aerum.  These  immune  bodies  were  present  in  the  propor-
tion of  I  :I0.  In  another  case  mentioned  at  that  time  we  obsen'ed  consider-
able chronological  variations  in  the  proportion  of  two  immune  bodies  with
different  complenientopliile  groups.


J


H     Ot     (


STUDIES  ON  H.liMOLYSINS.

to  an  immune  body  acting  on  rabbit  blood,  passed  through  with
the  greatest  difficulty;  the  other,  fitting  an  immune  body  acting
on  guinea-pig  blood,  passed  through  in  part  completely  isolated.
We  were  further  able  to  show  that  heating  the  serum  of  a  buck
treated  with  sheep  blood  caused  all  the  complements  excepting
one  to  disappear.  The  one  which  withstood  the  heat  fitted  the  immune
body  developed  by  the  immunization.  We  were  able  to  demon-
strate the  same  ihermoslabilc  complement  in  greater  or  smaller  amounts
in  the  serum  of  normal  goats  and  calves.  To  again  call  attention
to  these  experiments  ia  not  superfluous,  for  Gengou  {Annal.  I'lnst.
Pasteur,  1901)  in  spite  of  these  proofs  of  the  plurality  of  comple-
ments, still  maintains  that  the  serum  of  each  species  contains  only
a  single  simple  complement,  "  the  altxin."

It  would  be  natural  to  conclude  that  there  ia  a  plurality  of  com-
jilemcnts  from  the  manifold  variations  observed  in  the  comple-
tion of  various  inactive  sera  by  nornml  sera.  The  commonest,
example  of  this,  probably  known  to  every  one  having  experience
in  this  field,  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  certain  immune  serum  can
be  acti\'ated  by  two  different  sera  serving  as  complement,  whereas
other  immune  sera  can  be  activated  by  only  one  of  these  sera.  Never-
theless from  our  standpoint  we  cannot  regard  this  method  of  proof
as  at  all  conclusive  because  it  resta  on  the  assumption  that  for  a
certain  species  ot  blood  a  serum  contains  only  a  single  interbody
(or  immune  body).  In  our  fourth  communication  we  have  already
shown  that  this  assimiption  does  not  hold,  even  for  the  interbodies
of  normal  sera.

The  assumption  0/  a  plurality  of  complements  in  normal  sera  I'a
aupported  by  the  fact  that  by  injections  0/  a  normal  serum  (which,  accord-
ing to  our  view,  possesses  various  active  substances  which  may  be
present  as  complements,  or,  at  times,  in  the  form  of  complementoids)
untiaera  are  formed  which  act  against  (he  complements  of  various  other
aera.  In  a  number  of  different  anioaals  by  injecting  various  sera  we
have  succeeded  in  obtaining  anti complements  acting  not  only  against
the  serum  originally  employed,  but  also  against  certain  eomple-
ments  of  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs.  According  to  Bordet's  experi-
ments it  is  possible,  by  injecting  a  rabbit  with  guinea-pig  serum,
to  obtain  an  isolated  anticomplement  against  a  complement  (able
to  act  in  this  particular  case)  present  in  guinea-pig  serum.  From
this  it  follows  that  in  these  sera,  since  they  excite  the  production
of  different  anticoniplements,   at  least   two  different   complements


A


114


COLLECTED  STUOrES  IN  IMMUNITY.


are  concerned.  In  this  connection  it  is  particularly  interesting
to  note  that  by  long-continued  treatment  of  a  goat  with  rabbit
serum  we  obtained  an  anticomplanenl  serum  which  acted  also
against  guinea-pig  serum.  Table  XI  will  make  this  clear.  All  of
the  experiments  are  made  with  an  immune  body  derived  from  a
rabbit  by  immunizing  with  ox  blood.

TABLE  XI.


rrom

Treated  wilb

ProlMlinn
uuiul  Rabbit

+
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +

+  +
+  +  +

Horse  seriun':;:;;;;::::;::;;:::'

Rabbit

+  +  +  ■=  strong  protection;  +  +  =  fairly  strong  proleolion;  +  "  very  slight
protection.

With  the  assumption  of  a  plurality  of  complements  we  are  Ud  to
the  view  that  the  various  complementophile  groups  of  the  immune  body
here  concerned  (contained  in  rabbit  serum)  are  complemented  by  a
like  number  of  partial  complements.  As  a  result  of  this  fact  the  posai-
bilily  exists  tliat  certain  of  these  complements  are  not  constant,  occurring
in  the  blood  only  from  lime  to  time.

We  may  perhaps  give  another  example  of  these  partial  com-
plements, which  concerns  one  of  a  number  of  rabbits  treated  with
repeated  injections  of  goat  serum.  Aa  already  described  in  a  previous
communication,  this  results  in  the  disappearance  of  certain  com-
plements and  their  replacement  by  corresponding  autoanticomple-
ments.  In  the  example  mentioned,  this  disappearance  manifested
itself  by  the  fact  that  large  amounts  of  the  rabbit  serum  were
unable  to  activate  the  single  or  the  double  fatal  dose  of  the
immune  body  from  a  rabbit  imrauni3ed  with  ox  blood.  How-
ever, when  thirty  times  the  amount  of  immune  body  was  employed
complete  solution  ensued.  Evidently  the  principal  portion  of  the
comjdements  -usually  present  had  disappeared  from  this  serum,  but  a
partial  complement  had  remained  which  acted  on  a  partial-immune
body  present,  in  relatively  small  amounts.  The  circumstances  in  this
case  therefore  are  entirely  analogous  to  those  above  described  in


STUDIES  ON  HiEMOLYSINS.


115


which  we  proved  that  a  particular  immune  body  present  in  small
amounts  and  not  diverted  by  our  anti-immune  body,  finds  a  comple-
ment in  its  own  serum  which,  in  contrast  to  the  other  complements,
is  present  also  in  goat  serum.

Three  things  have  thus  been  established:

1.  Each  normal  serum  contains  a  number  of  different  com-

plements;

2.  In  different  animals  a  part  of  the  complements  present  are

either  completely  similar  or  at  least  similar  in  their  hap-
tophore  groups;

3.  The  inmiune  bodies  obtained  in  an  animal  species  represent

a  number  of  different  complementophile  groups.

As  a  result  of  this  demonstration  the  question  whether  or  not
the  resultant  immune-body  mixtures  obtained  in  different  animals
are  identical  in  their  complementophile  portion  loses  in  interest  at
least  so  far  as  the  problems  under  discussion  are  concerned.

Hence  we  should  merely  like  to  add  to  the  results  obtained  by
activating  the  inmiune  body  of  a  rabbit  immunized  with  ox  blood,
the  results  of  a  parallel  series  of  experiments  made  at  that  time
with  the  same  amounts  of  reactivating  sera  but  with  the  immune  body
from  a  goose  immunized  with  ox  blood.     (See  Table  XII.)

TABLE  XII.


Rea4stivBting  Normal  Sera.


Guinea-pig  serum,

Rabbit  serum

Rat  serum

Goose  serum

Chicken  serum.  .  .

Goat  serum

Pigeon  serum. .  . .
Horse  serum


Amount  of  the

Rabbit  Immune

Body  Sufficient  to

ESeot  Complete
Solution.

00.


0.0025

0.005

0.005

0.015

0.015

0.05
no  "completion"
no  ''completion"


Amount  of  the  Goose

Immune  Body
Sufficient  to  Effect
Complete  Solution.


cc.


0.025

0.05

0.1

0.035

0.035
no  "completion"

0.035
no  "completion


tf


This  table  again  shows  that  the  unitarian  view,  according  to
which  each  serum  contains  only  a  single  complement,  lacks  all  prob-
ability, for  it  is  to  be  expected  that  in  that  case  the  zoological  rela-
tionship of  certain  animal  groups  would  manifest  itself  in  their  com-
plements to  a  greater  degree  than  it  actually  does.  When,  for
example,  we  here  see  that  the  rabbit  immune  body  is  not  reactivated


116


COLLECTED  STUDIES  T.V  IMMtTNTTV.


by  horse  serum  but  ia  reactivated  by  gc»ose  serum,  we  should  Deces-
sarily  have  to  conclude  that  "  the  "  complement  of  the  goose  is  much
more  closely  related  to  "  the  "  complement  of  the  rabbit  than  m
that  of  the  horse.  From  the  unitarian  standpoint  also  a  more
marked  difference  should  be  manifested  by  the  complements  of
the  goose,  the  chicken,  and  the  pigeon,  for  the  first  two  reactivate
the  immune  body,  while  the  last  does  not.  A  priori,  therefore,  the
unitarian  view  is  very  improbable;  but  aside  from  thia  the  reactivat-
ing experiment  with  the  goose  immune  body  (which  shows  this  to
be  reactivated  by  all  three  avian  sera)  speaks  against  this  view.     •

All  of  these  facts  are  readily  explained  if  we  accept  the  pluralbtic
view  that  each  serum  contains  a  large  number  of  complements,  and
that  certain  types  have  a  wide  distribution  in  many  classes  of  animals.
In  these  they  may  l>e  completely  similar,  or,  what  is  of  primary  impor-
tance, their  haptophore  groups  may  be  identical.  It  may  very
well  be  that  the  anan  sera  are  alike  in  the  gri-ater  part  of  their  partial
complemerUs,  and  that  therefore  all  three  sera  may  in  certain  cases —
e.g.,  witli  the  immune  body  of  a  goat  immunized  mlh  ox  blood — reactivate
in  like  manner.  But  it  la  not  necessary  that  these  three  species
correspond  in  all  their  complements,  and  so  it  may  happen  that  a
certain  partial  complement  which  is  absent  in  pigeon  serum  is  present
in  the  other  sera.  This  occurs  in  the  above  case  with  the  immune
body  of  the  rabbit  immunized  with  ox  blood  (and  with  that  of  the
goat  similarly  treated).

I  should  like  to  emphasize  one  more  point.  The  immune  body
of  the  rabbit  immunized  with  ox  blood  is  not  reactivated  by  pigeon
serum,  whereas  the  immune  body  of  the  goat  immunized  with  ox
blood  is  thus  reactivated.  This  fad  in  itself  should  occasion  no  sur-
prise whatever.  The  tissue  receptors  which  are  present  in  the  avian
organism,  and  which  constitute  the  matrix  of  the  amboceptors  in
question,  po.sscss  complementophile  groups  that  fit  complements
widely  distributed  throughout  the  avian  body.  It  is  not  at  all  remark-
able, therefore,  that  the  immune  body  obtained  from  the  goose  finds
complements  in  various  avian  sera.  In  like  manner  it  can  readily
Ije  understood  why  pigeon  serum  is  unable  to  reactivate  the  immune
body  of  the  rabbit  immimized  with  ox  blood.

The  general  conclusion,  however,  that  the  avian  complements  in
their  entirety  are  different  from  those  of  mammals,  cannot  be  drawn
from  this,  as  is  shown  by  the  reactivation  of  the  rabbit  immune
body  by  goose  and  chicken  sera.


J


STUDIES  ON  H.EM0LYS1NS.


117


I


This  brief  analysis  will  show  us  that  the  complementopliile  groups
of  the  immune  bodies  do  not  in  general  possess  the  great  importance
which  we  must  ascribe  to  the  cytophile  groups.  In  order  to  obtain
the  greatest  therapeutic  effect  from  the  immune  bodies,  their  com-
piementophile  groups  and  the  provision  of  suitable  complements
cannot,  of  course,  be  neglected.  In  this  connection  Donitz  (Klin.
Jahrbiich,  1897)  first  pointed  out  the  importance,  in  the  therapy  of
infectious  diseases,  of  finding  sufficient  sources  of  complements.
The  conditions  determining  this  have  been  more  closely  defined  by
Ehrlich  in  hia  Croonian  Lecture '  of  March  22,  1900,  as  can  be  seen
from  the  following  extract:

"  Dr.  Neisser  at  the  Steglitz  Institute  sought  to  find  an  explana-
tion of  Sobernheim's  experiments.  He  was  able  to  determine  that
anthrax  serum  failed  in  mice  even  if  large  quantities  of  fresh  sheep-
serum  (i.e.,  containing  an  excess  of  'complement ")  were  introduced
at  the  same  time.  The  failure  in  this  case  appears  to  be  due,  on
the  one  hand,  to  the  destruction,  in  the  body  of  the  mouse,  of  the
'complement' present  in  the  sheep  serum,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
to  the  fact  that  the  'immune  body'  yielded  by  the  sheep  does  not
find  in  the  mouse  an  appropriate  new  'complement.'

"From  this  it  appears  that  in  the  therapeutic  application  of
antibacterial  sera  to  man,  therapeutic  success  is  only  to  be  attained
if  we  use  either  a  bacteriolvsm  with  a  'complement'  which  is  stable
in  man  {homoslabilc  complement),  or  at  least  a  bacterioly^in  the
immune  body  of  which  finds  m  human  serum  an  appropriate  'com-
plement.' The  latt-er  condition  will  be  the  more  readily  fulfilled
the  nearer  the  species  employed  in  the  immunization  process  is  to
man.  Perhaps  the  failure  which  has  as  yet  attended  the  employ-
ment of  typhoid  and  cholera  serum  will  be  converted  into  success
if  the  serum  be  derived  from  apes  and  not  taken  from  sjiecies  so
distantly  removed  from  man  as  the  horse,  goat,  or  dog.  However
this  may  be,  tlie  question  of  the  provision  of  the  appropriate  '  com-
plement' will  come  more  and  more  into  the  foreground,  for  it  really
represents  the  center  round  which  the  practical  advancement  of
the  bacterial  immunity  must  turn."

In  view  of  the  fact  that  every  normal  serum  contains  a  great
many  complements,  of  which  a  larger  or  smaller  part  fits  the  most
varied  immune  bodies,  the  need  of  artificially  supplying  complements


would  seem  to  indicate  that  our  therapeutic  efforts  be  directed  primarily
to  excHing  the  greatest  production  of  the  oryunism'a  own  complements.^
The  production  of  these  complements  can  surely  be  increased  by
means  of  artificial  procedures;  and  this  is  borne  out  by  a  few  experi-
ences in  this  direction.  Thus  Nolf,  by  injecting  certain  foreign  sera,
and  P.  Miiller,  by  injecting  pepton,  have  succeeded,  in  animal  experi-
ments, in  increasing  the  production  of  complement.  This  increase
may  perhaps  be  referable  to  a  hyperleucocytosis  in  accordance  with
the  views  held  by  Metchnikoff  and  Buchner.  We  are  certain  that
at  least  the  complemerUs  orginoUy  peculiar  to  the  organism  will  be  able
to  act  when  fitting  complenientophile  groups  present  themselves;  this
need  not  necessarily  be  the  case,  however,  when  foreign  complements
are  introduced.  In  this  question  it  is  of  no  consequence  whether
the  absence  of  complement  action  is  due  to  destruction,  to  com-
plementoid  formation,  or  to  a  combination  in  the  organism  such
as  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  ready  binding  of  anticomple-
meiits.^  The  question  raised  by  Donitz,  relative  to  the  provision
of  really  plentiful  sources  of  complement,  has  not  thus  far  been
solved.  It  still  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  interesting  in-
vestigations of  Wassermann  ^  on  the  completion  of  typhoid  im-
mune bodies  with  ox  serum  will  lead  to  results  which  can  be
practically  utilized.  The  amount  of  complement  contained  in
the  serum  of  the  larger  laboratory  animals  is  not,  as  a  rule,  great
enough  to  make  the  employment  of  these  sera  applicable  for  human
therapeutic  purposes.  Wassermann,  for  example,  found  that  with
a  method  of  procedure  which  excluded  the  above-mentioned  diminu-
tion of  complements  (since  he  injected  bacteria,  immune  body,  and
complement  mixed  together  into  the  peritoneal  cavity)  it  required
4  cc.  ox  serum  to  achieve  curative  results.  This  amount  of  serum
in  itself  causes  severe  injury  to  the  animals  experimented  upon.

Suck  hdng  the  case,  it  seems  that  in  the  matter  oj  supplying  com-
plements, the   method    suggested   by  vs,  namely,  the    employment    of


'  In  hiB  recent  study  (Zeitschrift  fiir  Hygiene,  No,  37}  Waaaermann  also
lays  great  stress  on  the  increase  of  the  individual's  own  complenienta.  Wo
were  especially  gratified  to  see  that  in  regard  to  the  multiplicity  of  the  comple-
ments Wassermann  accepts  our  view  completely.

'  This  is  also  supported  by  certain  experimenta  of  i-on  Dungern  (Miinch.
medizin.  Woehenschrcft)  concerning  the  binding  of  complement  by  certain  cells

'  Deutsche  medizinische  Wochenschrift,  1900,  No.  18.


J


STUDIES  ON  ELEMOLYSINS.  119

mijced  sera  which  contain  a  greai  many  different  immune  bodies  would
prove  the  most  effective;  for  with  the  mvUijMdty  of  the  immune  bodies
an  increase  of  the  different  complementophUe  groups  also  takes  place,
and  thus  the  probability  increases  that  the  normal  complements  present,
especially  those  in  the  human  organism,  can  come  into  action  most  effec-
tively.


DC.    CONCERNING  THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERI-
CIDAL SERA.*

By  Max  Neisser,  Member  of  the  Institute,  and  Dr.  Frederick  WECRSBBito.

Our  experiences  with  diphtheria  curative  serum  have  taught  us
that  in  antitoxin  the  employment  of  a  high  dose  of  antitoxin  is  of
primary  importance.  It  is  immaterial  whether  an  excess  of  antitoxin
is  administered,  since  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  an  excess
does  no  harm  and  can  on  the  contrary  only  be  of  benefit.

Concerning  the  action  of  bactericidal  sera,  howe\'er,  the  lilera-
tiire  contains  a  number  of  examples  which  indicate  that  here  an  excess
of  immune  serum  is  occasionally  injurious.  Thus  several  high
authorities  have  published  protocols  of  therapeutic  experiments  on
animals  which  seem  to  contain  paradoxical  results;  for  with  the  same
infection  and  varying  amounts  of  immune  serum  not  only  those
animals  died  which  had  received  the  smallest  amounts  of  serum  but
also  those  which  had  received  the  largest  amounts.  Only  those
animals  were  protected  which  received  doses  of  immune  serum  lying
between  these  extremes.  Such  a  protocol,  for  example,  was  published
by  Luffier  and  Abel  ^  on  their  experiments  with  bacillus  coH  and  a
corresponding  immune  serum.  Out  of  nineteen  guinea-pigs  which
had  been  inoculated  with  the  same  amount  of  culture  ('/lo  loop)
and  had  received  varying  amounts  of  the  immune  serum,  only  six
animals  were  protected,  those  which  had  received  doses  of  0.25  to
0.02  cc.  Eight  animals  with  larger  doses  as  well  as  five  with  smaller
doses  of  serum  died.

A  similar  protocol  is  that  of  R.  PfeifTer,^  which  states  that  of  four
guinea-pigs  treated  with  virulent  cholera  and  a  corresponding  im-
mune serum  only  the  two  animals  receiving  the  medium  doses
survived.

'  Reprinted  from  the  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr.,  1901,  No.  IS,
'  F.  LOffler  and  R.  Abel.  Centrnlbi.  (.  Bact.,  1896,  Vol.  19,  page  51.
•  R.  Pfeifier,  Zeitachr.  f.  Hygiene,  1895,  Vol.  20,  page  215.


MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERICIDAL  SERA.

The  same  phenomenon  was  noticed  by  Leclainche  and  Morel  ^
in  their  work  on  the  bacillus  of  malignant  cedema,  and  these  authors
had  similar  experiences  with  erysipelas  of  swine  and  with  sj'mpto-
matic  anthrax.  As  a  result  of  this  they  concluded  that  there  was
a  "dosis  optima  Tieulralisans"  of  the  immune  serum.

Since  we  encountered  the  same  phenomenon  in  bactericidal
Ust-tube  experiments  it  seemed  advisable  to  undertake  a  study  of
tliese  occurrences,  especially  because  the  question  seemed  to  offer
points  of  vantage  important  both  theoretically  and  practically.
None  of  the  authors  above  mentioned  has  furnished  an  adequate
explanation  of  the  phenomenon.

In  our  experiments  the  bactericidal  action  was  determined  in  two
ways,  namely,  with  the  aid  of  the  bioscopic  method  previously
described  by  us,'  and  by  means  of  plate  countings.  The  methods
gave  identical  resuits  even  in  parallel  series.  In  order,  therefore,
to  facilitate  looking  over  the  results  we  shall  here  give  only  the
results  obtained  by  the  counting  method.

The  method  of  procedure  was  generally  as  follows:  '/sooo  cc.  of  a
one-day  bouillon  culture  of  the  bacterium  in  question  was  put  into
each  of  a  series  of  test-tubes.  To  this  were  added  varj'ing  amounts
of  immune  senmi  inactivated  at  56'*  C.  and  equal  amounts  of  the
complementing  active  serum;  or  in  another  series,  equal  amounts
of  immune  serum  and  varying  amounts  of  the  complementing  serum.
It  was  so  arranged  that  all  the  tubes  contained  equal  emounts  of
0uid,  usually  2.5  cc.  Dilutions  were  made  with  0.85%  salt  solution.
Fiu'thermore  three  drops  of  bouillon  were  added  to  each  tube,  tor
we  had  convinced  ourselves  that  this  assured  a  good  growth  in  the
control  tubes.  Numerous  control  tests  were  necessary  nevertheless,
even  if  only  to  test  the  sterility  of  the  sera  employed.  The  specimens
were  kept  at  37°  C.  for  three  hours  and  then  plated  on  agar,  using
five  drops  from  pipettes  of  uniform  size  for  each  plate.  The  results
were  noted  by  comparison  and  estimation,  somewhat  after  the
following  scheme:  0,  isolated,  hundreds,  thousands,  infinite  number.

Omitting  the  very  extensive  preliminary  tests  the  following
example  is  given  to  show  the  phenomenon  studied  by  us.  The
;  serum  employed  was  obtained  from  a  rabbit  by  treatment


'  I,«clsini?he  and  Morel,  La  Si^rotb^rapia  da  la  septicemia  gangreneuse,  Annal.
del'lDst.  Pasteur,  1901,  No.  1.

•Munch,  med.  Wodieuachr,.  1900,  No,  37.


J


122  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

with  vibrio  Metchnikoff.  This  serum  was  inactivated  by  heating
to  57°  C.  for  half  an  hour.  Normal  active  rabbit  serum  served  as
complement.


In.cti™  Im-

Number  o(

erf

Serum  anunst

lUbbit  Berum

Colonies  DO  tbo

VibTIb
MetchnikoS.

u  ComplemBil-

Flste.

S-'o

1-0

0.3

O)

"5     ta*

0.5

0.3
0  3

Many  thousands

0,1

0.3

Several   hundred

-1l

0  05

0.3

About  100

0.026

0.3

About  50

■

OcE

0.01

0,3

0

h

tj|x

0  005

0.3

0

■

0.0025

0.3

About  100

F

-f'

0  001

0,3

1

0.0005

0,3

Control     I

11

0,01

"       III

1-0

0

'■       IV

0-3

"         V

~

1-0

0

Three  drops  of  bouillon  to  each  tube.  All  the  tubes  filled  to  the  same  volume
with  0,85%  salt  solution,  then  placed  into  the  thermostat  at  37°  C,  for  three
hours.    Finally,  five  drops  of  eath  plated  on  agar.

This  experiment  shows  that  the  inactive  hnmune  serum  alone
is  innocuous  to  i-iitrio  Metchnikoff  (Control  II) ;  also  that  0.3  cc.  of
the  active  normal  rabbit  serum  alone  is  innocuous.  However  when,
for  example,  0.01  cc.  immune  serum  is  mixed  with  0,3  cc.  normal
active  rabbit  serum,  the  many  thousand  germs  inoculated  are  killed.
In  tlie  same  way  0.005  cc.  immune  serum  plus  0.3  cc.  norma]  active
rabbit  serum  also  causes  the  death  of  all  the  organisms.  With
smaller  amounts  of  immune  serum  (but  with  the  same  amount  of
the  complementing  senim  as  before)  the  destruction  of  the  germs  is
incomplete,  while  with  still  smaller  amounts  there  is  no  destruction
whatever.  But  the  destrMUii'c  effect  also  becomrs  less  when  more  than
0.01  cc.  immune  serum  is  used,  so  that  with  0.5  cc.  immune  serum
no  destructive  at  all  can  be  observed.  Hence  if  we  had  tested  only
the  mixture  of  0.5  cc.  of  this  immune  serum  plus  0.3  cc,  normal
active  rabbit  serum  we  should  certainly  not  have  supposed  that
we  were  dealing  with  a  powerful  immuneserum.     That  this  action


J


MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERICIDAL  SERA


123


is  due  only  to  the  serum's  content  of  immune  body  is  shown  by  the
following  experiment  in  which  inactive  immune  serum  is  compared
with  inactive  normal  serum  of  the  same  species,  both  sera  being
complemented  with  active  normal  serum.

TABLE  IL


Amount  of  CuIturB.


T^pf  cc.  of  a  one-day  bouil-
lon culture  of  vibrio
Metchnikoff


Amount  of
the  Com-
plementing

Normal.

Active

Rabbit.

serum.

00.


1.0
}


(


Number  of  Colonies  on  a  Plate  on  the  Addition

of  Serum  from  a  Rabbit  Immuniaed

against  Vibrio  Bftetohnikoff ,  the  Serum

having  been  Inactivated.


00
00


1.0  oc.


00
00
00


ioc.


a  few

many
thousands

00


A  00.


0
0

00


A  00.


0
0

00


Amount  of  Culture.

Amount  of
Normal
Active
Rabbit-
serum.

00.

Number  of  Colonies  on  a  Plate  on  the  Addition
of  Inactive  Normal  Rabbit-serum.

Ioc.

ioc.

Aoc.

Aoc.

j^  CC.  of  a  one-day  bouil-
lon   culture    of   vibrio
Metchnikoff

r    1.0

»

00
00

00
00
00

00

00
00

00
00

00

((


t€


ft


Control     I.  T^  cc.  bouillon  culture +  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  sol. +3  drops  of

bouillon,  planted  as  above,  result  oo .
n.  Sterility  of  the  immune  serum,  0.
III.        "        tt    t€   inactive  normal  rabbit-serum,  0.
rV.        "        "    "   active  normal  rabbit-serum,  0.
All  the  tubes  made  up  to  equal  volumes  with  0.85%  salt  solution,  then
placed  into  a  thermostat  at  37^  C.  for  three  hours.     Finally,  five  drops  of  each
specimen  plated  on  agar.

This  experiment,  too,  shows  that  ^/le  cc.  immune  serum  plus
1  cc.  or  Va  cc.  normal  active  rabbit  serum  kills  the  germs  completely;
while  larger  doses  of  the  immune  serum  are  less  effective.  The  addi-
tion of  normal  inactive  rabbit  serum  has  no  effect.

The  same  phenomenon  can  be  demonstrated  in  another  man-
ner. For  the  complementing  serum  any  active  serum  is  used  which
by  itself  already  possesses  a  slight  destructive  action.  If  to  such  a
serum  varying  amounts  of  an  inactive  immune  serum  are  added,
it  will  at  times  be  foimd  that  small  quantities  of  the  latter  increase


124


COLLECTED  STUDIBS  IN  IMMUNITY.


the  action  of  the  normal  active  serum,  while  somewhat  larger  quan-
tities weaken  the  action.  Still  larger  quantities  may  inhibit  the
action  completely.

In  the  following  experiment  an  immune  serum  was  employed
which  had  been  obtained  by  immunizing  a  goat  with  vibrio  Nord-
hafen.  This  serum  was  inactivated  by  heatmg  it  to  57°  C.  Normal
active  goat  serum  served  as  complement.     (See  Table  111.)

The  first  column  shows  that  normal  active  goat  serum  by  itself
kills  bacteria,  even  in  doses  of  about  0.1  cc.  The  fourth  and  fifth
columns  show  that  this  bacteriolytic  effect  of  the  normal  active  goat-
serum  is  in  no  way  affected  by  the  addition  of  1.0  cc.  or  0.1  cc.  in-
active normal  goat  serum.  From  the  third  column  we  see,  however,
that  if  we  add  to  the  normal  active  goat-serum  0.1  cc.  inactive  im-
mune serum,  the  bacteriolytic  effect  of  the  former  is  lowered,  and
that  it  is  almost  neutralized  when  1.0  cc.  of  the  inactive  immune
serum  is  added,     (Column  2.)


TABLE  in.


Amoupt

.    1       .       1       .

•  h

BujActivf

Culture.

iDWlive  Go*t  Immime  Serui

Addition  of  lane-

Stiam.

Cost  S«  rum.

-

1.0  CO.

0.1k.

1.0  m.

O.Ieo.

linCCOtn

1-0

0

about  50

0

0

0

one-day

0.5

0

many  hundreds

0

0

0

0.2S

0

0

0

0

0.1

0

0

0.0.5

ttboiit  5(

Nord-

0.025

hafen.

■~

«

"

«)

CO

Control      I.  tH  "c   bouillon  culture +  3  cc.  0,S5%  salt  solution  +   3  drops
bouillon =00.

"        II.  Sterility  of  the  inactive  immune  serum,  0.

"        III.         "         "    "         "        normal  goat  serum,  0.

"        IV.         "         "    "    active  normal  goat  serum,  0.
Three  drops  of  bouillon  to  each  tube.

All  the  tubes  made  up  to  equal  volumes  with  0  85  %  salt  solution.
Kept  in  the  thermostat  at  37°  C.  for  three  hours.
Finally,  two  drops  of  each  specimen  plated  on  agar.


MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERICroAL  SERA.


125


The  same  phenomenon  is  shown  by  the  following  protocol;


TABLE  IV.


Amount
of

Amount  of
the  Comple-
menting
Active
Normal
Guinea-pig
Serum,
cc.

Number  of  Colonies  on  a  Plate  on  the  Addition  of  Inactive
Ooai  Immune  Serum  directed  against  Vibrio  Nordhafen.

Culture.

—

1.0  CO.

0.1  CC.

0.01  CO.

tItj  cc.  of  a
one-day
bouillon
culture
of  vibrio
Nord-
hafen.

•

1.0
0.5
0.25

0.1

0.05
0.025

0

0

a  few

several  thou-
sand

00

00

many  thou-
sands
almost  00

00

00
00

00

00

a  few

about  100
several  hun-
dred

00

00
00

00

0
0
a  few

about  100

many  hui>-
dred

00

00

Amount  of  Culture.

Amount  of
the  Comple-
menting
Active  Nor-
mal Guinea-

4

Number  of  Colonies  on  a  plate  on  the  Addition  of
Inactive  Normal  Ooat  Serum.

pig  Serum,
cc.

1.0  cc.

0.1  cc.

0.01  cc.

-jii,  CO.  of  a  one-
day      bouillon
culture  of  vibrio
Nordhafen

i

\     1.0
0.5
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.025

•

0

about  100
a  few  hundred

00

oo

00

00

0
0

a  few
a  few  hundred

00

00

00

0
0

a  few
several  thous.

oo

00
00

Control     I.  liji  cc.  bouillon  culture +  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  solution +  3  drops

bouillon.     Result,  oo.
"         II.  Sterility  of  the  goat  immune  seriun,  0.
"       III.        "        "    '*   normal  goat  seriun,  0.

"        rV.        "        "    *'        "       guinea-pig   serum,  0.      Three    drops  of
bouiUon  to  each  tube.
All  the  tubes  made  up  to  an  equal  volume  with  0.85%  salt  solution.
Kept  in  the  thermostat  at  37®  C.  for  three  hours.     Finally,  two  drops  of
each  plated  on  agar.


We  succeeded  in  obtaining  similar  results  in  such  experiments
with  the  following  combinations :  ^


*  We  should  like  to  call  attention  to  a  case  which  we  encountered  a  number
of  times.     We  found  that  an  immune  serum  obtained  from  a  goat  could  be


MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERICIDAL  SERA.  129

bacteria,  and  a  bacterium  all  of  whose  receptors  are  laden  with
b  need  not  at  all  be  injured  in  its  vitality,  liody  b  normally  possesses
a  peculiar  function,  namely,  to  serve  as  a  coupling  member  or  link,
and  hence  it  poaaesses  two  groups  (amboceptor).  In  this  particular
case  one  of  these  groups  fits  the  receptor  of  the  bacterium,  the  other
possesses  a  peculiar  relation  to  those  normal  ferment-like  constitu-
ents of  sera  which  Ehrlich  has  termed  complements.  When  there-
fore to  a  normal  serum  which  contains  suitable  complement  we
add  equivalent  amounts  of  immune  serum,  the  condition  pictured
in  A I  will  result.  On  adding  the  corresponding  bacterium  to  this
we  get  the  condition  shown  in  A  II,  in  which  all  the  bacterial  receptors
are  occupied  with  immune  bodies,  or,  more  accurately,  with  immune
bodies  which  on  their  part  are  loaded  with  bacteriolytic  comple-
ment c.  In  the  case  here  presented  we  shall  say  that  it  requires
the  occupation  of  all  the  receptors  with  complemented  interbodies
to  cause  the  death  of  the  bacterium.

If  now  to  an  equivalent  mixture  of  complement  and  interbody
we  add  an  excess  of  interbody,  it  will  be  possible  for  only  a  part
of  the  interbody  to  be  loaded  with  complement,  leaving  a  portion
of  the  interbody  uncomplemented.  On  adding  the  corresponding
bacteria  a  number  of  conditions  may  result ;  the  affinity  of  the  inter-
body for  the  bacterial  receptor  may,  as  a  result  of  the  loading  with
complement,  (1)  remain  unchanged,  (2)  it  may  thereby  be  increased,
or  (3)  be  diminished.

In  the  figure,  B II  shows  the  condition  of  increased  affinity.
Of  the  six  interbodies  only  those  combine  with  the  bacterium  which
have  become  laden  with  complement.  In  this  case  therefore  the
excess  of  interbodies  will  have  no  influence  on  the  bactericidal  effect.
The  condition  b  really  the  same  as  All,  except  that  free  interbody
is  also  present.

C  II  shows  the  condition  of  unchanged  affinity.  In  this  case,
if  we  add  the  bacterium  to  the  mixtm-e  of  complement  and  excess
of  interbody,  all  the  receptors  of  the  bacterium  will,  to  be  sure,  be
occupied  by  interbodies,  but  this  will  be  entirely  without  any  regard
to  the  fact  that  these  interbodies  are  or  are  not  loaded  with  com-
plement. It  may  therefore  happen  that  only  a  few  of  the  bacterial
receptors  will  be  occupied  by  complemented  (i.e.  active)  interbodies,
while  the  rest  of  the  bacterial  receptors  are  occupied  by  uncom-
]ilemented  (hence  inactive)  interbodies.  As  already  mentioned,
hnn'ever,  the  vitality  of  such  a  bacterium  is  not  necessarily  destroyed.


A


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

D II  represents  the  last  conceivable  case.  It  is  assumed  that
the  "  completion  "  of  the  interbody  has  resulted  in  a  diminution
of  the  latter's  affinity  for  the  bacterial  receptor.  In  this  case  pri-
marily only  the  uncomplemented  interbodies  will  combine  with
the  bacterial  receptors,  while  the  free  fluid  will  contain  complemented
interbodies.

In  cases  C II  and  D II,  therefore,  the  excess  of  interbody  is  not
without  important  results;  for  whereas  in  mixtures  of  equivalent
amounts  of  complement  and  interbody  all  the  interbodies  are  com-
plemented and  so  made  active,  the  excess  of  interbody  will  exert
a  deflecting  action  on  the  complements  in  case  C II  as  well  as  in  D  II,
thus  diminishing  the  end  results.

The  conditions  shown  in  B  II  are  apparently  those  which  apply
to  the  hfemolyains,  for  extensive  investigations  in  this  direction  by
Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  concerning  which  we  are  permitted  to
report,  have  shown  that  deflection  of  complement  by  an  excess  of
interbody  is  not  observed  in  hemolysis.  In  this  case  only  the
complemented  interbodies  seem  primarOy  to  be  anchored  by  the
receptors  of  the  erythrocytes.

In  the  baclericidal  sera  investigated  by  us,  however,  the  deflec-
tion of  complement  shown  in  C  II  and  D  II  ia  observed,  though
of  course  we  are  as  yet  unable  to  say  which  of  the  two  possible  modes
is  present  in  any  particular  case.  The  same  explanation  which
we  have  given  for  the  phenomenon  observed  in  vitro  must  also  be
held  to  apply  to  the  experiments  on  animals,  at  least  so  far  as  the
phenomenon  above  described  was  observed.  It  is  perfectly  obvious
that  when  appropriate  affinities  of  the  interbody  exist  and  when
there  is  a  marked  disproportion  between  complement  and  inter-
body, a  deflection  of  complement  by  the  excess  of  interbody  can
occur  in  the  animal  body.

The  phenomenon  of  deflection  as  described  may  perhaps  present
further  points  for  study.  We  know  that  inmiunization  causes  an
increase  only  of  the  interbody  and  that  therefore  every  immune
serum  presents  a  deficiency  of  complement  in  comparison  fo  inter-
body. Hence  it  is  conceivable  in  a  highly  immune  animal,  i.e.  one
in  which  through  immunization  a  great  increase  of  interbody  has
occurred,  that  after  infection  the  phenomenon  of  complement  deflec-
tion through  the  excess  of  immune  body  could  occur.  That  it  actu-
ally does  occur  we  conclude  from  the  following  statement  by  R.
Pfeiffer:


MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  BACTERICIDAL  SERA.  131

"  It  has  frequently  happened  to  me  that  highly  immunized  guinea-
pigs  died  after  an  injection  of  moderate  amounts  of  virus.  On
section  there  were  then  found  in  the  peritoneum  living  vibrios,  some-
times even  in  considerable  numbers.  Notwithstanding  this  the
heart  blood  of  the  cadaver  when  introduced  into  new  guinea-pigs
manifested  the  strongest  power  to  dissolve  vibrios."

It  is  therefore  conceivable  that  an  individual  can  lose  its  natural
resistance  by  producing  too  large  an  amount  of  interbody  in  pro-
portion to  the  amount  of  its  complement.  Such  an  excess  of  inter-
body then  would  act  injuriously  rather  than  helpfully.

•  This  phenomenon  is  also  of  some  theoretical  significance.  While
it  can  readily  be  explained  by  means  of  the  views  of  Ehrlich  and
Morgenroth,  it  appears,  to  us  at  least,  to  be  absolutely  irreconcilable
with  the  theory  of  Bordet.  This  author,  as  is  well  known,  regards
Ehrlich's  interbody  as  a  substance  capable  of  sensitizing  the  bac-
teria whereby  they  are  made  vulnerable  to  the  action  of  the  solvent
"  alexin  "  (Ehrlich's  complement).  If  this  were  the  case  it  would
be  absolutely  incomprehensible  how  an  excess  of  sensitizing  sub-
stance could  diminish  the  total  effect;  at  the  most  such  an  excess
could  only  increase  the  sensitizing  action,  not  decrease  it.  Since,
however,  we  have  actually  observed  this  decrease  very  frequently,
we  must  regard  this  as  a  weighty  objection  to  Bordet's  theory.

Equally  incomprehensible  from  Bordet's  standpoint  is  the  fol-
lowing observation.  As  has  been  shown  above  it  is  possible  to  over-
come the  action  of  an  equivalent  mixture  of  interbody  and  com-
plement (the  mixture  itself  being  fatal)  by  adding  a  large  excess
of  interbody  to  it.  When,  however,  through  the  addition  of  more
complement  the  equivalence  of  the  mixture  is  again  restored,  the
action  returns.  This  action  therefore  depends  not  only  on  the  abso-
lute amoimts  of  complement  and  interbody,  but  also  and  essentially
on  the  proportion  in  which  these  two  substances  are  present.  This
is  true  at  least  in  the  sense  that  not  very  much  more  interbody
should  be  present  than  is  required.


X.    THE  DEFLECTION  OF  COMPLEMENTS  IN  BACTERI-
CIDAL TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.'

By  Dr.  A.  Lipstein,  AssiBtant  in  the  Bact«riological  Division.

I^f  a  study  published  in  1901,^  Neiseer  and  Wechstwrg  described
a  peculiar  jihenomenon  occurring  in  bactericidal  test-tube  experi-
ments. This  phenomenon  conebted  in  the  fact  that  the  bacteria
were  not  killed  despite  the  presence  of  the  appropriate  bacterial
amboceptor  (immune  body)  and  complements  when  a  compara-
tively large  excess  of  amboceptor  waa  present.  This  fact,  for  which
all  other  explanations  failed,  was  explained  by  the  authors  on  the
basis  of  Elirlich  and  Morgenroth's  views.  They  assumed  that,  with
certain  conditions  of  affinity,  an  excess  of  amboce]itor8  exerts  a
deflecting  and  at  the  same  time  a  diluting  action  on  the  complement;
aa  a  result  the  complement  does  not  combine  with  the  amboceptors
anchored  to  the  bacteria,  but  with  the  superfluous  free  amboceptors,
while  the  amboceptors  which  are  anchored  to  the  cells  remain  without
any  complement.  Now  since  only  those  complements  exert  a  bac-
tericidal action  which  are  anchored  to  the  bacteria  by  means  of  the
amlwceptors,  it  follows  that  in  this  case  there  will  be  no  bactericidal
action.  Naturally  this  phenomenon  of  deflection  of  complement
does  not  occur  with  ever>'  combination  of  amboceptor  and  comple-
ment, but  oiJy  when  certain  conditions  of  affinity  are  present.  Later
I  shall  be  able  to  show  how  the  same  amboceptor  in  excess  exerts  a
deflecting  action  on  one  complement  while  it  fails  to  do  so  on  two
other  complements.  I?ecause  of  the  theoretical  importance  of  this
phenomenon  and  its  explanation,  a  continuation  of  the  experiments
of  Nei.sser  and  Wechsberg,  taking  special  cognizance  of  the  objectiona
since  made,  seemed  desirable.

'  Reprinted  from  Centralblatt  fiir  Bact,,  Vol.  XXXI.  No.  10,  1002.
•  See  page  120  of  this  volume;  also  Wechsberg,  Zeitschr,  t.  Hygiene,  Vol.  39,
1902.


BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPEHLMENTS.


133


In  the  following  experiments  the  method  is  the  same  as  that  of
the  above  authors,  to  whose  work  I  refer  for  these  details.  The
phenomenon  of  the  deflection  of  complement  can  be  exhibited  in
two  ways:  First  by  emploj'ing  aa  a  source  of  complement  an  active,
in  itself  not  bactericidal  serum  and  showing  that  when  decreasing
amounts  of  inactive  immune  serum  are  added,  only  the  medium
amounts  of  the  same  exert  a  bactericidal  effect,  whereas  both  tlie
larger  and  the  smaller  amounts  are  ineffective.  The  results  shown
in  Table  I  will  serve  as  an  e.\ample  of  this.


PiKB"n

Number

of  Coloni™  on  a  PUile  on  the  Addition  <rf

'■■""■■"v,te:s':,£E.'»'-"-"

1,0

0,3

0,1

0,03

0,01

0  003

0.001

..«„

•r

,i»  M.  of  a  oneway  ]
bouillon  culture  of  \

0,4

00

OO

.

20
to

30

0

0

0

many
thou-
sand

OO

Control  I.  iSb  ce,  bouillon  pulture  +  2  cc.  0.8o%  salt  solution,  ResiJt,  oo,
' '  II.  0.4  PC.  a<^tive  pigeoD  serum  +iJj  co.  bouillon  culture.  Result,  <s
"        III.  Sterility  of  all  the  Bera,  0.

The  second  method  consists  in  employing  a  serum  or  serum  mix-
ture which  will  kill  the  amount  of  bacteria  employed.  By  adding
to  this  decreasing  amounts  of  inactive  immune  serum  (or,  as  a  con-
trol, inactive  normal  serum)  it  is  found  that  the  immune  serum,
in  proportion  to  the  amount  added,  exerts  an  anlihactericidat  effect,
whereas  the  normal  serum  fails  entirely  to  do  this  or  does  so  in  a
very  much  less  degree.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  results  in  Tables
III  and  TV,  columns  1  and  2.

In  opposition  to  the  explanation  furnished  by  Neiaser  and
Wechsberg,  according  to  which  the  deflection  of  complementH  is
caused  by  an  excess  of  amboceptors,  the  following  points  have  been
raised :

A.  The  phenomenon  is   due  to  agglutination   of  the  bacterial

culture;

B.  It  is  due  to  Twrmal  anticomplements  (Metchnikoff).


'  Each  tiihe  also  receives  three  drops  of  liiiilion  as  in  Neiaser  and  Wechs-
berg's  exeprimeots.    This  applies  also  to  the  rast  of  our  experiments.


OOIiECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNTTT:

C.   It  is  due  to  anticomplementa  which  arise  during  the  imnair

nizing  process  (Gniber).
I   shall   LTilically   examine   each   of   these   objections   beginning
with  the  first.


A.    Is  the  Deflection   ot  Compleraents  In  any  way  Connected  with
Agslutlmitiou  ?

This  very  natural  objection,  namely  that  each  immune  serum
agglutinates  the  corresponding  bacteria  and  that  it  is  this  mechanical
effect  of  clumping  which  causes  the  bactericidal  power  of  the  immune
serum  to  fail,  Keisser  and  Wechsberg  sought  to  overcome  by  the
following  method  of  procedure.  They  first  agglutinated  the  bacteria
which  were  to  be  ust-d  in  the  cultures,  and  then  studied  the  effect
that  a  normal  and  an  immune  serum  exerted  on  these,  with  the
result  that  a  deflection  of  complement  was  obtained  only  with  the
immune  serum.  The  following  experiment  also  shows  that  the
agglutinating  action  of  an  immune  serum  is  in  no  way  the  cause
of  the  deflection  of  complement;  for  in  it  1  succeed  in  showing
that  an  immune  senim  which  agglutinates  strongly  is  nevertheless
unable  to  exert  any  deflecting  action  on  the  complements:

In  this  experiment  two  inmnme  sera  acting  against  vibrio
Metchnikoff  are  employed,  namely,  that  of  a  goose  (A)  and  that
■of  a  goat  (ii).  I'oth  sera  strongly  agglutinate  vibrio  Metchnikoff,
i.e.,  even  in  a  dilution  of  1:1000.  The  method  of  procedure  is  such
that  decreasing  amounts  of  the  hiactive  sera  were  reactivated  with
rabbit  serum  (column  I)  and  with  pigeon  serum  (column  2).  Now
while  the  immune  serum  of  the  goat  (1.)  shows  a  typical  picture  of
deflection  of  complement,  the  immune  serum  of  the  goose  (A),  whose
bactericidal  power  is  just  as  strong  as  that  of  the  goat  serum,  is
unable  despite  this  large  content  of  amboceptor  to  defiect  the  com-
plement. This  proves  that  the  agglutinating  action  and  that  of
complement  deflection  are  two  properties  of  one  and  the  same  immune
serum,  which  may  exist  side  by  side,  but  that  agglutination  in  no
way  causes  deflection  of  complement.

According  to  our  view  the  reason  why  the  surplus  amboceptor
of  the  goose  immune  serum  fails  in  our  experiment  to  bring  about  a
deflection  of  complement  Is  becau'^e  there  is  not  sufficient  affinity
between  the  complements  of  pigeon  and  rabbit  serum  on  the  one
hand  and  the  free  amboceptor  of  the  immune  serum  on  the  other.


J


BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.


135


By  varying  the  experiment  I  have  succeeded  with  this  same  immune
serum  in  producing  this  phenomenon  of  deflection  on  another  comple-
ment, thus  furnishing  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  these  views.
The  source  of  this  complement  was  an  active  normal  goat  serum
which  in  itself  was  bactericidal  for  the  amount  of  organisms  em-
ployed in  the  culture.  (See  Control  II.)  This  experiment  is  other-
wise similar  to  the  preceding,  except  that  as  additional  control  tests
the  corresponding  normal  sera  have  been  subjected  to  examination
respecting  their  deflecting  power.


TABLE  II.
A.


Amount  of  Culture.

Amount  of  In-
active Goofle
Immune  Serum

Directed

aiminst  Vibrio

Metchnikofif.

cc.

Number  of  Colonies  on  a  Plate
after  Completion  with

0J3  cc.  Active

Normal  Rabbit

Serum.

0.4  cc.  Active

Normal  Pigeon

Serum.

riir  cc.  of  a  one-day  bouillon  cultiue
of  vibrio  Metchnikofif

1.0

0.3

0.1

0.03

0.01

0.003

0.001

0
0
0
0
10
many  thous'd

00

0
0

0

0

0

100

00

B.


Amount  of  Culture.

Amount  of

Inactive   Goat

Immime  Serum

Mainst  Vibrio

MetchnikoflT.

cc.

Number  of
Colonies  on  a
Plate  on  Com-
pletion with
0.3  cc.  Active
Normal  Rabbit
Serum.

j^  cc.  of  a  one-day  bouillon  culture  of  vibrio
Metchnikofif |

ft

1.0

0.3

0.1

0.03

0.01

0.003

0.001

0.0003

00

0
0
0
0
0

X

Control     I.  fiir  cc.  bouillon  culture  +  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  solution »  x .

II.  Normal  active  rabbit-serum  0.3 +  t^  cc.  bouillon  culture*

III.  0.4  cc.  active  pigeon-serum +t^  cc.  bouillon  culture -=x.

IV.  Sterility  of  aU  the  sera,  0.


tt


a


4i


X


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.
TABLE  III.


GoBt

in  'itS'lf
BwMri-

iDMliVO

ond"'

.         1         ,         1          3         1        .

"-Mffir.siK^i'S^*""-

MeU'huikoff

Serum.

SenuB
UelcliDikoff

H"

rts  PC.  ot    »  one-
day      bouillon
culture  of  vibrio
Metchnikoff

0,04

1.0
0.3
0   1
0.03
0,01

sev'l  h'n'd
0
()

sev'l  hVd
0
0
0
0

sev'i  h'n'd
0

100
0
0
0
0

Control      1.  jJm  cc,  bouillon  culture +  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  solution— oo,

"         U.  Normal  active  goftUserum  0.O4  cc.  +  iiT[  cc.  bouillon  culture  — 0.
HI.  Sterility  of  all  the  sera-O,

The  principal  difference  in  this  as  comparetl  with  the  former
experiment  is  that  the  goose  immune  serum  deflects  the  comple-
ment even  more  strongly  than  doea  the  goat  immune  serum.

Tliua  the  objection  that  the  deflection  of  complements  is  due  to
agglutination  has  been  refuted  by  these  experiment's  also.  The
beha\ior  of  the  normal  sera  employed  aa  controls,  whose  antibap-
tericidal  power  even  in  amounts  of  1.0  cc.  is  very  slight,  will  be  spoken
of  in  the  next  section.


B.    la  the  Deflection  of  Complements  due  to  Normal
AntlcomplemenU  7

The  deflection  of  complements  under  discussion  has  been  ascribed
by  Metchnikoff '  to  anticytases  rwmiaUy  present.  This  objection
falls  to  the  ground  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  specific  immune  serum
exhibits  a  constant  and  distinct  difference  in  comparison  to  other
immune  sera  or  to  various  normal  sera.  It  is  entirely  immaterial
if  the  normal  sera  also  show  this  phenomenon  to  a  slight  degree,
e,g.  Table  III.  columns  2  and  4.  An  adequate  explanation  of  this
has  already  been  furnished  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,  who  were  also
the  first  to  describe  normal  anticomplements.  Just  this  quartiir-
UUive  difference  between  immune  serum  and  normal  serum  is  one

'  L'lmmunit^'  dans  lex  Maladies  infcctieuscs,  page  313,


BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.  137

of  the  postulates  of  Ehrlich's  theory,  and  it  is  this  quantitative
difference  which  constitutes  the  essential  point  in  the  deflection  of
complementsdescri  bed .

The  following  table  includes  ten  different  goat  sera,  among  them
three  bactericidal  immune  sera  (columns  2,  3,  4),  one  antitoxic  serum
(column  5),  four  hemolytic  immune  .sera  (columas  6,  7,  8,  9),  and
one  an ti complement  serum  directed  against  the  complements  of
horse  serum  (column  10).  All  of  these  have  been  tested  as  to  their
complement-deflecting  power  against  vibrio  Metchnikoff.

The  experiment  has  been  slightly  modified  from  the  former,
for  in  this  I  made  use  of  a  mixture  of  0.1  cc.  active  guinea-pig  serum
(in  itself  not  bactericidal,  Control  II)  plus  0.01  cc.  inactive  goat
immune  serum  (again.st  vibrio  Metchnikoff).  Tliis  mixture  completely
killed  the  amount  of  bacterial  culture  used,  namely,  ^aVi  cc,  of  a
one-day  bouillon  culture  of  vibrio  Metchnikoff  (see  Control  11).  De-
creasing amounts  of  various  inactive  goat  sera  were  added  to  this,
as  is  shown  in  colunms  1  to  10,

According  to  this,  the  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  exerts  a  specific
action,  and  it  is  certainJy  too  hazardous  to  assimie  that  the  Metchni-
koff goat  used  by  us  happened  to  possess  an  unusually  large  amount
of  normal  anticomplement.  Furthermore,  it  is  possible,  as  I  shall
show  later,  to  furnbh  positive  proof  that  the  deflection  of  complement
is  caused,  not  by  the  anti complements,  but  by  the  amboceptors;
for  by  removing  the  amboceptors  it  is  possible  to  prevent  the  deflec-
tion. The  following  experiment  furnishes  still  further  evidence
against  Metchnikoff's  view:  I  examined  the  serum  of  a  rabbit  before
and  after  immunization  with  vibrio  Metchnikoff  and  foimd  that  the
normal  senun  was  entirely  inactive,  whereas  after  eight  days  the
immune  senun  of  this  animal  caused  strong  deflection.  In  these
cases,  therefore,  it  will  not  do  to  ascrilje  the  deflection  of  complements
to  a  normal  anticomplement.  That  normal  anti  com  piemen  is  do
occur  and  that  they  may  at  times  simulate  the  phenomenon  above
described  is,  of  course,  possible  and  has  already  been  emphasized
by  Nekser  and  Wechsberg.  In  such  cases  suitable  control  tests,
above  all  the  absorption  method  described  in  the  next  section,  will
guard  against  errors.  From  all  tins  it  follows  that  the  phenomenon
of  complement  deflection  wliich  can  be  observed  in  suitable  cases  is
not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  a  normaX  constituent  but  to  one
produced  by  immunization.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


Amount  of  tbe  Bwteri-
cid^l  Scnim  Mixture.

VBIod

■    1     "     1    '

Juaowt  of

Number  of  COlooiea

Nonnal
Serum.

Hnichnikolf.

i

day  bouillon
culture      o  f
vibrio  Meteh-
nikoS

0.1  cc.  active  normal
guinea  -  pig     serum
pliisO.Ol  cc.  inactive
goat  immune  Bcnim

against  vibrio  Metch-

1.0
0  3
0,1
0  03
0  01

0
0
0
0
0

almost  m
0

0
0
0
0
0

Control    I,  TiiVn  cc.  bouillon  cullui
"       II,  Active  guinea-pig  serui


5%  salt  8olutioD"oe.

"tA»  ^'^-  bouillon  culture—"


C.    Is  the  Deflection   of  Complements  Caused  by  Antleomplements
Developed  by  Immunization?

The  assumption  that  wlicn  immunizing  with  Bacteria,  antialexins
develop  in  the  serum  of  the  animals  treated,  and  that  these  substances
exert  an  antibactericidal  and  antihaBmolytic  action,  is  made  by
Gniber'  solely  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  an  explanation  for  the
phenomenon  not  based  on  Ehrlich's  views.  Wechsberg^  has  very
properly  pointed  out  that  Gmber's  assumption  completely  contradicts
all  our  previous  experiences,  for  then  neither  by  active  nor  by  pas-
sive immunization  should  we  benefit  the  organism  treated,  but  we
should  even  injure  it.  The  evidence  on  which  Gruber  bases  this  new
conception  consists  in  hfcmolytic  test-luhe  experiments  in  which  he
shows  that  bactericidal  immune  serum  hinders  the  hiemolysis,  whereas
the  corresponding  normal  serum  does  not  do  so.  Wechsbei^  in  a
recent  study  ^  was  never  able  to  obtain  this  result,  even  with  the
same  method  of  making  the  experiment  as  employed  by  Gruber.
Similar  negative  results  were  obtained  by  H.  Sachs  of  this  institute,
who  studied  a  munber  of  immune  sera  for  this  purpose,  viz.,  immune
sera  agaiitst  vibrio  Mctchnikoff,  vibrio  Nordhafen,  staphylococcus,

'  Wiener  idin.  Wocbenschr,,  1901,  Ko,  30.

'  Ibid.

•Ibid.,  1902,  No.  13.


BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.


139


IV.


6


8


9


10


on  a  Plate  on  the  Addition  of  the  Inactive  Goat  Sera  here  mentioned.


Immune
Serum
against

Staphylo-
coccus
Aureus.


0
0
0

0
0


Serum

Serum

Serum

acainst
SUphylo-

against
Rabbit

against

Hneep

Blood-

coocus

Blood-

Toxin.

cells.

cells.

scv'l  hun'd

0

20-40

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Serum

against

Ox  BIoo<l-

cells.


many  thou.
0
0
0
0


Scrum

against

Human

Blood -cells.


almost  X
0
0
0
0


Serum

against

Horse

Serum.


100
0
0
0
0


Control  III.  Active  guinea-pig  serum  0.1  cc.  +0.01  cc.  inactive  goat  immune

serum  against  vibrio  Metchnikoff +77^  cc.  bouillon  culture.
IV.  Sterility  of  all  the  sera«0.


« <


erysipelas  of  swine,  hog  cholera,  dysentery.  I  am  unable  to  say
what  the  cause  of  these  contradictory  results  may  be.  One  thing,
however,  is  shown  thereby,  namely,  that  there  is  no  general  law  such
as  Gruber  assumes,  and  that,  their  toxicity  taken  for  granted,  his
experiments  constitute  rather  a  rare  exception  which  must  even  be
regarded  as  an  unfortunate  coincidence.

That  immunization  with  any  kind  of  bacteria  does  not  cause  the
formation  of  anticomplements  with  a  general  antibactericidal  action,
in  Gruber's  conception  is  seen  by  glancing  at  Table  IV,  columns  2,
3,  and  4.  In  these  experiments  only  the  Metchnikoff  immune  serum
exerted  a  complement-deflecting  action,  not,  however,  the  immune
sera  of  two  other  goats  immunized  with  vibrio  Nordhafen,  and  with
^aphylococcus  pyogenes  aureus.

It  is  very  easy  to  prove  that  in  the  Metchnikoff  immune  scrum
the  active  factor  which  effects  this  anticomplementary  action  and
which  develops  as  a  result  of  the  immunization  is  really  an  ambo-
ceptor; for  by  previously  adding  the  corresponding  dead  bacteria
to  the  immune  serum  and  later  centrifuging,  the  amboceptor  of
the  serum  is  abstracted.  It  can  then  be  shown  that  this  amboceptor-
free  immune  serum  has  lost  all  its  power  to  deflect  complement,
provided,  of  course,  a  sufficient  amount  of  bacteria  was  used.  It
can  further  be  shown  in  this  way  that  the  action  proceeds  quanti-
tatively.   Thus  if  decreasing  amounts   of  bacteria   are   employed


140


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


to  absorb  the  araboceptora,  e.g.,  1,  i,  i^jr,  bj  agar  culture,  it  will  be
found,  for  instance,  that  the  whole  agar  culture  eompleteiy  abstracts
the  amboceptor  from  the  serum;  one-quarter  of  the  culture  abstracts
only  part  of  the  same,  smaller  amounts  still  less  corresponding  to
the  amount  of  bacteria  added.

But  by  this  method  I  was  able  to  bring  further  proof  of  the  specific
action  of  the  immune  serum.  Thus  when  I  added  dead  Metchnikoff
vibrios  to  the  Metchnikoff  immune  serum,  1  was  able  to  remove
the  amboceptor;  the  serum  then  did  not  show  even  a  trace  of  deflect^
ing  action.  If,  however,  to  this  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  I
added  other  bacteria  (vibrio  Nordhafen,  typhoid,  dysentery)  the
senun  lost  none  of  its  power  to  deflect  complement,  because  the
immune  body  of  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  is  anchored  only  by
Metchnikoff  vibrios,  and  not  by  any  other  kind  of  bacteria.

^uch  an  experiment  is  reproduced  in  exlenso  below.  For  certain
reasons  to  be  explained  directly,  this  requires  a  tedious  and  complex
method  of  procedure.  As  in  the  previous  experiment  I  employed  a
mixture  of  active  guinea-pig  serum  and  inactive  Metchnikoff  immune
serum  (from  a  goat),  which  sufficed  to  kill  the  amount  of  bacterial
culture  employed  (Control  II).  To  this  mixture  are  added  decreasing
amounts  of  the  native  inactive  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  of  a
goat  (column  1).  The  same  immune  serum  previously  treated  with
Metchnikoff  vibrios  is  shown  in  column  2;  treated  with  Nordhafen
vibrios,  column  3;  with  typhoid  bacilli,  column  4;  and  with  dysentery
bacilli,  colunm  5.  This  preliminary  treatment  with  bacteria  is  as
follows:  Agar  cultures  of  the  various  bacteria  are  suspended  each
in  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  solution  and  killed  by  heating  these  suspensions
to  65''-70°  for  one  hour.  If  to  these  four  suspensions  we  were  now
to  add  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  with  the  object  of  having  the
immune  body  absorbed,  we  should  later,  on  centrifuging  to  remove
the  bacteria,  encounter  great  difficulties,  it  being  impossible  in  this
way  to  obtain  a  clear  fluid  free  from  bacteria.  The  Metchnikoff
vibrios  alone  are  an  exception,  because  they  are  agglutinated  by  the
corresponding  immune  serum.  Although,  according  to  Gniber,
even  a  considerable  accumulation  of  bacteria  is  without  effect  on
haemolysis,  in  my  bactericidal  experiments  I  met  with  the  annoying
fact  that  such  large  amounts  of  bacteria  (the  centrifuged  fluid  is
cloudy)  are  in  themselves  strongly  antibactericidal.  I  was  able
to  overcome  this  difficulty  as  follows:  2.0  cc.  of  the  corresponding
inactive  immune  serum  were  added  to  the  suspended  agar  cultures


J


BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.


141


in  order  to  effect  agglutination;  thus  Metchnikoff  vibrios  to
MetchnikofT  immune  6erum,  Nordfiafen  vibrios  to  Nordhafen
immune  serum,  etc.  The  mixtures  were  kept  at  37°  C.  for  one  hour,
diluted  to  25  cc.  with  salt  solution  (in  order  to  dilute  the  serum  as
much  as  possible),  and  then  centrifuged.  The  fluids  were  poured
off;  the  sediments  consisting  of  agglutinated  bacteria  were  thoroughly
shaken,  each  with  2)  cc.  inactive  Metchnikoff  immune  serum  and
allowed  to  stand  for  IJ  to  2  hours  at  37°  C,  the  mixtures  being  occa-
sionally shaken.  On  then  again  centrifuging  for  a  long  time,  I  was
able  to  pour  off  a  clear  bacterial-free  fluid  which  was  used  for  the
following  ezp^iment  (columns  2  to  5).


TABLE

V.

Amount  d(  tbe
Miiluw.

1

i

il

■  1  - 1  ■  1 '  h

tioQ  of  lt>»tive  Goat  Serum  itBUut
Vbrio  Metehailiafl.

Amaunl  of

Culture.

i

S
S

a

1

a

PreviourLy  Tnatnl  with  Dead

II

p

P

P

tA.  ec.    of   a
one-day  bouil-
lon culture  of
vibrio  Metch-
nikoff

pig  serum  plus  0.01
Metchnikoff

1.0

0,5
0.2.
0,1

[o,o,^

10-20
0

0
0
0
0
0

10-20
0

10-20
0

100
0

Control     I.  tAi  cc  bouHloii  culture -f  2  cc.  0.85%  salt  eolutioa-co.

"        II.  0,1  ee,  active  guinea-pig  Benim -1-0,01  cc.  inactive  goat  immune
senimagaiDst  vibrio  Metchnikoff +17/1^100.  bouillon  culture—0.
"       IIL  Sterility  of  all  the  sera-0.

This  experiment  shows  that  by  previously  adding  dead  bacteria
of  the  corresponding  species  and  then  using  the  centrifuged  serum,
it  is  possible  to  remove  the  property  by  means  of  which  an  immune
serum  when  in  excess  can  exert  a  complement-deflecting  action.
This  absorption,  however,  did  not  succeed  with  three  other  species
of  bacteria.  Hence  we  can  conclude  that  the  deflecting  agent  of
the  immune  serum  is  a  substance  produced  by  immunization  and


142  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

related  to  the  complement  on  the  one  hand  (complement  deflection  I)
and  to  the  corresponding  bacterium  on  the  other  (specific  absorption) »
It  is  therefore  an  amboceptor  in  Ehrlich's  sense,  and  not  an  anti-
alexin  in  that  of  Gruber.

The  results  of  my  experiments  may  be  simmiarized  as  follows:

(1)  By  comparing  two  bactericidal  unmune  sera  both  possessing
a  strong  agglutinating  property,  while,  in  certain  combinations,  only
one  manifested  the  phenomenon  of  deflection  of  complement,  the
objection  was  controverted  that  this  deflection  is  due  to  the  mechanical
action  of  agglutination.

(2)  It  was  possible  to  show  in  several  different  ways  that  the
deflection  of  complement  is  not  caused  by  a  constituent  of  normal
serum.

(3)  It  was  directly  proven  that  the  deflecting  agent  of  the  immime
serum  is  the  specific  amboceptor  (immune  body)  produced  by
immunization.

From  this  it  follows  that  the  amboceptor  merely  plays  the  role
of  a  coupling  element  between  bacteria  and  complement  and  that
the  property  of  "sensitizing"  (Bordet)  or  of  "preparing"  (Gruber)
cannot  be  ascribed  to  it.  The  latter  assumptions  seem  to  be  irrecon-
cilable with  the  phenomenon  of  deflection  of  complements  described
by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg.


XI.    ACTIVE  IMMUNITY   AND  OVERNEUTRALIZED

DIPHTHERIA    TOXINS.^

By  Dr.  Jules  Rehns.

Instead  of  following  the  classical  method  of  immunizing  against
diphtheria,  namely,  by  inoculating  the  toxin  in  gradually  increasing
doses,  a  number  of  workers  have  attempted  to  produce  immunity
by  inoculating,  either  from  the  outset  or  during  the  course  of  the
immunizing  process,  mixtures  in  which  the  toxin  was  partly,  wholly^
or  over  neutralized.  It  will  at  once  be  realized  that  these  methods,
with  which  the  names  Babes,  Pavlovsky,  Arloing,  Madsen,  and  Kretz
are  principally  associated,  possess  an  entirely  different  significance.

Under  the  direction  of  Professor  Ehrlich  I  have  tried  to  see  whether
active  immimity  could  be  conferred  upon  a  given  normal  organism  by
the  injection  of  increasing  doses  of  diphtheria  toxin  mixed  with  one
or  more  times  its  equivalent  of  antitoxin.

Rabbits  weighing  about  2000  grams  were  used  and  these  were
injected  with  mixtures  composed  of  a  toxin  L  and  the  Standard
Serum  of  the  Institute.

The  constants  of  this  poison,  determined  according  to  the  clas-
sical methods  devised  by  Ehrlich  were  as  follows:

(1)  The  amoimt  of  poison  which  just  corresponded  to  an  immu-
nizing  unit,  i.e.,  the  limit  of  no  action  whatever,

Lo=0.3  cc.

(2)  The  amount  of  poison  which,  mixed  with  one  immimizing^

imit  of  serum,  was  just  sufficient  to  kill  the  animal,  the  so-called

Lt  dose,

Lt=0.45  cc.

(3)  The  fatal  dose  for  a  rabbit  weighing  about  2000  grams,  deatb
occurring  in  four  days:

This  was  about  0.01.

'  Reprinted  from  Compt.  rend,  de  la  Soc.  de  Biologie,  1901,  page  141.

14a


144


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY


Two  rabbits  were  inoculated  intravenously,  one  with

3  units  aerum  +  0.3  cc.  toxin,

B.  mixture  neutralized  about  three  fold  ;   the  other  with

3  units  serum  +  0.45  cc,  toxin,

a  mixture  about  doubly  neutralized.

The  animals  received  daily  increasing  doses  from  the  5th  t
ISth  of  December,  1900,  at  the  end  of  which  time  the  total  amount
of  toxin  they  had  received  was

for  the  one     7.5    cc  or  750  fatal  doses,  ^H

for  the  other  4.27  cc.  or  429  fatal  doses.  ^|

The  animals  showed  no  change  in  health  and  lost  no  weight.

In  order  to  allow  the  excess  of  serum  introduced  time  to  be
eliminated,  four  weeks  were  ailowetl  to  elapse  before  testing  the  serum
for  its  antitoxic  strength.

A  control  rabbit  treated  with  serum  alone  died  accidentally,  but,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  results  of  the  experiment,  a  control  was
superfluoui.

Both  rabbits  were  killed  Jan.  24,  1901,  and  1  cc.  of  the  serum
was  mixed  with  one-quarter  a  Lt  dose.  The  test  animals  died  in
twenty-four  hours.  By  decreasing  the  quantity  of  toxin  to  one-
eighth  Lt   dose,  death  occurred  in  forty  eight-hours.

From  this  we  see  that  the  serum  of  these  animals  certainly  con-
tains no  more  than  one-eighth  of  an  immunizing  unit,  an  amount
which  at  once  eliminates  any  idea  of  a  passive  immunity.

One  must  therefore  conclude  that  the  organism  of  a  normal
rabbit  not  sensilized  through  previous  immunization  is  unable  to  break
up  the  combination  of  diphtheria  toxin  with  antitoxin.  Not  a  trace  of
this  toxin  is  tree  at  any  moment,  and  the  strongest  doses  of  the  mix-
ture are  destitute  of  any  injurious  effects.  Twenty  fatal  doses,  for
instance,  were  given  at  the  beginning.  But  we  see  further  that  these
mixtures  do  not  cause  even  the  slightest  production  of  antitoxin.
We  must  therefore  conclude,  with  Arloing,  that  the  injection  of
ovemeutralized  toxin  is  absolutely  useless  for  purposes  of  immuni-
zation.

These  results  do  not  in  the  least  resemble  those  of  other  authore
who  have  used  partially  neutralized  mixtures  in  which  toxons  and
toxonoids  are  present  in  a  free  state.     So  far  as  immunizing  power


DIPHTHERIA  TOXINS.  145

is  concerned,  Madsen  has  found  that  these  substances,  though  abso-
lutely free  from  pathogenic  action,  are  entirely  equal  to  pure  toxin.
In  these,  then,  toxicity  and  immunizing  power  are  entirely  luiasso-
ciated.  These  facts  make  Ehrlich's  hypothesis  very  plausible,  ac-
cording to  which  the  toxin  molecule  contains  separate  groups,  "  hapto-
phore"  and  "  toxophore."  The  combination  of  the  former  with
corresponding  groups  in  the  receptive  organs  furnishes  the  condi-
tions necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  production  of  antitoxin  by
these  organs.

Translator's  Note. — Park  and  Atkinson  report  quite  difiPerent  results  in  a
similar  set  of  experiments.  By  treating  horses  with  toxin  neutralized  threefold
(for  guinea-pigs) ,  they  produced  a  considerable  amount  of  antitoxin.  Even  when
the  toxin  was  neutralized  sixfold  there  was  a  slight  production  of  antitoxin.
See  Proceedings  of  the  New  York  Pathological  Society,  1903.


I


Xn.    IS  IT  POSSIBLE  BY  INJECTING  AGGLUTINATED

TYPHOID    BACILLI   TO   CAUSE  THE  PRODUCTION

OF  AN   AGGLUTININ?'


lei^^^^


By  Prof.  M.  Neisser,  Memlier  of  the  Institute,  and  Dr.  R.  Ldbowsei,  fomii
Assigtant  in  the  Bacteriological  Division.

Especially  important  for  Ehrlich's  conception  of  the  chemical
union  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  are  the  experiments  in  which  immu-
nization of  animals  was  attempted  with  neutral,  and  therefore  non-
poisonous,  toxin-antitoxin  mixtures.  Such  experiments,  inaugu-
rated by  Babea,  were  recently  published  by  ICretz,^  among  others.
At  first  it  appeared  to  this  author  that  he  could  really  immunize
with  such  neutral  mixtures,  but  exact  reexamination  convinced  him
of  the  contrary.  Jules  Rchn.^^  also  was  unable  to  obtain  any  results
with  neutralized  toxin-antitoxin  mixtures.  All  of  these  experi-
ments showed  that  Ehrlich's  conception,  that  of  a  chemical  union
of  toxin  and  antitoxin,  most  readily  sufficed  to  explain  the  facts.

In  immunization  with  celbilar  material  the  circumstances  are
far  more  complex,  von  Pungem^  therefore  first  attempted  to
rule  out  the  immunizing  action  of  the  injected  cells  (cn,'throcytes)
by  simultaneously  injecting  the  corresponding  immune  serum  obtained
elsewhere.  This  mixture,  therefore,  was  neutral,  and  caused  no
immunity  reaction.  Our  colleague,  Dr.  Sachs,  has  continued  these
researches  at  the  suggestion  of  Professor  Shield,  and  will  report
thereon  the  following  article.

In  direct  contrast  to  v.  Dungem's  experiments  are  the  results

■  Reprint  from  the  Centralblatt  f.  Baeteriologie  ParoGiteokunde  und  Infec-
tions Krankheiten,  Vol  XXX,  1901,  No  13.  ^

'  R.  Kretz,  Ueber  die  Beziehungen  von  Toxin  und  Antitoxin,  2
Heilkunde,  1901,  No.  4.

*  See  pages  143  et  seq.

*  See  pogea  30  et  seq.


L


AGGLUTINATED  TYPHOID  BACILLI.


147


I


obtained  by  Jules  Rehns '  by  the  injection  of  agglutinated  typhoid
bafiili.  He  found  that  it  was  inunaterial,  so  far  as  effect  was  con-
cerned, whether  he  injected  the  typhoid  bacilli  agglutinated  or  not
agglutinated.  An  entirely  similar  experiment  has  also  been  pub-
lished by  Nicolle  and  Tr^nell.^

Having  previously  and  independently  of  Rehns  busied  ourselves
with  this  question,  and  having  seen  that  it  is  attended  with  con-
siderable experimental  difficulties,  we  again  took  up  the  problem
on  the  publication  of  Reims'  article,  especially  because  of  the  theo-
retical importance  of  the  subject.  Furthermore,  our  previous  experi-
ences had  given  ua  the  impression  that  Rehns'  results  were  not  gen-
erally applicable.

The  technique  of  our  experiments  was  as  follows:  The  typhoid
culture  employed  was  an  old  laboratory  culture  es])eeially  adapted
to  agglutination  exjieriments.  Of  this,  one-day  agar  cultures,  sus-
pended in  physiological  salt  solution  and  killed  by  exposure  for  one
hour  to  eO^-TO"  C,  were  used  for  the  injections.

Tlic  preparation  of  the  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli  was  moefc
carefully  attended  to,  it  being  deemed  especially  imjxirtant  to  fully
satisfy  the  bacilli  with  the  agglutinin.  The  agglutinin  was  a  highly
active  typhoid  agglutinin  derived  from  a  horse,  and  agglutinated
even  in  dilutions  of  1:50,000;  only  in  the  last  experiments  was  a
weaker  serum  used.  The  agglutinin  was  added  to  the  bacteria  in
Buch  amounts  that  about  500-1000  times  the  amount  calculated
to  be  necessary  was  used.  In  order  to  cfTect  as  firm  a  union  as  pos-
sible between  bacilli  and  agglutinin  the  latter  was  allowed  to  act
on  the  bacilli  for  one  hour  at  42°-44''  C,  during  which  time  the  tubes
were  shaken  everj'  ten  minutes  (at  times  with  glass  beads)  in  order
to  loosen  the  larger  clumps  and  secure  the  penetration  of  the  agglutinin
to  the  central  portions  of  the  clumps.  And  in  order  to  be  on  the
Bafe  side,  we  centrifuged  the  bacteria  from  the  first  mixture  and
repeated  the  saturating  process  in  the  same  manner.  After  the
Kcond  saturation  the  mixture  was  again  centrifuged,  filled  up  with
salt  solution,  again  centrifuged,  and  then  washed  several  limes.
The  various  decantations  were  saved  and  tested  for  the  presence
<ot  agglutinin;    the  last  washings  had  to  be  free  from  agglutinin.

Concerning  the  amount  of  injected  bacilli  in  conformity  to  our


'  J  Rehns,  Compt,  rend  de  la  Soc  de  Biol,  1900,  page  1068.

'  Nicolle  et  Trc:'nen,  Compt.  rend,  de  la  Soc.  de  Biol  ,  1900,  pn^  1088.


^^1


148


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


previous  experience  we  took  two  agar  cultures  to  be  the  noi
measure  for  one  rabbit.  Since  small  amounts  of  bacilli  were  lost
through  the  centrifuging,  we  often  employed  somewhat  larger  amounts
for  the  injection  of  the  agglutinated  bacilli;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  the  control  animals  frequently  purposely  received  less  than
two  agar  cultures.  This  was  done  to  meet  the  objection  tliat  the
animals  injected  with  agglutinated  bacilli  had  received  fewer  bacilli
than  the  control  animals.  But  just  in  these  control  animals  which
therefore  received  different  amoimts  it  was  seen  that  a  strict  jmral-
lelism  between  the  amount  of  bacilli  injected  and  the  agglutinating
value  produced  thereby  does  not  exist.  Many  animals  with  smaller
doses  exhibited  higher  agglutinin  values  than  other  animals  with
larger  doses,  as  is  seen  by  the  following  table  I,


Aulutimiini
™«  of  the


K<  culture  Kubcutan.


I


1:320

1-1380
l;12-«)
I:25S0


The  injection  was  usually  subcutaneous,  a  few  times  intrajwri-
toneal.     The  blood  was  abalracled  from  the  ear  vein.

Testing  the  agglutinating  value  of  the  serum  was  accomplish!
according  to  a  method  long  in  use  in  the  bacteriological  division,
follows:

The  serum  dilutions  (in  0.85%  salt  solution)  were  usually  V)
Vm.  '/so.  '/i60i  ^t". ;  finer  gradations  were  not  employed,  as  the]
are  of  no  value  in  measuring  the  agglutination.  The  culture  used
was  a  living  20-hour  agar  culture  which  was  suspended  in  10  cc.
of  bouillon.  To  each  serum  dilution,  whose  volume  was  1  cc.  the
some  amount  of  bacilli  was  added  (1  cc.  bouillon  culture),  so  that
the  total  volume  of  each  specimen  was  2  cc.  Each  specimen  was
then  poured  into  a  little  Petri  dish  and  placed  into  the  thermostat
for  two  hours.  Thereupon  the  specimens  were  examined  with  the
low  power  of  the  dry  objectives.  In  this  way  the  occurrence  of
larger  or  smaller  clumps  is  very  distinctly  seen.     In  the  protocols


AGGLUTINATED  TYPHOID  BACILLI.


149


only  "  complete  agglutination  "  and  the  "  positively  distinct  agglu-
tination "  are  regarded  as  positive;  everything  at  all  doubtful  is
regarded  as  not  agglutinated.

The  first  question  was  on  which  day  following  the  injection  the
maximum  agglutinating  value  was  to  be  expected  in  the  serum  of
the  animals.  Table  II  gives  a  r^um^  of  eight  animals  injected  with
dead  typhoid  bacilli  and  examined  at  different  times.


TABLE  II.


Aggluti-

Num-

nating

Agglutinating  Value  on  the

ber  of

Value  of

the

the
Serum

Injected  Amoimt.

Ani-

mal.

Previous

9th.  10th,

to  the

5th  Day

7th  Day

or

14th  Day

15th  Day

InJMtion

11th  Day

117

1:40

(V  mass  culture  subcut.

1:80

1:320

118

1:40

J      ..

1:320

1:1280

119

0

i     ''

1:80

1:160

134

1:160

2  agar  cultures

1:320

1.640

132

0

J    "         '*

1:640

1:640

110

?

^  mass  culture  +      \
i  agar  culture    f

jV  mass  culture  +      1
}  agar  culture   |

1:640

1:320

1:160

109

1:2560

1:1280

1:320

108

1^  mass  culture  +      1
i  agar  culture   J

1:1280

1:640

1:640

Four  of  these  animals  exhibited  a  lower  value  on  the  7th  (or  on
the  5th)  day  than  on  the  14th  (or  on  the  10th)  day.  The  other  four
animals  showed  a  decrease  or  no  change  at  all  in  their  agglutinating
values  on  the  5th;  9th,  and  14th  (or  5th  and  10th)  days.  Hence
if  on  the  7th  day  we  examined,  as  we  actually  did,  the  animals  which
had  been  injected  only  with  dead  typhoid  bacilli,  we  Were  not  sure
that  we  should  strike  the  maximum  agglutinating  value.  That
we  chose  this  time  nevertheless  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  this  simpli-
fied the  investigations,  and  by  the  further  consideration  that  we
did  not  need  the  highest  possible  values  in  these  control  animals.

The  animals,  however,  in  which  we  were  compelled  to  strike  the
maximum  value  are  seen  by  reference  to  Table  III  to  have  behaved
differently.  Of  15  animals  which  had  been  injected  with  dead,
aggltUinated  typhoid  bacilli,  there  were  only  3  which  still  showed
a  slight  increase  of  agglutinating  value  from  the  7th  to  the  14th
(or  5th-9th)  day.    We  were  therefore  justified  in  withdrawing  the


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


blood  for  examination  of  all  the  animals  on  the  7th  day  after  the
last  injection.


VJueon

Number

A'SiJ^,

Slh  D.y

7ihI»By

BUiD.y

lllh  Dky

laih  D.y

Utb  D.y

laih  D»y

lU

1:80

l:iflO

11.1

1:80

1:160

111

1:80

1:166

1:80

103

1:100

1:160

1:160

104

3.„

1:80

1:80

1:80

106

!1

1:160

1:160

1:160

132

0

0

181

i|-

0

0

182

1:40

1:40

112

118

II

i:ieo

0

1:160

0

1:1G(I

131

0

0

133

1

0

0

\fH

1:20

0

105

H

I:1G0

1:R0

1:80

It  may  further  be  mentioned  that  examinations  were  also  made
on  the  29th  and  39th  day  ofter  the  injection,  in  which  however  a
decrease  of  the  agglutinating  value  was  usually  found.

Investigations  also  showed  that  injections  of  physiological  salt
solution  in  bouillon  caused  no  variation  in  the  normal  agglutinating
values.

A  further  question  was  whether  and  to  what  degree  the  serum
of  normal  untreated  rabbits  possesses  agglutinating  properties  on
typhoid  bacilli.  Out  of  17  rabbits  which  were  examined  for  this  pur-
pose, 10  showed  no  agglutination  in  dilutions  of  1:20,  one  serum
agglutinated  in  the  dilution  1:20,  but  no  higher,  5  others  in  1:40,
but  no  higher,  and  only  one  agglutinated  even  in  a  dilution  of  1 :  160.
(See  Table  IV.)

It  is  therefore  a  rare  exception  for  normal  rabbit  serum  to  still
manifest  agglutinating  powers  on  typhoid  bacilli  In  a  higher  dilution
than  1:40.  It  should  be  remarked  that  in  the  above  table  "0"
has  always  then  been  put  down  when  the  agglutinating  value  of  the
serum  in  a  dilution  of  1 :20"0;  for  the  examinations  began  with  this
dilution.


AGGLUTINATED  TYPHOID  BACILLI.


151


TABLE  IV.
Agolutinatinq  Values  of  Normal  Rabbit  Serum.


Dilation  of  the  Serum.

Number  of  the

AnimAl.

1:20.

1:40.

1:80.

1:160.

1:320.

133

0

0

0

0

0

132

0

0

0

0

0

136

0

0

0

0

0

164

0

0

0

0

0

181

0

0

0

0

0

163

0

0

0

0

0

166

0

0

0

0

0

165

0

0

0

0

0

159

0

0

0

0

0

162

0

0

0

0

0

161

+

0

0

0

0

114

+

+

0

0

0

160

+

+

0

0

0

182

+

+

0

0

0

117

+

+

0

0

0

118

+

+

0

0

0

134

+

+

+

+

0

We  now  come  to  the  experiments  proper.  In  the  first  of  these
(Table  V)  a  series  of  rabbits  was  injected  with  agglutinated  typhoid
bacilli,  while  a  control  series  was  injected  with  the  same  or  smaller
amounts  of  non-agglviinated  bacilli.  This  comparison  shows  a  far
higher  agglutinating  value  of  the  serum  of  the  control  animals  than
that  of  the  other  animals.

TABLE  V.


Agglu-

tinating

Num-

Value

•

Maximum

ber  of

the

of  the
Serum

Injection  of

Aggluti-
nating

Average.

Animal.

previ-
ous to
the  In-

Value.

jection.

Ill

7

1  L

^  mass  culture + \  agar  culture

1:160

"

112

7

ditto

1:160

103

?

.S  2-'=

ditto

1:160

1:147

104

?

9  ao8

ditto

1:80

105

7

1 1^

ditto

1:160

106

7

ditto

1:160

*

108

7

» , #

Non-
aggluti-
nated
typhoid
bacilli

ditto

1:1280

•

109

7

ditto

1:2560

1:1493

110

7

-fi  mass  culture  +  \  agar  culture

1:640

a

152


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


The  next  question  was  whether  rabbits  really  react  at  all  to
injections  of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli;  in  other  words,  whether
the  normal  agglutinating  value  possibly  present  is  at  all  increased
by  injections  of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli.  The  result  was  sur-
prising, as  is  seen  in  Table  VI.  For  while  in  four  animals  no  increase
occurred,  in  two  others  there  was  a  very  slight  increase,  and  in  four
more  the  increase,  though  distinct,  was  tnsigni6cant  in  comparison
with  that  in  six  animals  injected  with  non-agglutinated  typhoid.

TABLE  VI.


Agglu-

M»imum

Number

ylu^'ai

Aggiu.

"to  the
riii«tion.

InJBClioa  of

Vdue"

i-b™«b.

132

0

3

2  agar  cultures  (iiitraperito-
ne&lly)

0

181

0

i

2  agar  cultures

0

116

0

0

182

1:40

i|

ditto

1:40

164

0

i  laaea  culture +  }  agar  culture

1:20

1:106

163

0

1-^

ditto

1:40

166

0

ditto

1:320

11.1

0

1  mass  culture

1  niBHs  culture  + 1  agar  culture

1:160

161

1:20

1:320

114

1:-I0

"^

i  mass  culture

i:ieo

165

0

,\,  luasa  culture  4-    agar  culture

1:640

159

0

i|

i      •'          ■'       +       ■•         •■

l:12S0

162

119

0
0

f  ::    ;;  -  "    -

1:2660
1:160

l;IOre

136

0

3'^

1  agar  culture

1:640

160

1:40

1^  moss  culture +1  agar  culture

i,i2ro

Note. — -1  mass  culture  e<iuflla  about  12  agar  cuiluies.
With  this  the  main  portion  of  the  question  had  been  answered;
for  these  experiments  already  showed  that  the  injection  of  agglutinated
typhoid  bacilli  exerts  an  action  which  quantitatively  is  different
from  that  following  the  injection  of  non-agglutinated  bacilli.  Never-
theless even  the  agglutinated  bacilli,  although  their  injection  is
often  wholly  without  effect,  in  many  cases  still  exert  a  stimulus  on
the  forniation  of  agglutinins  even  though  in  a  slight  degree.  This
is  due  to  individual  peculiarities  of  the  animals  employed,  and  these
we  ha^'e  not  thus  tar  been  able  to  recognize  in  advance.  The  natural
assumption  that  animals  which  already  normally  possess  agglutinins
r^act  more  readily  to  the  injection  of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli


J


AGGLUTINAFED  TYrHOtD  BACILLI.


153


I


I


I


than  do  those  which  do  not  normally  possess  agglutinins  has  not
been  confirmed,  for  out  of  seven  animala  (Table  VI)  in  whose  serum  no
typhoid  agglutinin  could  be  demonstrated  previous  to  treatment,
threedid  not  react  to  the  injection  of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli,  two
reacted  feebly  and  two  very  distinctly.  On  the  other  hand,  out  of  three
animals  in  which,  previous  to  treatment,  a  typhoid  agglutinin  could
be  demonstrated,  two  reacted  distinctly  to  the  injection  of  agglutinated
bacilli  and  one  not  at  all.

Another  assumption  was,  that  in  the  animala  which  had  reacted
but  feebly  or  not  at  all,  an  increase  of  the  sensitiveness  against  agglu-
tinated bacilli  could  be  brought  about  artificially  by  repeated  injec-
tions of  agglutinated  bacilli.  This  also  iiaa  not  been  confirmed.
Thus  three  animals  (Table  VII)  reacted  to  the  second  injection  of  agglu-
tinated bacilli  jast  as  little  as  they  did  to  the  first,  one  animal  reacted
feebly,  as  it  had  done  previously,  and  only  two  animals  {Nos.  13 1  and
133),  which  had  failed  to  react  to  the  first  injection,  reacted  distinctly
to  the  second.  The  protocols  of  these  last  two  animals,  however,  point
out  a  peculiarity.  On  the  first  occasion  these  animals  were  injected
intraperitoneally  and  it  b  noted  that  at  this  time  the  intestine  was
pricked.  The  first  injection  may  therefore  have  mostly  gone  into
the  bowel  and  so  produced  no  effect.  The  second  injection  would
then  have  really  been  the  only  effective  one.  These  two  cases  can-
not therefore  be  used  to  prove  that  by  means  ot  a  previous  injection
of  agglut'mated  bacilli  an  artificial  increase  of  the  sensitiveness  against
a  subsequent  injection  of  agglutinated  bacilli  can  be  effected.  The
previous  injection  of  agglutinated  bacilli,  however,  in  no  way  influences
the  sensitiveness  against  non-agglutinated  bacilli,  ss  is  shown  by
the  four  control  animala  (Table  \1l).

Finally  experiments  were  made  regarding  still  another  assump-
tion. It  was  conceivable  that  the  previous  injection  of  a  certain
amount  of  non-agglutinated  bacilli  would  have  sufficed  to  bring  about
a  sensitiveness  against  a  subsequent  inoculation  with  agglutinated
bacilli.  This  assumption  also  has  not  been  borne  out.  Out  of  five
animals  (Table  VIII)  which,  after  a  previous  injection  of  non-aggluti-
nated typhoid,  received  an  injection  of  agglutinated  typhoid,  two
showed  a  slight  increase  and  three  no  increase  in  agglutinating  value.

It  follows  from  all  these  experiments  that  there  is  a  distinct  dif-
ference between  the  injection  of  agglutinated  and  of  non-agglutinated
typhoid  bacilli.  The  injection  of  non-agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli
is  always  followed  by  an  increase  of  the  agglutinating  power.     Thia


154


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


9


CO        CO


8


o

s


o      »o


CO        ,^        r-4        i-H        i-H        C4

1-1     w      N      w      w      ^


S

I


I


I

a


fo


)UI^  9X{%  o)'  snoLv
-aia  miuog  9q)  jo
jaMOj  8in)«ai)n[88y


I

CD

s

9


3    -5

sp  i


3


3


3


3


Q


3


HO      M       HO


N


pioqdX)  'po;«iii)niS8y


-     s

'in     ^     ^     ^


— »       /— —

'aoi^odfaj  puooog
oq)     o)    BnotAaia

o

o

5     o

o

o     S

8

•  •

•  •

1-1

8

•  *

'noil oaf uj  96JIJ
aq;  a»4i«  anpaA  *'«!
-)«unni88Y  uiniuixtiK

o

o

§     o

o

8    §

8

8

1-4

8

»-H           1-H

1-1

-*

-

1

o


2


i  £

I       I      =


08

g

•c

.s


+

3


4-

£

3

s


o


o


N        W        N        W        W        H»      ^

p;oqdiC)  'po^vapnfSSy


po^vai^niaay


-iny  9X{%  JO  joqmnf^


00C000C0C0^OOi-ii-i


AGGLUTINATED  TYPHOID   BACILU.


■nqiJSljD9H[«A»n!

1:1280
1:320

1:160
1:320
1:320

1

§      1

1     1        ■      ■      •

vqi'o)  snoiA^U  tint

1:540
1:640

1:80
1:640
1:320

111  "le  '"VA.  «°!

11         1^1

1
1

p8i,«i,nHfa«.«iN

s  =    ?  =  ?

b

Til
■3-9

Twicewithaggi  typhoid
(See  Ta^VII)

ditto

ditto

ditto

jBBOj  «niiBB!jni»v

1     o         o     o      ?

■ISHZTuyaq,  jojsqmnN

=  S    5  =  s

COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN"  IMMUNITY.

increase  is  usually  very  great  and  only  rarely  slight.  The  injection
of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli,  provided  that  attention  is  paid  to  a
sufficient  saturation  with  agglutinin,  is  frequently  followed  by  no
reaction,  often  by  a  slight  reaction,  and  rarely  by  a  marked  increase
of  the  agglutinating  value.  This  reacting  power  depends  on  the
individuality  of  tlie  animal  and  stands  in  no  relation  to  the  original
agglutinating  value,  nor  can  it  be  influenced  artifically.  Furthermore,
aa  we  learned  from  a  special  experiment,  it  is  immaterial  whether
the  immune  serum  used  to  agglutinate  the  typhoid  bacilU  is  derived
from  the  same  or  from  another  animal  species.

The  explanation  of  these  facts  is  not  difficult  provided  one  pro-
ceeds on  Ehrlich's  theor\'.  According  to  this  the  agglutinin  consists
of  thrust-off  cell-receptore.  As  a  result  of  their  seizure  by  the
bacterial  receptors  they  have  been  produced  in  excess  and  give
off  to  the  circulation.  They,  therefore,  possess  a  definite  relation
to  the  corresponding  bacterial  receptors.  Hence  when  we  fully
saturate  typhoid  bacilli  with  agglutinin,  we  caase  the  bactedal
receptors  to  be  occupied,  and  are  then  aa  little  able  to  cause  a  reaction
with  these  bacteria  as  we  are  to  cut  with  a  sword  in  its  scabbard.

If  then,  in  spite  of  this,  certain  animals  react  to  such  "occupied"
typhoid  bacilli,  we  shall  have  to  assume  that  these  animab  possess
the  power  to  dissolve  the  combination  of  agglutinin  and  bacterial
receptor  and  thus  set  the  latter  free.

This  action,  however,  never  proceeds  to  the  full  extent.

Incomparably  more  important,  and,  as  it  appears  to  us,  explicable
onlj-  with  the  aid  of  Ehrlich's  chemical  %-iews,  is  the  main  phenomenon,
that  in  many  animals  no  reaction  whatever  follows  the  inoculation  of
agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli;  that  therefore  in  many  eases  it  is
possible  to  dispose  of  the  bacterial  group  giving  rise  to  the  agglutinin,
by  causing  this  group  to  be  occupied  by  the  corresponding  agglutinin.

ScBsEquENT  Note.

R.  Pfeiffer  and  Friedberger,'  through  recent  experiments  on  cholera  vibrios
and  cholera  amboceptors,  have  obtained  refniita  which  are  in  gratilying  accord
with  those  obtained  by  v.  n\ingem,  M.  Neiaser  and  Lubowski,  and  Sachs.*
In  earlier  experiments  R.  Pfeiffer  '  had  found  that  the  bacterial  subatanc©
dissolved  in  the  peritoneum  through  (he  influence  of  (he  cholera  ir

'  11.  Pfeiffer  u,  Friedljerger,  Rerl.  klin.  Wochenachr,,  1902,  No.  '.

'  See  the  following  article.

'R,  Pfeiffer,  Deutsche  med.  Wochenschr.,  1901,  Nos.  fO-61.


AGGLUTINATED  TYPHOID  BACILLI.  157

usually  still  excite  an  extraordinarily  strong  immunity  reaction,  a  phenomenon
seemingly  in  contradiction  to  Ehrlich's  theory.  Further  experiments,  however,
showed  that  when  very  high  doses  of  an  active  cholera  goat  serum  were  em-
ployed, the  immunizing  action  was  almost  entirely  lost.  Of  especial  importance
for  future  methodical  investigations  of  this  kind  is  the  fact  determined  by  these
authors,  that  a  real  saturation  of  the  receptors  of  the  cholera  vibrios  requires
a  surprisingly  high  multiple  of  the  amount  of  immune  serum  sufficient  to  dis-
solve the  same  amount  of  cholera  vibrios.  7500  times  this  amount  does  not
yet  satisfy  all  the  affinities  and  it  requires  enormous  doses,  up  to  3-4  million
times,  to  completely  saturate  all  the  receptors.


XIII.     IMMUNIZING    EXPERIMENTS    WITH    ERYTHRO-
CYTES  LADEN  WITH  IMMUNE  BODY.i

By  Dr.  Hans  Sachs,  Assistant  at  the  Institute.

The  interesting  experiments  of  v.  Dungem^  have  furnished
further  proof  that  the  same  group  (receptor)  of  the  blood-celb  which
in  haemolysis  combines  with  the  specific  immune  body  causes  the
production  of  this  immune  body  within  the  organism,  v.  Dungem
injected  rabbits  with  ox  blood  to  which  a  plentiful  amount  of  an
immune  body  (obtained  from  rabbits  by  immunizing  with  ox  blood)
had  been  added,  and  found,  as  was  to  be  expected,  on  the  basis  of
the  side-chain  theory,  that  animals  so  treated  failed  to  produce
any  inmiune  body  whatever.

The  results  of  the  investigations  of  M.  Neisser  and  Lubowski^
show  that  the  complete  inactivity  of  such  saturated  receptors —
agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli — in  the  animal  body  is  not  at  all  a  general
rule,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  a  moderate  development  of  the
immunity  reaction  occurs  even  with  such  mixtures  and  that  this
depends  on  certain  individual  differences.  Hence  at  the  suggestion
of  Prof.  Ehrlich  I  have  extended  the  experiments  of  v.  Dungern
and  undertaken  blood-immunization  experiments  on  a  large  series
of  animals.  The  results  obtained  lead  to  certain  modifications  of
von  Dungern's  conclusions.

The  method  of  these  experiments  must  be  guided  by  two  prin-
ciples. To  begin,  it  is  important  that  the  receptors  of  the  injected
blood  are  reaUy  saturated^  for  even  a  very  slight  free  residue  might
effect  an  immunity  reaction  in  the  animal  body.  And  yet  it  is  es-
sential to  remove  any  possible  excess  of  immune  body^  because  this

*  Reprint  from  the  Centralblatt  fiir  Bacteriologie,  Parasitenkunde  und  In-
fection Krankheiten,  Vol.  XXX,  1901,  No.  13.

'v.  Dungem,  Muench.  med.  Wochenschr.,  1900,  No.  20.     See  also  page  56l
'  See  the  preceding  article,  page  146.

158


IMMUNIZING  EXPERIMENTS  WITH  ERYTHROCYTES.        159

could  passively  reappear  in  the  serum  of  the  injected  animal  and  so
simulate  an  active  new  formation  of  immune  body.  In  accordance
with  this  the  experiments  were  made  as  follows :  Ox  blood  was  treated
with  an  excess  of  inactive  serum  from  a  rabbit  which  had  been  im-
munized with  ox  blood,  the  mixture  digested  at  37-40**  C.  for  half
an  hour  and  then  centrifuged.  The  decanted  fluid  was  then  tested
for  its  content  of  inmiune  body.  Only  when  this  test  proved  posi-
tive, and  it  could  therefore  be  assumed  that  all  receptors  had  been
saturated,  was  the  blood  so  treated  employed  for  injections.  But
it  was  previously  repeatedly  washed  with  physiological  salt  solution
in  order  to  remove  all  free  immune  body.  Finally  the  centrifuged
sediment  was  made  up  to  its  original  volume.  The  course  of  such  an
experiment  is  illustrated  in  the  following:

100  cc.  ox  blood  are  mixed  with  25  cc.  inactive  immune  serum
of  a  rabbit  which  has  been  inmiimized  with  ox  blood.  Of  this  im-
mune serum,  0.0025  cc.  suffice,  when  complement  is  added,  to  just
completely  dissolve  1  cc.  5%  ox  blood;  the  amount  employed,  there-
fore, represents  five  times  the  amoimt  necessary  to  dissolve  the
100  cc.  ox  blood.  After  the  mixture  has  remained  in  the  thermostat
for  half  an  hour  it  is  filled  up  to  300  cc.  with  0.85%  salt  solution  and
centrifuged.  The  first  decantation  is  tested  by  adding  it  in  decreas-
ing quantities  to  1  cc.  5%  ox  blood  plus  0.4  cc.  normal  rabbit  serum
(as  complement).

The  following  results  are  obtained :

1st.  Decantation:  1.5  cc.  complete  hemolysis.

1.0  cc.  almost  complete  haemolysis.
0.5  cc.       ''  "  ''

0.25  strong  haemolysis.
0.1    no  "

From  this  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  blood-cell  receptors  are
incapable  of  further  absorption;  in  other  words,  that  they  have  been
saturated.

The  second  decantation  tested  in  this  same  manner  yields  the
following  result :

2d.  Decantation :  3.0  cc.  strong.

2.0  *'  moderate.
1.0  "  little.
0.5  '*  trace.

It  therefore  contains  only  very  little  immune  body.


160  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

The  blood  is  once  more  washed  and  centrifuged  and  then  filled  uii
to  100  CO.  The  blood-cells  thiia  saturated  with  immune  body  are  ia-
jerted  in  rabbits  intraperit-oneally,  each  animal  receiving  25  cc.  of
the  mixture.

At  the  same  time  control  animals  are  injected  with  the  sarae
amounts  of  normal  ox  blood.

Usually  on  the  tenth  day  after  the  injection,  as  this  had  shown
itself  the  most  favorable  time,  serum  was  withdrawn,  inactivated  and
tested  for  Its  content  of  immune  body  by  adding  it  in  decreasing
quantities  to  1  cc.  5%  ox  blood  plus  sufficient  complement.  Either
rabbit  serum,  0.4-0.5  cc,  or  guinea-pig  serum,  0.1-0.15  cc,  served
as  complement,  for  these  are  equally  well  adapted  for  this  purpose.
The  results  of  the  experiments  are  as  follows :

Out  of  eight  rabbits  injected  intraperitoneally  with  ox  blood
saturated  with  immune  body,  only  three  corresponded  to  the  requirements
which  follow  from  von  Dungem's  results.  Their  serum,  tested  exactly
like  the  immune  body,  failed  even  in  amounts  of  1.0  cc  to  produce
a  trace  of  hemolysis,  whereas  when  the  serum  of  the  corresponding
control  animalM  was  tested,  0,025  and  0,05  cc,  respectively  sufiiced
to  effect  complete  hiemolj'sis.

These  results  are  approached  very  closely  by  the  serum  of  a
fourth  animal.  The  hasmolytic  action  of  this  serum  compared  to
that  of  the  serum  of  the  corresponding  control  animal  wag  1 :  <  135,
i.e.,  was  exceedingly  slight.  Tlie  remaining  four  rabbits  had  pro-
duced an  immune  body  in  greater  or  less  amounts,  though  this  amount
was  always  far  less  than  that  produced  by  the  corresponding  control
animals.  When  the  absence  of  a  zone  of  marked  complete  solution
rendered  it  impossible  to  make  an  exact  determination,  the  compari-
son of  the  immune  body  values  of  the  sera  in  parallel  tests  was  accom-
plished by  comparison  of  tubes  whose  colors  corresponded.  The
amount  of  immune  body  possessed  by  these  animals  compared  to  that
of  the  corresponding  control  animals  was  aa  follows:

(1)  1:5;  (2)  1:7;  (3)  1:10;  (4)  1:10.

I  have  supplemented  these  experiments  with  a  smaller  series  of
experiments  made  with  intravenous  injections.  In  these,  of  course,
very  much  smaller  amounts  of  blood  were  used  for  injection  because
when  the  blood-cells  loaded  nithimmune  body  are  injected  directly  into
the  circulation,  they  suffer  hemolysis  through  the  action  of  the  oom-


IMMUNIZING  EXPERIMENTS  WITH  ERYTHROCYTES.


Ifll


plement  present  in  the  serum,  causing  serious  symptoms  or,  with  larger
amounts  of  blood,  fatal  results.  This  accords  with  the  phenomena
observed  by  Rehna '  when  he  injected  rabbits  which  had  beeu  immu-
nized with  ox  blood,  intravenously  with  normal  ox  blood.  Only  two  of
the  animals  1  empioyeti,  namely  those  injected  with  7-S  cc.  blood,  re-
mained alive  sufficiently  long.  In  one  of  these  only  traces  of  immune
body  were  found  in  the  seriyn,  whereas  the  serum  of  the  other  animal
efFected  complete  solution  in  doses  of  0.05  cc,  In  the  serum  of  a
control  animal  the  limit  of 'complete  solution  was  0.01  cc.  These
few  experiments  confirm  the  reaulta  obtained  with  intraperitoneal
injections,  (hat  blood-cells  saturated  with  immune  body  have  not  by  any
meam  always  hat  the  power  to  excite  a  certain  degree  oj  immunity  reeictwn
in  the  orgaTtistn.

Our  results,  therefore,  show  that  in  half  of  the  animals,  in  con-
formity with  the  results  obtained  by  von  Dimgern,  the  power  of  the
blood  to  caa'^e  an  immunity  reaction  is  lost,  owing  to  the  blocking  of
that  particular  group  in  the  blood-cell  which  unites  with  the  immune
body.  In  the  remaining  cases,  however,  the  specific  immune  body
was  produced,  though  always  in  decidedly  less  amount,  since  only
a  fifth  to  a  tenth  part  of  the  amoimt  appeared  that  was  produced  by
the  control  animals.  This  apparently  unfavorable  portion  of  the  ex-
periment shows  at  least  that  saturation  with  immune  body  exerts  a  marked
restricting  influence.  These  results  agree  with  those  obtained  by
Neisser  and  Lubowski  with  injections  of  agglutinated  typhoid  bacilli.

Furthermore,  like  Neisser  and  Lubowski,  in  an  animal  which  had
not  reacted  to  the  injection  of  saturated  blood,  we  found  after  injec-
tion of  the  same  amount  of  normal  blood  that  an  immune  body  of
considerable  power  had  develojied  in  the  serum.  The  complete
Bolvent  dose  for  I  cc.  5%  ox  blood  amounted  to  0.005  cc.  serum  These
last  experiments,  which  have  been  done  on  a  much  larger  scale  by
Neisser  and  Lubowski  on  typhoid  baciUi,  indicate  that  the  failure  of
antibodies  to  form  is  not  due  to  possible  individual  differences  in  the
reading  capacity  of  the  organbm.  Considering  the  uniform  appear-
ance of  immune  body  in  rabbits  treated  with  ox  blood  such  an  assump-
tion would  have  lacked  all  probabiUty.

That  portion  of  the  experiments  in  which  the  injection  of  saturated
blood-cells  was  borne  by  the  animals  without  producing  any  reaction,
can  be  regarded,  as  has  been  done  by  von  Dungem,  as  a  complete  demon-

'  Relma.  Comp,  rend  de  la  Soo.  biol..  1891.  No.  12.


162  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

stration  tluU  the  groups  excttmg  tke  production  of  immunity  are  actuaUi/
the  same  as  those  which  in  haemolysis  anchor  the  immune  body.  We
have  seen,  however,  that  there  is  not  always  an  absence  of  reaction
and  that  even  the  injection  of  the  same  saturated  blood,  which  in  one
animal  fails  to  cause  a  production  of  immune  body,  is  followed  in
another  animal  by  a  certain  low-grade  production  of  immune  body.
The  cause  of  these  phenomena  can  only  be  that  certain  animals
possess  the  indi^-idual  capacity  to  anchor  the  saturated  receptors  in
Hpite  of  this  saturation.  We  do  not  know  the  mechanism  of  thia
action.  Two  factors  in  particular  come  into  consideration;  a  part
of  the  immune  body  may  perhaps  be  destroyed  in  the  animal  body
through  special  agencies  (oxidation?)  and  the  receptors  thereby  set
free.  It  is  also  possible,  however,  without  assuming  a  destruction  of
immune  body  to  explain  the  phenomenon  in  the  sense  of  Ehrlich's
views,  by  assuming  a  higher  affinily  oj  the  tissue  receptors  present  in
tlie  animal  body,  which  receptors  tben  would  be  able  to  break  up  the
union  of  blood-cell  receptors  and  immune  body,  and  draw  the  blood-
cell  receptors  unto  themselves.'

Whichever  of  these  explanations  is  the  correct  one,  our  experiments
certainly  show  one  thing,  that  the  dissolution  of  the  blood-cell  receplflr
combination  is  never  a  complete  one.  Merely  a  portion  of  the  groups
is  concerned,  for  only  by  this  partial  dissolution  is  the  fact  {determined
by  Neisser  and  Lubowski,  as  well  as  by  us),  to  be  explained  that  a
very  alight  degree  of  immunity  reaction  is  produced  by  the  injection  of
saturated  receptors.

Hence  even  in  the  cases  running  an  apparently  unfavorable
course,  only  a  part  always  of  the  receptors  exert  their  action.  This
portion  of  the  experiments  may  therefore  also  be  used  as  a  sup-
port for  the  side-chain  theory.

'  A  Himilar  assumption  must  be  made  in  order  to  explaEn  certain  forms  of
Over-sensitiveneBS  studied  particularly  by  v  Behriitg.  in  which,  despite  a  large
excess  of  antitoxin,  very  small  dosea  of  toxin  cause  death.  The  most  ready
explanation  is  that  here,  in  contru-st  to  tlio  bchsivior  iii  normal  animals,  the
toxinophile  receptors  po.Hsess  a  pathologically  increased  avidity  by  which  they
are  enabled  to  break  up  the  neutral  toxia-antitoxin  mixture  (which  cannot  be
broken  up  by  normal  cells)  and  take  up  the  toxin  thus  set  free.


XIV.  CONCERNING  THE  ESCAPE  OF  ILEMOGLOBIN
FROM  BLOOD  CELLS  HARDENED  WITH  CORROSIVE
SUBLIMATE.i

V

By  Hans  Sachs,  Assistant  at  the  Institute.

The  following  study  was  undertaken  on  reading  the  results  of
investigations  carried  on  by  Matthes^  on  the  r61e  of  the  immune
body  (amboceptor)  in  haemolysis.  The  peculiarity  of  his  very  inter-
esting results  demands  a  thorough  study  of  the  factors  concerned.

The  facts  there  brought  out  have  been  confirmed  by  us,  but  the
results  of  our  study  have  led  us  to  regard  these  facts  in  an  entirely
different  light.  As  a  result  of  nimierous  earlier  experiences  with
pepsin,  pancreatin  and  papain  we  can  confirm  the  observation  that
normal  as  well  as  sensitized  red  blood-cells  (i.e.  cells  loaded  with
immune  body)  cannot  be  attacked  by  digestive  ferments.^  With
digestive  experiments  with  pepsin  and  pancreatin,  to  be  sure,  the
difficulty  exists  that  the  amounts  of  HCl  and  alkali  respectively  which
represents  the  optimum  of  action,  are  in  themselves  not  indifferent
for  the  blood-cells.  With  these  ferments  one  is  therefore  forced  to
work  under  relatively  unfavorable  conditions.

Matthes  killed  the  blood-cells  by  means  of  Hayem's  solution
(which,  as  is  well-known,  contains  i%  mercuric  chloride)  and
found  that  blood-ceUs  so  treated  were  readily  dissolved  by  means  of  active
pancreas  fluid.  These  fixed  blood-ceils,  which  are  no  longer  sus-
ceptible to  the  destructive  action  even  of  distilled  water,  are  dissolved
by  the  specific  hsemolytic  serum  and  even  by  their  ovm  normal  serum.


*  Reprint  from  the  Muenchener  med  Wochenschr  ,  1902,  No.  5.

'M.  Matthes,  Experimenteller  Beitrag  zur  Frage  der  H&molyse,  Muench.
med.  Wochenschr.,  1902,  No   1.

*  According  to  recent  investigations  of  Dr.  Morgenroth,  the  interesting  intes-
tinal ferment,  erepsin,  described  by  Cohnheim  and  by  him  kindly  placed  at  our
disposal,  is  also  not  able  to  attack  sensitized  blood-cells.

163


164


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY,


Although  we  can  entirely  confinn  these  statements,  we  cannot  accept
Matthes'  view,  according  to  which  the  solution  of  the  fixed  blood-
cells  by  pancreatin  is  conceived  as  a  digestion,  the  Hayeni  solution
acting  somewiiat  like  an  immune  body.  The  striking  fact  that
the  fixed  blood-cells  dissolve  even  in  their  own  serum  appeared
to  us  rather  to  be  the  result  of  the  union  of  the  mercuric  chloride  !
(which  adhered  to  the  blood-cella  and  prevented  this  solution)  with  ,
the  albumin  of  the  serum.  The  experiments  made  in  this  direc-
tion at  the  suggestion  of  Prof.  Ehrlich  have  completely  confirmed
this  view.

Following  the  procedure  of  Matthes,  I  eniploj-ed  rabbit  blood
which,  freed  from  serum,  was  mixed  with  Hayem's  solution  in  the
proportion  of  1:4.  After  standing  a  short  time,  the  blood  wae  cen-  .
trifuged  and  then  washed  three  or  four  times  with  0.85%  salt  solu-
tion. Finally  a  5%  suspenson  of  the  fixed  blood-cells  in  .85%
salt  solution  was  prepared.  The  corresponding  control  was  made
with  normal  5%  rabbit  blood.

In  the  experiments  1  cc.  of  the  5%  blood  mixtures  was  used;  the
fluid,  after  the  addition  of  the  reagent  being  made  up  to  2  cc.  with
physiological  salt  solution.     It  was  found  that  nol  only  fresh  rabbit
serum,  but  even  rabbit  serum  whU-h  had  been  inactivated  by  half  an
hour's  heating  to  56°  C,  as  well  as  rabbit  serum  which  had  been  diluted
with  leit  rohimes  of  physiological  saU  solution  and  then  boiled  one  hour,
was  still  able  to  cau.se  solution  of  the  fixed  rabbit  blood-cells;    0.075
cc.  serum  causing  complete  and  almost  instantaneous  solution.     In
this  case  the  toxic  action  of  the  serum  can  hardly  be  thought  of.
The  experiment  indicated  rather  that  other  kinds  of  influences  are
the  cause  of  this  curious  phenomenon.     If  the  conceplion  is  correct
that  we  are  dealing  with  a  combination  of  the  mercurj'  with  the
serum,  it  should  be  possible  also,  with  other  means  which  abstract
the  mercury,  to  cause  a  solution  of  blood-cells  fixed  with  Hayem'a
solution.     As  a  matter  of  fact  this  can  very  easily  be  done.     I  chose  i
potassium  iodide  and  sodium  hyposulphite  for  this  test  and  found  ]
that  extremely  small  amounts  of  these  substances  cause  immediate  '
solution  of  the  fixed  blood.     0.00075  cc.  of  a  20%.  KI  solution  in  ]
physiological  salt  solution  or  0.00025  cc.  of  a  similar  hyposulphite  I
Bolution  sufficed  to  completely  dissolve  1  cc.  of  our  5%  fixed  blood   ■
suspension.'     This   positively   shows   thai   the  function   of   the   serum


'  With  normal  rabbit  blood,  1000-2000  times  the  a
■ulpbito  Bolution  slill  acts  itidifFerently.


it  oE  Kl  or  of  bypc^


ESCAPE  OF  HEMOGLOBIN  FROM  BLOOD  CKLLS.


165


I


I
I


•


albumin  in  the  experiments  viade  by  Matlhea  is  that  which  wv  assumed.
It  must  therefore  be  concluded  that  the  blood-cells  treated  with
Hayem's  solution  do  not  dissolve  in  water  because  the  mercuric
chloride  with  which  they  have  combined  prevents  the  escape  of  the
hiemoglobin.  The  came  of  this  may  be  that  the  soluble  substances,
e.g.  the  hiemoglobin,  form  an  insoluble  combination  with  the  mer-
curic chloride;  it  is  sufficient,  however,  to  assume  that  the  limiting
membrane  of  the  diacoplasma  becomes  denser  through  the  deposited
mercury  salt  and  so  prevents  the  diffusion  of  the  blood  coloring-
matter.  Be  this  as  it  may,  certainly  all  agencies  which  break  up  the
mercury  combination  will  cause  an  immediate  solution  of  the  h^e-
raoglobin.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  discoplasma,  which  in  the
living  state  hinders  the  diffusion  of  haemoglobin,  has  been  killed
by  the  subliniate  treatment.

From  this  it  is  easily  seen  that  the  solution  of  the  fixed  blood
by  means  of  pancreatin  as  it  is  described  by  Matthes,  is  not  to  be
r^arded  as  a  species  of  digestion.  Every  suth  ferment  solution
contains  enough  albumin  to  explain  the  action  according  to  our
view.  I  was  able  to  confirm  this  by  the  experiment  in  which  the
hjemolytic  action  (observed  by  ua  also)  of  neutral  pepsin  and  pan-
creatin solutions  was  exerted  in  Uke  manner  when  the  solution  had
previously  been  heated  to  95'  C.  for  1  hour.

In  conclusion  it  may  be  remarked  that,  after  fixation  with  }%
mercuric  chloride  solution  in  phy.siological  salt  solution  instead  of
with  Hayem's  fluid,  the  blood-cells  behaved  in  exactly  similar  fashion,
&s  was  a  priori  to  be  expected.  The  control  tests  made  at  the  same
time  with  normal  blood  gave  negative  results  in  all  the  experimenta.
On  the  other  hand  with  aoUmin,  a  substance  which  dissolves  normal
blood  even  in  enormous  dilutions,  haemolysis  of  fixed  blood-cella
could  not  be  effected  encn  though  large  doses  toire  emphyed.  In  this
substance  the  necessary  albumin  is  wanting  and  the  dead  blood-
cells  are  no  longer  vulnerable  to  the  action  of  the  blood  poisou.

To  sum  up,  we  may  say  that  in  the  blood-cells  hardened  with
Hayem's  solution  it  is  merely  the  cJiemicalh/  bound  nercuric  chloride
which  hinders  the  escape  of  the  h/rmoglobln.  All  agents  which  are
capable  of  attrofting  this  saU  to  themselves,  i.e.  to  "  de-harden  "  the
blood-cells,  cause  the  immediate  escape  oj  htrmotflobin.

Hence,  although  the  observations  of  Matthes  are  extremely  intei^
esting  in  themselves,  they  possess  no  value  tor  the  doctrine  of  hte-
molysis.     On  the  other  hand  it  would  seem  as  though  they  might


166  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

be   applied    to    a    method    of    detecting    smallest    amoimts    of
mercury.

Subsequent  Addition. — In  a  recent  communication  (Muench.  med.  Wo-
chenschr.  1902,  No.  17)  Matthes  has  completely  confirmed  the  results  of  our
experiments  so  far  as  mammalian  blood-cells  are  concerned.  The  fact  that
other  species  of  blood,  such  as  frog  blood  studied  by  Matthes,  after  hardening
with  mercuric  chloride,  do  not  give  up  their  ha>mogIobin  even  in  fluids  rich  in
albumin  does  not  affect  our  view,  but  only  points  to  a  high  degree  of  hardening
of  the  frog-blood  stromata  which  does  not  permit  the  escape  of  the.hsmofi^obin
even  in  the  presence  of  substances  abstracting  mercury.  We  did  not  deny
that  the  stromata  could  be  digested  by  means  of  proteolytic  ferment.  Our
objection  was  directed  only  to  regarding  the  escape  of  hsemoglobin,  an  indi*
cation  of  a  digestion,  or  of  digesting  complements.


I


I

I


XV-  A  CONTRIBUTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  POISON
OF  THE  COMMON   GARDEN  SPIDER.>

By  Dr.  Hans  Sachs,  AssistBiDt  Bt  the  Institute.

The  studies  in  hsemolysis,  constantly  keeping  pace  with  the  develop-
ment of  the  doctrine  of  immunity,  have  siiown-that  besides  the  usiial
blood  poisons  sharply  defined  chemically,  there  is  another  group
of  hsemolysina  of  animal  or  vegetable  origin  which  exert  their  damag-
ing influence  like  the  toxins,  by  combining  with  certain  definite
groups  of  the  protoplasm.  Included  in  this  are  snake  venom,  numer-
ous bacterial  secretions  such  as  tetanolysin  and  ataphylolysin,  tox-
albumins  of  higher  planta,  such  as  crotin.  Besides  this  there  ia
the  endless  series  of  htemolysina,  both  normal  and  those  produced
at  will  by  immunization,  which  are  found  in  the  blood  serum.

Of  the  highest  importance  for  the  conception  of  the  similarity
of  these  blood  poisons  was  the  fact  that  only  such  blood-cdls  are  sat-
sitive  to  these  hcemolysins  which  are  cajxibU  of  anchoring  them.  This
fundamental  law,  which  waa  first  recognized  and  clearly  formulated
by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth^  has  constantly  been  confirmed,  espe-
cially in  the  study  of  the  serum  hiemolysins  artificially  produced,
-4s  a  result  of  this  the  mode  of  action  of  these  poisoTis  as  well  as  of  the
toxins  has  been  concriivd  from  the  standpoint  of  tlie  side-chain  theory.
"  •  •  ♦  the  prerequisite  and  the  cause  of  the  poisonous  action  in
all  these  cases  is  the  presence  in  the  blood-cells  of  appropriate  receptore
(side  chains)  which  fit  into  the  haptophore  groups  of  the  toxin;  con-
versely, therefore,  there  is  an  intimate  connection  between  natural
immunity  and  the  absence  of  receptors."  (Ehrlich.)

It  is  evident  that  the  study  of  the  combining  relations  of  the
toxin-like  blood  poi.-^oas  is  of  great  significance  for  the  study  of  the


chemischeii  FliysoloKie  u.  Fatbologie,  Vol  II,


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

causes  of  this  poisonous  action.  Such  a  study,  moreover,  is  calcu-
lated to  extend  our  knowledge  of  the  receptors  and  their  physio-
logical distribution  in  the  animal  kingdom.  While  examining  an
extract  derived  from  the  common  garden  spider  (Epeira  diadema)
I  found  in  it  a  hicmolysin  which  showed  itself  particuiariy  well
adapted  to  researches  in  this  direction.

The  description  of  a  complete  experiment  will  give  an  idea  of
the  method  of  obtaining  and  testing  tliis  poison.

A  garden  spider  weighing  1.4  graxns  is  rubbed  up  with  5  cc.  toluol  water
containing  10%  NaCl  and  the  fluid  kept  iit  the  refrigerator  for  twentf-four
hours.  Then  water  ia  added  to  make  the  total  volume  25  cc.  and  the  mixture
filtered  (or  centrifuged).  The  ha;molytic  experimentB  are  made  in  the  uaual
manaer  with  thia  cloudy,  brownish-yellow  filtrate.  Decreasing  amounts  of
the  poison  solution  are  placed  in  a  series  of  test-tubes,  each  of  which  is  then
filled  up  to  1.0  cc.  with  physiological  (0.85%)  salt  solution.  Elach  tube  now
receives  one  drop  of  undiluted  blood  or  I  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension  of  blood  in
physiological  salt  solution.  The  specimens  are  kept  in  the  incubator  at37°C.
for  two  boura,  and  then  in  tbe  refrigerator  until  the  following  day  when  the
amount  of  solution  is  determined.  The  blood  employed  was  always  centrifuged
and  washed  in  order  to  remove  the  adherent  scriun  and  go  exclude  any  possible
disturbance  from  that  source.

The  Aracknolysin,  as  we  may  designate  the  active  principle  of
the  poison  solution,  causes  solution  of  the  sensitive  blood-cells  even
at  room  temperature;  when  present  in  certain  proportions,  solu-
tion occurs  almost  instantaneously.  In  this  respect,  arachnolj'sin  is
somewhat  analogous  to  snake  venom,  while  it  differs  therein  from
the  hsemolysins  of  blood  serum,  in  which,  as  is  well  known,  actual
hiemolysis  Ls  preceded  by  a  longer  or  shorter  period  of  incubation.
The  more  exact  determinations  on  different  species  of  blood  were
made  in  the  usual  manner  and  yielded  the  results  shown  in  the  fol-
lowing table.  The  amounts  of  arachnolysin  given  in  the  table  refer
to  the  original  solution,  containing  28%  of  spider  substance.

,ls  can  be  seen  from  Ike  table  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  hiemolysin
of  extraordinary  power,  the  action  of  which  on  the  individual  species
of  blood,  however,  is  very  variable.  Thus  a  number  of  species  of  blood
are  destroyed  even  in  dilution  of  1 : 1(K)0  or  1 :  10000  (this  refers  to
the  original  poison  solution) ;  others  remain  imaffected  even  by  large
amounts  of  poison.  Next  to  rat  blood,  the  most  sensitive  was
rabbit  blood,  for  0.(XX)1  cc.  of  the  original  solution,  i.e.,  0.QQQ028  g.
spider  substance,  sufficed  to  completely  dissolve  0.05  cc.  blood
C=200,-000,000  blood-cells).     A  garden  spider  weighing  1.4  g.  there-


J


THE  POISON  OF  THE  COMMON  GARDEN  SPIDER.  169


ArAehnolsrBin.

Hsmolsrtio  Aotion  on  the  Blood  of

Rabbit.

Rat.

Mouse.

Man.

00.

1/1000         1.0
0.75
0.5
0.35
0.25
0.15

1/10000      1.0
0.75
0.5

complete

almost  complete
strong

complete

almost  complete
Strong

complete
<i

almost  complete

do.

it

strong
tt

complete
tt

ft

almost  complete

do.

moderate
tt

little
trace

Arftchnoljmin.

Hamolytio  Action  on  the  Blood  of

Ox.

Goose.

Quinea-
Pi«.

Horse.

Sheep.

Doc

CO.

1/1000         1.0
0.75
0.5
0.35
0.25
0.15

1/10000      1.0
0.75
0.5

complete

almoet  complete

strong

little

trace

0

str
mod

ong

erate

<

0

0

0

0

No  haemolysis  even  with
larger  amounts

fore  contains  sufficient  poison  to  completely  destroy  2.5  liters  rabbit
blood.  Remembering  that  only  an  extremely  small  part  of  the
spider's  weight  is  made  up  by  the  active  poisonous  constituent,
and  even  assuming  that  the  content  of  arachnolysin  amounts  to  1%,
we  see  that  this  enormous  activity  indicates  thai  the  arachnolysin  belongs
to  the  doss  of  blood  poisons  which  exert  a  powerful  action  after  the  manr
ner  of  the  toxins.

The  same  is  indicated  by  the  marked  instabilty  of  the  active
principle.  Heat  readily  destroys  the  arachnolysin,  although  a  higher
degree  is  necessary  than  for  other  hemolysins.  Heating  to  56^  C.
for  40  minutes  does  not  affect  the  poison  solution,  and  at  60^  C.
only  a  very  slight  reduction  of  action  is  noticed.  Complete  destruc-
tion does  not  occur  until  the  poison  is  heated  to  70^-72®  C.  for  40
minutes.  Arachnolysin  is  easily  preserved  by  the  addition  of  glyc-
erine, showing  no  reduction  in  activity  even  after  months.

Experiments,  designed  to  show  whether  normal  sera  possess  an
inhibiting  action  on  hsemolysis  due  to  spider  poison,  have  had  nega-


170


COLLECrrED  STUDIES  IN  IMMDIOTY.


tive  resulte;  the  sera  of  man,  rabbit,  horse,  pig,  dog,  rat,  guinea-
pig,  goat,  sheep,  ox,  goose,  and  pigeon,  inactivated  by  heating  to
56°  C-  in  order  to  eliminate  any  possible  solvent  action,  were  unable
even  in  amounts  of  1.0  cc.  to  protect  rabbit  blood  against  just  a  com-
plete solvent  dose  of  arachnolysin.

On  the  other  hand,  the  study  of  the  poison's  behavior  toward
sensitive  and  insensitive  cells  has  yielded  results  of  special  interest
in  connection  with  the  receptor  theory.  Certain  species  of  blood,
such  as  dog  or  guinea-pig  blood,  have  shown  themselves  immune
to  the  spider  poison.  This  presents  the  most  favorable  conditions
tor  studying  the  relations  between  the  binding  of  poisons  and  their
action.  This  point,  as  we  have  seen,  is  of  the  greatest  importance
for  the  view  that  serum  hicmolysins  are  toxin-like  bodies.

If  arachnolysin  is  a  blood-poison  whose  action  is  due  to  the  anchor-
ing of  a  certain  haptophone  group  to  a  receptor  of  the  sensitive  blood-
eell,  and  if,  corresponding  to  tliis,  the  immunity  of  certain  species
of  blood  is  due  to  a  lack  of  appropriate  receptors,  it  follows  that
the  sensitive  blood-cells  must  be  able  to  bind  the  active  principle
of  such  a  poison  solution,  while  the  insensitive  cells  leave  it  entirely
imaffected.

So  far  as  the  insensitive  bloods  are  concerned,  the  method  of
making  the  experiment  is  very  simple.  Dog  blood  is  mixed  with  a
certain  quantity  of  arachnolysin,  kept  in  the  incubator  for  an  hour
and  frequently  shaken.  Thereujron  the  blood,  which,  of  course,  is
unchanged,  is  separated  by  means  of  a  centrifuge.  The  decanted
fluid,  compared  with  the  original  material,  shows  not  the  least  diminu-
tion of  its  solvent  power  on  rabbit  blood-cells.  This  shows  that  the
insensHive  dog  blood  is  not  able  to  bind  the  arachnolysin.

In  the  case  of  the  sensitive  blood-cells,  the  demonstration  of  the
combining  power  is  much  more  difficult,  for  these,  when  tested  in
a  similar  manner  are  dissolved,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  separate
blood-cells  and  fluid.  We  can  then  only  operate  with  the  laky  blood
solution,  the  inactivity  of  which  permits  of  no  direct  conclusion
that  a  binding  of  the  poison  by  means  of  receptors  had  occurred.
Furlherraore,  if  the  poison  solution  has  lost  its  power  as  a  result
of  the  action  already  exerted,  there  is  no  means  by  which  this  can
be  determined.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  employ  blood-cell
material  which  had  been  made  stable  so  far  as  the  vital  influences
of  the  hemolysis  were  concerned,  without,  however,  losing  its  chemi-
cal character.     For  this  purpose  we  used  blood-cell  stromata,  by


THE  POISON-  OF  THE  COMMON  GARDEN  SPIDER.  171

Tvhich  wc  mean  blood-cells  deprived  of  their  ha?moglobia  by  swell-
ing and  then  again  condensing  the  blood-eell  residues.  Ehrlieh'
had  already  (in  1885)  pointed  out  the  importance  of  this  true  pro-
toplasm of  the  blood-cells,  and  had  termed  it  "  discoplasnia  "  because
of  its  peculiar  character.  According  to  Ehrlich,  the  main  function
of  this  discoplasma  is  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  haemoglobin,  and
he  therefore  ascribed  the  diffusion  of  the  blood  coloring- ma  Iter  to
death  of  the  discoplasma.  In  agreement  with  this  is  the  fact  first
■described  by  Bordet''  and  aftonvard  confirmed  by  Nolf,^  that  it
b  the  stromata  which  bind  the  specific  serum  hemolysins.  We
could  therefore  assume  that  in  our  case,  in  all  probability,  the  arach-
nolysin  would  be  bound,  if  bound  at  all,  by  the  stromata.

In  this  Institute  a  method  for  the  production  of  the  stromata,
which  differs  somewhat  from  the  one  commonly  employed,  has  proven
particularly  valuable,  especially  in  studying  the  receptors.  With
the  usual  solution  of  the  blood  in  distilled  water,  the  separation  by
eentrituge  of  the  stromata  condensed  with  salt  is  extremely  dif-
ficult ;  and  even  with  suitable  species  of  blood  only  a  small  yield  is
obtained.  By  previously  heating  the  blood  we  have  found  that
the  subsequent  centrifugation  is  made  considerably  easier  (perhaps
because  of  a  kind  of  coagulation  of  the  blood-cells)  and  that  a  plentiful
sediment  of  stromata  is  thereby  assured.

The  blood  employed  ia  heated  on  a  water-bath  Bt  50°-60°  C.  Tor  half  an
hour  (depending  on  Che  species  of  blood,  ox  blood  GO"  C,  rabbit  and  guinea-
pig  blood  about  W  C.)  until,  dark  brown  in  color,  it  just  begins  to  Wome  Uky.
Thereupon  the  blood,  made  up  to  6  to  10  volumes  by  the  addition  of  water  and
shaken,  is  mixed  nith  eo  much  salt  that  this  amounts  to  I  %  at  the  total  amount.
The  mixture  is  then  strongly  centrifuged.  The  stromata  remain  at  the  bottom
of  the  vessel  in  the  form  of  yellowish- white  masses,  and  can  be  washed  by
repeatedly  adding  NaCl  solution  and  cenCrifugiog.

The  siTomata  so  obtained  have  preserved  their  receptor  properly;
they  bind  specific  serum  kcemalysins,  and  also,  when  introduced  irito
the  organism,  excite  the  production  of  specific  hcemohjtic  immune  bodies.^

'  Ehrlich,  Zur  Pbysiologie  und  Pathologie  der  Blulscheiben,  Cbaritfi  Annalen,
X,  1885.

'  Bordet,    Lea   Serums    himolytiques,    etc.,    Annales   de   I'lnstit.    Paatour,

inoo.

•  Nolf,  Le  Mecanisme  de  la  globulyse,  Annal.  de  I'lnst.  Pasteur,  1900.
'It  may  he  recalled  that  immunization  with  heat«d  bacteria  has  been  suc-
cessfully practiced  even  from  the  beginning  ot  the  study  of  inimimity.


A


Tlie  fact  that  they  have  suffered  a  certain  quantitative  Iom  in
these  properties,  owing  to  the  extensive  manipulation  to  which  they
have  been  sulijepted,  in  no  way  affepta  their  utility  for  combining  ex-
periments. In  the  qualitative  demonstration  of  specific  affinity  the
employment  of  an  excess  of  receptors  anawpra  all  recjuirements.

In  order,  furthermore,  to  meet  the  objection  of  a  mechanical  absorp-
tion of  the  poison  by  the  stromata,  exactly  similar  combining  experi-
ments were  made  simultaneously  with  a  blood  of  the  sensitive  class,
and  with  one  of  the  insensitive  class.  As  a  representative  of  the
former,  rabbit  blood,  which  is  highly  sensitive,  was  used.  For  the
control,  guinea-pig  blood,  which  is  not  dissolved  by  arachnoh'sin,
was  used.  The  degree  of  activity  of  the  poison  solution  before  and
after  binding  was  measured  by  means  of  rabbit  blood.


Tbe  struniala  sedimentfl  derived  from  each  of  40  ce.  rabbit  blood  and  guinea-
pig  blood,  are  mixed  each  with  10  cc.  of  an  arachnolydu  soiutioD  of  whicli  0,025
ce.  suffice  to  just  completely  dissolve  0.05  cc.  rabbit  blood.  The  Btromata  so
treated  are  digested  for  half  an  hour  in  the  n-ater-bath  at  40°  C,  being  re-
peatedly shaken.  They  are  then  centrituged.  The  decanted  fluid  from  the
sl.romata  of  guinea-pig  blood,  like  the  original  material,  still  completely  dis-
solves 0.05  cc.  rabbit-blood  in  amounts  of  0.025  cc;  the  decanted  fluid  from
the  rabbit  biood  stromata.  on  tbe  other  hand,  has  entirety  lost  its  poisonous
action.  Even  in  amounts  of  1.0  cc.  it  is  unable  to  exert  the  least  action  on
rabbit  blood.


Hence  the  stromata  obtained  from  the  sensitive  blood  have  actually
bound  the  arachnolysin,  and  this  combination  must  be  r^arded  as  a
chemical  one  because  the  control  test  with  guinea-pig  blood  shows
that  the  insensitive  cell-material  exerts  no  attraction  whatever  on
the  arachnolysin.  Such  behavior,  however,  is  most  easily  explained
by  assuming,  in  accordance  with  the  side-chain  theory,  the  presence
of  appropriate  receptors  in  the  sensitive  cells  as  a  prerequisite  for
the  action  of  the  arachnolysin.  The  natural  immunity  of  certain
species  of  blood  will  then  correspond  to  an  absence  of  appropriate
receptors.  We  see  from  this  that  the  distribution  of  receptors  capable
of  binding  arachnolysin,  at  least  so  far  as  the  blood  is  concerned,  is
not  universal  throughout  the  animal  kingdom,  but  confined  to  certain
species.

While  the  experiences  already  mentioned  lead  us  to  regard
arachnolysin  as  a  poison  belonging  to  the  class  of  toxins,  the  evidence
will  be  made  absolutely  conclusive  by  demonstrating  the  abilily  of  the
poison  to  produce  antitoxin,   the  most  important  criterion  for  the


J


THE  POISON  OF  THE  COMMON  GARDEN  SPIDER.


173


toxin  nature  of  any  substance.  Owing  to  the  scarcity  of  material
the  immunizing  expcrimenta  were  somewhat  delayed;  they  will,
however,  be  dealt  with  in  detail  at  the  proper  time,  Nevertheless
I  can  announce  that  shortly  before  the  conclusion  of  this  work  we
eucceeded,  by  means  of  a  short  immunization  of  guinea-pigs '  with
garden-spider  poison,  to  produce  a  high-grade  antitoxic  serum,  of
which  0.0025  cc.  sufficed  to  fully  protect  0.05  cc.  rabbit  blood  against
a  complete  solvent  dose.  This  proves  the  toxin  nature  of  arachnolysin.
In  conclusion  I  should  like  to  refer  to  the  relations  which  arachnoly-
ain  bears  to  what  we  know  about  spider  poisons  in  general.  In  doing
so  I  shall  follow  Kobert,^  who  made  the  fundamental  studies  in  the
toxicology  of  animal  and  vegetable  poisons,  and  to  whom  we  owe
most  of  our  knowledge  canceming  spider  poisons.  In  addition  to
the  true  secretion  of  the  poison  gland,  Kobert  distinguishes  "a  toxol-
buroin  which  permeates  the  entire  body  of  the  spider,  even  the  legs
and  eggs,  but  which  bears  no  necessary  relation  lo  the  poison  gland."
In  some  species  of  spiders  this  substance  mixes  with  the  gland  poison.
According  txj  Kobert,  the  more  toxalbumin  gets  into  the  wound,  the
stronger  are  the  constitutional  symptoms;  the  more  true  gland  poison,
the  stronger  the  local  changes.  Tlie  latter  is  especially  the  case  in  the
lathrodectes  species  {malmignalte,  karakujie)  whose  sting  produces
most  fearful  general  symptoms,  even  being  able  to  kill  human  beings.
In  these  the  gland  secretion  becomes  dangerous  only  when  mixed
with  toxalbumin  derived  from  the  body.  In  contrast  to  this,  the
sting  of  the  garden  spider  produces  only  local  symptoms  of  irritation,
although  the  spider's  body  contains  a  toxalbumin  whose  action  is
analogous  to  the  preceding;  but  this  substance  does  not  become
mixed  with  the  gland  secretion.  This  being  the  case,  it  is-very  likely
that  the  haemolysin  described  by  ua  ia  identical  with  the  toxalbumin
already  known  to  Kobert;  for  we  also  obtained  it  from  the  body
substance  of  the  garden  spider,  and  found  its  properties  to  be  those
of  the  toxin.

Addition  on  Revision. — Since  sending  in  the  manuscript  of  this  study  1
have  learned  of  a  monograph  by  Kobert  (Beitriige  zur  KenntniM  der  Giftspinnen,
Stuttgart,  IQOl]  which  htm  juxt  appeared.  In  tliis  Kol)ert  also  reports  on  the
hirmolylic  action  of  the  poiMtn  ot  Kiirukurtes  and  of  garden  spiders.     He  statea

'  Hence  although  guinea-pig  blood  is  insensitive  to  arachnolysin,  appropriate
receptors  capable  of  bindingthepoisonmustbe  present  in  Che  guinea-pig  organism
outside  of  the  blood.

'Kobert,  Lcbrbuch  der  Intoxicatioaen,  Stuttgart,  1S9,'],  p.  329.


174  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

that  although  he  found  the  hsemolytic  action  to  be  present  in  the  latter,  "it
was  much  less  than  that  of  Karakurtes  poison."  It  is  possible,  however,
that  Kobert  made  these  experiments  on  one  of  the  species  of  blood  found  by
us  to  be  insensitive  to  arachnolysin  (horse  blood,  dog  blood?).  At  any  rate
our  garden-spider  extract  far  exceeds  in  hsemolytic  action  the  Karakurtes  poison
tested  by  Kobert  in  this  respect.  I  should  also  like  to  point  out  that  for  the
hemolytic  experiments  with  Karakurtes  poison,  Kobert  used  dog  blood,  which
according  to  our  table  belongs  to  the  dass  of  blood  species  inmiune  to  garden-
spider  poison.  Perhaps  in  conformity  with  the  extensive  analogy  between
these  two  spider  poisons,  the  Karakurtes  poison  possesses  a  far  greater  hsBmo-
lytic  action  on  other  species  of  blood.  Kobert's  observation  that  a  tolerance
can  be  established  against  Karakurtes  poison  as  well  as  against  garden-spider
poison,  agrees  very  well  with  the  idea  of  a  strong  antitoxic  serum,  a  fact  actually
observed  by  us.    Since  then  we  have  obtained  such  a  serum  also  in  rabbits.


XVI.   A  STUDY  OF  TOAD  POISON.'

By  Dr.  Fr.  PrOschkr.

The  numerous  investigations  concerning  toad  poison  which  have
been  made  especially  by  French  and  Italian  workers,  have  not  yet
come  to  a  definite  conclusion  as  to  whether  this  substance  is  alkaloid-
like or  toxin-like.  The  skin  secretions  of  the  different  varieties  of
toads  contain  a  number  of  bodies  which  have  not  thus  far  been  studied.
In  the  garlic  toad,  for  example,  there  is  a  substance  of  garlicky  odor,
which  has  not  been  more  closely  identified.  Besides  this,  according
to  Calmels,  toad  secretion  contains  methylcarby  Liminic  acid  and
methylcarbylamin,  which  are  aaid  to  act  intensely  on  the  nervous
system.  Kobert  applied  the  name  "phTynin"  to  a  substance  which
irritates  the  mucous  membranes  very  intensely.  Phisalix  and
Bertrand  claim  to  have  isolated  an  alkaloid  from  the  blood  serum
of  the  common  toad,  but  it  remains  doubtful  whether  the  substance
was  not  a  toxin,  for  they  were  unable  to  produce  it  in  chemically
pure  form.  At  the  conclusion  of  their  inve.stigations  they  themselvea
say  that  the  poisonous  action  is  not  due  entirely  to  the  "alka-
loid." In  like  manner  Jornara  and  Casali  claim  to  have  isolated
"bufidin"  from  dried  toad  poison.  They  say  that  this  forms  crystal-
line salts  and  must  therefore  be  an  alkaloid.  The  alcoholic  extract
of  toad  skin  is  said  to  have  an  action  similar  to  digitalis,  Pugliese
found  that  toad  poison  changes  hEemoglobin  into  methsemoglobin,
and  that  it  also  dissolves  the  blood-cells  outside  the  body.  Pugliese
has  not  attempted  any  more  detailed  investigation.  From  the
abstracts  of  his  study  at  my  disjiosal  I  was  unable  to  determine  the
species  of  toad  used  in  his  experiments.

The  object  of  the  following  investigation  is  to  furnish  a  small
contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  toad  poison.  At  present  there
can  be  no  thought  of  any  exact  analysis  of  the  poison.

■  Reprint  from  Beitctkge  lur  chemiBcbcja  PhTaiologie  u.  Pathologie,  Vol.  t,
N«.  10-12.


COLLECTED  STl'DIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


METHOD   OF  OBTAIf


;   THE   POISON.


The   toad   poison   iised   in    my  experiments  was    derived   from

bombinatoT  igneits,  tlie  fire-toad,  and  from  hujo  cinereus,  the  commoD
garden  toad.  In  order  to  obtain  the  poison,  the  skin  of  the  abdomen
and  back  of  a  frcsUy  captured  toad  was  used,  for  the  poison  is  present
in  largest  amounts  in  the  skin.  The  muscles  and  blood  serum  of
the  fire-toad  also  contain  the  poison,  but  in  smaller  quantities.

After  the  toads  were  thoroughly  rinsed  with  physiological  salt
solution  they  were  decapitated  and  skinned.  The  skin  was  again
rinsed  with  salt  solution  and  then  rubbed  to  a  paste,  as  homogeneous
ae  possible,  with  powdered  glass.  After  adding  2  to  3  cc.  physiological
salt  solution  the  mixture  was  filtered  or  contrifuged.  The  resulting
fluid  had  a  feebly  acid  reaction,  a  greyish  white  color  and  a  peculiar,
garlicky  odor.  Toluol  was  added  as  a  preservative,  and  the  fluid
stored  in  the  refrigerator.  In  the  same  manner  I  prepared  an  extract
from  the  skin  of  the  garden  toad.

The  extract  of  the  skin  of  the  fire-toad  showed  strong  hsemolytic
properties;  that  of  the  garden  toad  the  same,  though  only  in  traces.
(See  Table  III.)  The  following  experiments  refer  only  to  the  fire-
toad  poison  which,  for  short,  we  shall  call  "  phrynolysin."  The  poison
of  the  garden  toad  was  used  merely  for  comparison.

PROPERTIES   OF   FHRTNOLYaiN.

Phrynolysin  is  an  exceedingly  labile  body.     Heating  to  56°  C,

exposure  to  light,  the  addition  of  alcohol,  ether,  chloroform,  min-
eral acids,  strong  potash  lye,  pepsin  and  trypsin,  all  destroy  it  in  a
short  time.  Drying  the  phrynolysin  over  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid
at  room  temperature  weakens  it  materially.     It  does  not  dialyze.

Since,  as  already  mentioned,  the  extract  from  the  toad  skin  pos-
sesses a  faint  acid  reaction,  requiring  I  to  1.3  cc.  decinormal  lye
for  neutralization,  it  could  be  assumed  that  the  acid  reaction  slowly
destroys  the  toxin.  The  destruction  of  the  toxin,  however,  proceeds
in  tlie  same  time  in  neutral  as  in  feebly  acid  solution,  so  that  the
acid  reaction  cannot  possess  any  great  influence.  The  hiemolytic
action  is  the  same  in  acid  as  in  neutral  solution.

The  best  preservative  for  this  substance  is  toluol,  first  employed
by  Ehrlich  for  presen-ing  the  toxins.  Cold  storage  is  also  good.
After  a  time  the  fluid  becomes  cloudy,  owing  to  the  separation  of
albumin,  but  it  maintains  its  hajmolytic  power  unimpaired  for  a


A  8TTTDT  OF  TOAD  POISON.


177


considerable  time.  After  from  one  to  two  months  the  phrynolysin
gradually  becomes  inert.  Owing  to  the  extreme  lability  of  the  toxin
there  can,  for  the  present,  be  no  thought  of  obtaining  the  eubstance
pure,  for  even  drying  at  room  temperature  weakens  the  poison  con-
Biderably.  Owing  to  lack  of  material,  a  pharmacological  examination
of  the  poison  could  not  be  undertaken.


BEHAVIOR    OF  THE    PHRTNOLYSIN    TOWARD    DIFFERENT   SPECIES    OF
BLOOD.

The  method  of  testing  was  such  that  a  series  of  test-tubes  was
prepared,  each  containing  1  cc.  of  the  dilution  1 :  10,  1 :20,  etc,  i.e.
decreasing  amounts  of  the  poison.  The  dilutions  were  made  with
0.85%  salt  solution.  To  each  tube  1  cc,  of  the  5%  blood  suspension
in  0.85%  salt  solution  was  added.  Thereupon  the  tubes  were  kept
at  37° C.  for  two  hours  and  in  the  refrigerator  overnight.  A  "com-
plete solution  "  is  one  that  on  shaking  shows  no  body  elements  of
any  kind:  "almost  complete  "  if  there  is  still  a  slight  sediment;  and
"incomplete  "  when  numerous  blood-cells  are  undissolved.  This  is
followed  in  order  by  "red,"  "top,"  "trace,"  "O."

Commenciug  with  Table  III  all  the  experiments  are  made  on  sheep
blood.

As  can  be  seen  from  Table  I,  sheep  blood  is  most  strongly  dis-
solved, frog  and  toad  blood  not  at'  all.  The  limits  of  solution  for
sheep  blood  are  a  dilution  of  1 :  10240  in  the  case  of  phrj-nojysins
I  and  II,  and  1:5120  in  phrynolysin  III.  In  Table  IV,  decreasing
amounts  of  the  poison  are  added  to  1  cc,  5%  sheep  blood.  Of  phry-
nolysin I,  0.0025  cc.  stifiiced  to  efEect  complete  solution;  of  II  and
III,  0.00025  cc.  sufficed,  and  of  IV,  0.005  cc.  By  determming  the
amount  of  dry  residue  in  poison  solution  II  it  is  seen  that  0.0000022
g.  of  organic  substance  suffice  to  completely  dissolve  1  cc.  5%  sheep
blood.  Of  poison  solution  III,  0.0000015  g.  have  the  same  effect.
If  we  assume  that  one-tenth  of  this  organic  substance  (probably
it  is  still  less)  represents  true  phrj-nolv.sin,  the  rest  being  merely
indifferent  albuminous  bodies,  we  find  that  ^/n,  mg.  are  sufficient
to  completely  dissolve  one  liter  of  sheep  blood.

The  yield  of  phrynolysin  is  subject  to  individual  fluctuations.
Animals  freshly  caught  yield  a  stronger  ha-molysin  than  those  which
have  been  kept  in  captivity  for  some  time.


178


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


TABLE  I.


Dilutioii.

Sheep  Blood.

Qoat  Blood.

Rabbit  Blood.

Dog  Blood.

Ox  Blood.

1:20

complete

complete

complete

complete

tp^

1:40

n

tt

1:80

11

red

tt

1:160

tt

tjyp

trace

1:320

red

0

1:640

tt

tt

0

1:1280

tt

tt

0

1:2560

incomplete

trace

tt

,    0

1:5120

almost
complete

top

0

0

0

1:10240

red

trace

0

0

0

1:20480

trace

0

0

0

0

1:40960

0

0

0

0

0

Dilution.

Chieken  Blood.

Guinea-pig  Blood.

Rat  Blood.

Pigeon  Blood.

1:20

1:40

1:80

1:160

1:320

incomplete
tt

0
0

red

tt

top

trace

0

red
top

trace

0

•

trace
0
0
0
0

Dilution.

Pigeon  Blood.

Goose  Blood.

Frog  Blood.

Toad  Blood.

1:20
1:40
1:80

trace
0
0

red

top

0

0
0
0

0
0
0

TABLE  n.
Phrtnolysin  op  the  Common  Garden  Toad.


Dilution.

Sheep  Blood.

Goat  Blood.

Dog  Blood.

Rabbit
Blood.

Guinea-pig
Blood.

Ox  Blood.

1:20
1:40
1:80

red

trace
It

0
0
0

red
top

0
0
0

0
0
0

OOO

TABLE  III.
Behavior  op  Different  Phrynolysins  toward  Sheep  Blood.


Dilution.

Phrynolysin  I.

Phiynolsrsin  II.

Phnmolysin  III.

1:640

1:1280

1:2560

1:5120

1:10240

1:20480

complete
tt

tt

tt

almost  complete
top

complete
tt

tt

tt

almost  complete
red

complete
tt

almost  complete
top
red

A  STUDY  OF  TOAD  POISON.


179


TABLE  IV.
Behavior  op  Difperbnt  Phrynolysins  toward  Sheep  Blood.


cc.


0.005

0.0025

0.001

0.00075

0.0005

0.00025

0.0001


PhryDolysin  I.


complete
incomplete


3mpi

rea

top

0

0


Phrynolysin  II.


complete


1 1


incomplete


Phrynolysin  III.


complete


red


Phrynolysin  IV.


complete

incomplete

top

0

0

0

0


ATTEMPTS  AT  REACTIVATING  A  PHRYNOLYSIN  WHICH  HAD  BECOME

INACTIVE  AT  56*^  C.

The  investigations  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  have  shown  that
the  haemolysins  of  the  higher  vertebrates  are  of  complex  constitu-
tion. They  consist  of  two  portions,  the  complement  and  the  immune
body.  By  heating  to  56*^  C.  the  complement  is  destroyed,  while
the  immune  body  remains  intact.  The  immune  body  by  itself  can-
not exert  any  haemolytic  action;  a  fitting  complement  must  first
be  added.

It  would  be  quite  comprehensible  for  the  phrynolysin  likewise
to  consist  of  two  parts.  Heating  to  56®  C.  would  destroy  the  com-
plement, while  the  thermostable  interbody  would  be  preserved.
I  therefore  attempted  to  reactivate  the  toxin  which  had  become
inactive  at  56*^  C.  and  tried  the  addition  of  a  number  of  different
normal  serum  for  this  purpose,  such  as  goat  serum,  sheep  serum,
pigeon  serum,  horse  serum,  guinea-pig  serum,  and  rabbit  serum,
all  without  success,  no  solution  taking  place.  Unfortunately,  owing
to  lack  of  material,  I  was  unable  to  obtain  1  or  2  cc.  of  serum  from
the  fire-toad  in  order  to  employ  this  for  reactivation.  Experiments
with  the  normal  sera  of  the  higher  vertebrates  are  not  conclusive,
because  the  complement  sought  for  may  possibly  be  contained  only
in  the  serum  of  the  fire-toad.  For  the  present  therefore  the  ques-
tion as  to  the  complex  character  of  the  phrynolysin  must  still  be
kept  open.

DO    NORMAL   SERA    CONTAIN    ANTIBODIES    AGAINST    PHRYNOLYSIN?

A  number  of  normal  sera,  which  had  first  been  inactived  at  56*^  C.
in  order  to  avoid  solution  of  the  sheep  blood  added,  were  tested  for
this  purpose,  e.g.,  pigeon  serum,  sheep  serum,  guinea-pig  senim,
horse  serum,  rabbit  serum,  and  goat  serum.    None  of  these  sera.


180  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.

even  in  amounts  up  to  1  or  2  cc.  was  able  to  prevent  solution,  although
only  the  single  solvent  dose  of  phrynolysin  was  added  to  the  mix-
ture of  blood  and  serum.


IMMUNIZ-^TION    WITH   PHHTNOLYSIN,

In  order  to  fumiah  conclusive  proof  that  phrynolysin  ia  a  true
toxin,  a  number  of  rabbits  were  immunized  with  the  same.  The
poison  wag  injected  aubcutaneously,  commencing  with  J  cc.  and
increasing  to  5  cc.  in  the  course  of  eight  days.  The  dose  of  5  cc.
was  then  injected  every  5  to  6  days  for  two  or  three  times  so  that
in  the  couree  of  three  weeks  about  30-35  cc.  had  been  given.

It  is  not  advisable  to  give  more  than  5  cc.  at  once  because  other-
wise the  animals  die  in  one  or  two  days.  Tlie  anatomical  findings
in  an  animal  which  has  died  of  toad  poison  are  negative,  excepting
a  marked  hypera?mia  of  the  abdominal  viscera;  no  macroscopical
changes  of  the  organs  are  demonstrable.

As  already  mentioned,  normal  rabbit  serum  does  not  contain
a  trace  of  anti-body  against  phrynolysin.  The  production  of  anti-
toxin commences  about  fourteen  days  after  the  injection  of  the  toxin
and  reaches  its  maximum  in  three  weeks.  Of  the  strongest  serum
which  I  obtained,  0.025  cc.  protected  against  double  the  solvent
dose  of  phrjTJolysin  for  1  cc.  5%  sheep  blood.


LITERATITRE.

VuLPiAN,  Comp.  rend,  de  la  eoc.  de  bid.,  1S54,  p.  133;  1856,  p.  124.

DoM.  JoRNARA,  Sur  les  effets  physiol.  du  venin  de  crapaud.,  Joiim.  de  ThSrap,,

4.  p.  833  et  929.
G.  Calmbls,  Comp.  rend.,  98,  536  (1883),  and  Archiv.  de  physiol.,  1883.
Capparelli,  Archiv.  ilal.  de  biol.,  4,  72  (1883).
EoBBHT,  Sit2UDgB-Beri(^ht   der  Dorpater  NaturforBchendeii  Gesellachaft,  9,  63

(1891).
PmsALnc  and  G.  Bbrtsasd,  Toiische  Wirkung  von  Blut  und  Gift  der  gemeinen

Krote.  Comp.  rend.,  116,  1080-1082.  Arch,  de  physiol.,  25,  511,  and  517,

Comp.  rend.  boc.  biolog.,  45,  477,  479.
D,  JoRNARA  and  Casali,  Dob  Gift  der  Kr6te  uad  daa  Bufidin,  Revista  clinick

Bologne,  1873.
A.  PcQi.iEaE,  Die  Methiemoglobinbildende  Wirkung  des  KrStengiftea,  Archiv.

di  farmac.  e  terap.,  189^.
Ehruch  and  Mosoensoth,  Uber  Hxmolysine,  Berl.  klio.  Wooheniichr.   1899,

Nos.land22;  1900,  Nos.  21  and  31;  1001,  Noa.  10,  21,  and  22.


XVn.   CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.*


By  Dr.  Bans  S&cbb,  Assistant  at  the  Institute.

Ajter  the  fundamental  studies  of  Bordet,  and  of  Ehriich  &

Morgenroth  had  shown  that  the  hemolysins  produced  in  serum  by
inununlzation  with  blood-cells  owed  their  effect  to  the  combined
action  of  two  substances  (amboceptor  and  complement)  it  seemed
very  natural  to  suppose  that  the  hfemoiysina  of  normal  sera,  which
had  been  known  for  some  time,  were  also  of  a  complex  nature.
Buchner,  who  was  the  first  to  recognize  the  significance  of  the  bac-
tericidal and  globulicidal  properties  of  blood  senim,  had  conceived
these  actions  from  a  unitarian  standpoint  and  referred  them  to  the
"  alexin "  of  each  particular  serum.  Recent  investigations,  how-
ever, have  shown  that  Buchner's  alexin  is  not  a  single  simple  sub-
stance, bul  the  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of  combinations,  whose  more
thorough  analj-sis  has  been  rendered  possible  only  by  the  methods
of  the  newer  htemolysin  investigations.

The  credit  of  applying  the  experiences  gained  with  the  hiemoly-
sins  artificially  produced  to  the  study  of  hiemolysins  of  normal
serum,  belongs  to  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.  They  made  use  of  a
method  which  they  had  already  employed  in  the  analysis  of  ha>moIytic
immune  sera,  the  separation  by  means  of  cold.  This  depends  on  the
fact  that  at  0°  under  favorable  circumstances  only  the  interbody,
and  not  the  complement,  is  bound  by  the  blood-cetls.  Accordingly
by  appropriate  treatment  it  could  be  shown  that  the  serum  had
lost  part  of  its  power,  but  that  it  could  be  regenerated  by  the  addi-
tion of  the  same  kind  of  serum  previously  inactivated  by  heat.  Tliis
confirraed  their  view  of  the  complex  nature  of  normal  hemolysins.
They  were  further  able  to  activate  inactive  hiemolytic  normal  sera
by  the  addition  of  other  kinds  of  sera  which  served  as  complements,
and  which  by  themselves  did  not  dissolve  the  particular  blood-cells


182  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

used.  Tliis  showed  conclusively  that  the  globuliddal  yropcrty  of
normal  serum  is  du£  to  Ike  co-action  oj  two  bodies,  one  which  wUkelands
keaiing  {thermostabk}  and  llie  other  which  docs  not  {tluTmolabilc.)

These  views  have  been  accepted  by  the  majority  of  investiga-
tors, and  numerous  obsen'ers,  P.  Miiller,'  London,^  E.  Neisser,
and  Doring'  ha\'e  constantly  added  new  facts,  the  analysis  of
which  in  every  instance  demonstrates  the  complex  nature  of  nor-
mal hemolysins.  Nevertheless  it  does  not  seem  to  me  superfluous
to  thoroughly  discuss  this  question  once  more,  since  such  eminent
authorities  as  Buchner  *  and  Gruber,*  because  of  the  negati^'e  result
of  part  of  their  experiments,  hold  that  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth's
conception  of  the  nature  of  normal  hemolysins  is  erroneous.  Ehrlich
and  Morgenroth  had  from  the  beginning  stated  that  the  solution  of
this  problem  in  any  particular  case  was  only  possible  by  their  method
under  certain  favorable  ciTcumslances.  Now,  although  Buchner  and
Gruber  have  employed  this  method,  so  that  a  negative  result  proves
nothing  whatever,  in  consideration  of  the  importance  of  the  matter
I  have  followed  the  suggestion  of  IVof.  Ehrlich,^  and  undertaken
a  critical  study  of  the  negative  findings  of  these  authors.  The  results
of  this  have  already  been  briefly  alluded  to  elsewhere.

Buchner  sought  to  discover  the  presenae  of  thermostabile  bodies
(his  "  Hilfskorper  ")  on  the  occurrence  of  hfemolysis,  by  reactivate
ing  normal  sera,  which  had  been  inactivated  by  heating  to  60°  C,
with  fresh  serum  of  a  different  species.  But  out  of  the  large  number
of  possible  combinations  he  chose  only  one  and  used  as  a  source  of
complement  only  that  senun  which  was  derived  from  the  same  species
that  furnished  the  blood-cells.  In  an  address  on  the  protective
bodies  of  the  blood,  delivered  at  the  Hamburg  Congress  of  Natu-
ralists, Ehrlich  pointed  out  that  this  procedure  was  inapplicable.
It  can  surely  not  be  expected  that  every  serum  contains  a  fitting

'  P.  Miiller,  iJber  Antiharaolyaine,  Centralblatt  fur  Bacteriologie,  Vol,  26,
1001.

'  E.  S.  London,  Contribution  h.  I'^tude  dea  b^molysines,  Arch,  des  ScieoceB
biolog.  (Inst,  imperial  de  mfid.  exper.  i  St.  Pet«rebourg),  T.  VIII.  1901.

'  E.  NeisBer  u.  Doring,  Zur  Kenntniss  der  haniolytischen  EigenHchatten  dea
menschlichen  Serums,  Berl.  klin,  Wochen.  1901,  No.  22.

'  Buchner.  Sind  die  Alcxine  einfuche  oder  complexe  Korper?  fieil.  klin.
Wochenschr.  1901,  No  33.

'  M.  Gniber.  Zur  Theorie  der  AntikOrper,  II,  tfber  Bacteriolyse  u.  HceiuoIyaG,
Huncb,  nied.  Wochenschr.  1901,  4S  and  49.

•  Ehrlich,  Vortrag  im  Verein  fiir  innera  Medicin,  Dec.  16,  1901.


CONCERNING   ALEXIN'   ACTION.

complement  for  any  given  amboceptor.  In  testing  a  series  of  com-
binstions,  therefore,  the  finding  of  a  suitable  complement  will  to  a
certain  extent  be  merely  a  coincidence.  In  all  the  cases  studied
at  this  Institute,  however,  e\ea  though  often  only  after  consider-
able labors,  this  has  always  led  to  a  certain  realization  of  the  com-
plex nature  of  the  hemolysin.

Buehner  was  successfid  in  two  of  his  cases  in  activating  the  combi-
nation chosen  by  him;  btood-ccUs  A  +  inactive  scrum  (amboceptor)  B
+active  serum  {complement)  A.  (Guinea-pig  blood  and  ox  serum;
goat  blood  and  rabbit  serum.)  In  three  other  eases,  however,  he
was  unable  with  a  corresponding  mode  of  procedure  to  restore  the
solvent  power  which  had  been  lost  by  inactivation.  Guinea-pig
blood  and  sheep  serum  (Case  I);  sheep  blood  and  rabbit  serum
(Case  II);  gmnea-pig  blood  and  dog  serum  (Case  III).  These  results,
to  be  sure,  are  contrary  to  those  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  who
observed  more  or  less  marked  hiEmolysis  in  these  same  combina-
tions. These  opposing  results  are,  however,  explained  first  by  the
fact  that  the  amount  of  complement  contained  in  the  serum  of  the
same  species  is  subject  to  individual  and  chronological  variations
within  wide  limits.  Beside  this,  recent  experiences,  which  we  shall
Bubsequently  discuss  in  detail,  have  shown  us  that  the  temperature
at  which  the  senmi  is  inactivated  is  not  indifferent  for  the  function
of  the  amboceptor.  Hence  it  appears  significant  that  in  these  experi-
ments Buchner  inactivated  the  sera  by  heating  to  60°  C,  whereas
ordinarily  this  is  done  at  56°-57°  C.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Buchner's
experiment  No.  6  shows  that  dog  serum,  in  this  experiment  inac-
tivated by  heating  only  to  57°  C,  is  activated  in  its  hEemoIytic  action
for  guinea-pig  blood  by  rabbit  serum.  In  view  of  this,  the  nega-
tive findings  of  Buchner  in  Case  III  lose  their  significance.

In  the  three  cases  looked  upon  by  Buchner  as  negative,  I  tried,
by  separation  by  means  of  cold,  to  convince  myself  of  the  presence
of  two  substances  effecting  the  haemolysis.  My  method  of  pro-
cedure was  as  follows:

Two  parallel  series  of  tubes  of  blood  containing  decreasing  amounts
of  active  serum  were  prepared,  kept  at  0°  C.  for  2-3  hours  and  then
centrifuged.  The  decanted  fluid  of  one  series  was  then  allowed  to
act  on  the  sediments  of  native  blood,  that  of  the  other  series  on  the
sediments  of  blood  which  had  been  treated  with  a  like  quantity  of
inactivated  serum.  The  amoimt  of  blood,  as  in  all  our  experiments,
waa  1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension  in  .85%  salt  solution.


184


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


In  two  combinations  (Cases  I  and  II)  the  separation  of  the  two
components  was  effected  without  any  trouble.  The  following  pro-
tocol  will   also  show   the  technique  of  the  experiment.

Negative  case  I  of  Buchner.  0.5  cc.  sheep  senim  is  still  just
able  to  completely  dissolve  guinea-pig  blood.  To  each  1  cc.  of  a
5%  guinea-pig  blood  suspension  varying  amounts  of  active  sheep
serum  are  added  and  the  volume  of  fluid  made  up  to  2  ec.  with  physio-
logical salt  solution.  Two  parallel  series  like  this  are  kept  at  0°  C.
for  two  hours  and  then  centrifuged.  The  clear  decanted  fluids  from
the  one  series  are  allowed  to  act  each  on  the  sediment  of  1  cc.  native
5%  guinea-pig  blood;  the  fluids  from  the  other  series,  each  on  the
sediment  of  1  cc.  5%  guinea-pig  blood,  which  had  previously  been
treated  with  the  same  varying  amounts  of  inactive  sheep  serum.
The  htemolytic  action  of  the  decanted  fluids  is  shown  by  Table  I.
TABLE  I.
Absorption  op  Sbeep  Sebum  by  GtriNEA-Pio  Blood  at  0'  C,


^^

Sulveot  Power  of  tbe  Dwcnted  FluicU  for

A,  Nuive

GuinBi.-pi«  Blood.

B,  Guinea-pijc  Blood
Previnurly  TreoMd

Sheep  Serum.

1  0.7

2  0.6

3  0,5

4  0.4

5  0.35

6  0

moderate

little

trac«

0

complete

almoEt  complete

fltrong

0

Buchner's  second  negative  case  deals  with  the  combination  sheep
blood  and  rabbit  semm.  In  the  following  experiment,  entirely  ana-
logous to  the  preceding,  the  complete  solvent  dose  of  rabbit  serum
for  sheep  blood  was  0.2  cc.     See  Table  II.

These  experiments,  which  are  confirmed  by  numerous  parallel
experiments,  show  that  in  these  two  cases,  as  a  mailer  of  fact,  hemolysis
depends  on  the  presence  of  two  substances.  One  of  these,  thermostable,
is  bound  by  the  blood-cells  at  0°C.,  the  other,  thermolabile,  is  left
behind  at  this  temperature.  The  latter,  however,  is  only  then  able
to  effect  hsemolysis  when  it  acts  on  blood-cells  which  have  previously
anchored  the  thermostable  substance,  the  amboceptor.

A  comparison  of  Tables  I  and  II  also  shows  how  much  the
combining  relations  between  amboceptor  and  blood-ceU  on  the  one


CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.


hand,  and  amboceptor  and  complement,  on  the  other,  may  vary
from  case  to  case.      Whereas  in  Case  II  the  decanted  fluids  were

TABLE  II.
Absobftion  of  the  Rabbit  Serum  bt  Sheep  Blood  at  0°  C.


Acided.

Solvent  Power  of  the  Deeanied  Fluidn  iar

A,  Nmive
Sheep  Blood.

B,  Sheep  Blood
Babbit  Serum.

1  0.6

2  0.45

3  0.35

4  0.25

5  0.2

6  0

trace
0
0
0
0
0

coin[)lete

almost  complete
moderate

0

absolutely  inactive  against  native  blood  (i,e.,  all  the  amboceptor
had  been  bound  at  CC.  by  the  blood-cells)  in  Case  I  the  decanted
fluids  were  then  still  active  when  the  amounts  of  serum  added  were
less  than  the  solvent  doae.  This  indicates  that  in  this  case  the  affinity
of  the  amboceptor's  eytophile  group  for  the  receptor  of  the  cell  is
relatively  slight  at  O^C.  In  like  manner  the  columns  B  of  the  tables
show  a  certain  difference  of  affinity  between  amboceptor  and  com-
plement. In  Case  I  the  decanted  fluid  still  contains  the  entire  com-
plement; in  Case  II,  on  the  other  hand,  a  portion  of  the  complement
must  have  combined  with  tlie  amboceptor,  for  the  decanted  fluid
shows  a  distinct  loss  of  complement.  The  separate  examination  of
the  sediments  of  the  specimens  to  which  active  serum  was  added
agrees  with  this;  in  Case  I  these  sediments  mixed  with  physiological
salt  solution  and  placed  into  the  incubator  showed  no  trace  of  solution,
while  in  Case  II  the  sediments  of  the  fu^t  three  tubes  showed  mod-
erate, little,  and  trace  of  solution  respectively.

Both  normal  hiemolysma  (Buchntr's  negative  Cases  I  and  11)  therefore
correspond  in  their  main  behavior.  They  amsist  of  two  componenis
(readily  separable  by  the  "cold  method")  which  in  their  mutual  relationt
manifest  a  certain  variation  in  (he  behavior  of  their  receptors.

The  conditions  in  these  two  combinations  were  favorable  for
analysis  of  the  mode  of  action  by  means  of  our  method.  In  the
study  of  Buchner's  third  negative  case,  however  (guinea-pig  blood
and  dt^  serum),  difficulties  presented  themselves  which  at  firet  ap-


lob  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMLTNITY.

peared  to  be  insurmountable.  Despite  numerous  variations  in  the
conditions  of  tlie  experiment  we  did  not  succeed  with  approjjriate
procedures  in  effecting  a  separation  by  means  of  the  "cold  method."
The  fluids  decanted  from  the  mixture  of  guinea-pig  biood-eells  and
active  dog  scrum  manifested  tlie  same  behavior,  so  far  as  hsemolytic
action  was  concerned,  on  normal  guinea-pig  blood  and  such  as  had
previously  been  treated  with  inactive  dog  blood;  and  j'et  the)- showed
slight  differences  so  tjiat  we  did  not  feel  justified  in  drawing  any
conclusion.  However,  we  soon  became  convinced  that  a  separation  of
two  substances  causing  hicmolysis  had  nevertheless  been  effected  by
the  absorption  in  the  cold.  We  allowed  the  fluid  decanted  from  the
guinea-pig  blood-cells  previously  treated  with  active  dog  serum,  which
fluid  only  slightly  dissolved  native  guinea-pig  blood,  to  act  on  guinea-
pig  blood  sediments,  which  also  had  previously  been  mixed  with
active  dog  serum.  We  were  then  abie  to  determine  that  these  sedi-
ments were  strongly,  in  appropriate  quantities  completely,  dissolved
by  the  decanted  fluid,  although  when  mixed  merely  with  salt  solution
and  placed  into  an  incubator  they  did  not  dissolve  at  all,  or  dissolved
only  in  traces.     An  experiment  of  this  kind  is  shown  in  Table  III.


Ahbc

TABLE  m.
RPTioN  OF  Doo  Serum  by  Guinea-piq  Blood  at  0°  C.

HsmolyiiK  of  tho
^utEoB^t  37°.

8olv.nt  Poirer  ol  Ibe  Dwnnled  Fluid»  for

^ffii

A.NMtivsGuine.-
pig  Blood.

Tr«Kle<l  with
AttiY.  Do^Sbiuih

1  0.26

2  0.2

3  0.16

4  0.1

5  0.075

trace

faint  trace
0
0
0

almost  complete
strong

little

complete
almost  complete

little
trace

completa
strong

Hence  by  means  of  ihe  absorplion  with  guinea-pig  blood  in  the  cold,
the  active  dog  serum  was  separated  into  two  components  each  of  which
by  itself  was  incapable  of  effecting  solution.  One  of  these  become  attached
to  Ihe  red  blood-cells,  the  other  remained  in  the  fluid.  The  former  there-
fore corresponded  in  its  behavior  to  the  amboceptor,  and  it  icas  only
a  coincidence  that  dog  scrum  inactimted  by  heating  to  60°  C.  was  unable
also  to  assume  that  role.  We  hoped  to  discover  more  about  the  nature
of  this  curious  behavior  by  employing  a  different  method  of  inactivat-


CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.


187


ing  the  dog  serum,  and  therefore  in  this  case  turned  first  to  the  com-
pletion method.  Uy  means  of  completion  of  the  variously  inactivated
dog  serum  with  other  sera  which  do  not  dissolve  guinea-pig  blood,
tte  hojied  to  obtain  an  insight  into  the  circumstances  here  presented.
In  this  way  we  were  able  to  convince  ourselves  that  dog  serum  which
had  been  inactivated  by  half  an  hour's  heating  to  60°  C.  according  to
Ruchner'a  procedure,  ia  no  longer  activated  in  its  hsemolytic  action
on  guinea-pig  blood,  by  the  addition  of  guinea-pig  senmi.  When
the  dog  serum,  however,  was  heat«d  only  to  55°  C.  or  even  only  to
50°  C.  it  was  always  possible  to  activate  such  an  inactivated  serum
by  means  of  guinea-pig  serum.  This  was  the  more  readily  effected,
the  lower  the  inactivatmg  temperature  employed.  It  need  hardly
be  mentioned  that  in  particular  cases  we  always  determined  whether
the  serum  really  was  inactive;  and  this  showed  that  dog  senim
loses  its  hffimotytlc  property  for  guinea-pig  blood  completely,  even
when  merely  warmed  for  half  an  hour  to  49°  C.  We  must  therefore
regard  it  as  a  fortunate  coincidence  that  the  complement  of  dog
serum  is  so  markedly  tkerTnolabik,  (or  only  under  this  condition  could
it  be  possible  to  preserve  the  amboceptor  intact,  i.e.,  capable  of  react-
ing, for  that  body  is  but  little  more  stable.  Whether  the  amboceptor
heated  to  60"  has  been  damaged  in  its  cy  tophile  or  complementophile
affinity  is  still  undetermined.  One  could  perhaps  also  think  of  a
blocking  of  the  complementophile  group  of  the  amboceptor  due  to  a
binding  of  the  comp  ement  taking  jslace  at  the  higher  temi>erature.
Be  this  as  it  may,  these  experiments  certainly  show  that  the  power
oj  a  dog  serum  (inactivated  at  a  suitable  temperature,  e.g.,  50°  C.)  la
be  activated  by  guinea-pig  sentm  is  lessened  by  heaiing  the  dog  serum
to  55°  C.  and  destroyed  at  60°  C.

Table  IV  shows  such  an  experiment:


COMPLBTIOS   (W


TABLE  IV.

1  GntNEA-pia  Sbiipm)  op  Dog  Sbrcm  iNAcmvATED  j

DiFrBRBNT  TEMPBRATtniBS.


Degroe  at  Solution  of  the  Guinm-pig  Blood  M™a  with  0,1&  «.  Dob
Serum  and  luutivsted  by  HbU  bd  Bour's  SeBiicw  to

A.*.-,

B,  SS".

C,  50°.

1  0,5

2  0,25

3  0.1

4  0

0

moderate
little

0

complete
strong

little
0

4


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY,

We  now  repeated  the  experiment  of  separation  in  the  cold  by
allowing  the  fluid  which  was  decanted  from  the  guinea-pig  blood-cella
after  these  had  been  treated  with  active  dog  serum  at  0°  C,  to  act
on  guinea-pig  blood  sediments  previously  mixed  with  dog  serum.
Our  results  were  in  accord  with  the  above  and  led  to  a  clear  under-
standing of  our  previous  negative  findings.     See  Table  V.

TABLE  V.

Absorption  or  Doo  Sbrfm  by  Gcinka-piq  Blood  at  0"  C.

(0,075  cc   dog  Bcrutn  just  (>omplBte!y  disBolvea  1  cc.  5%  guinea-pig  blood.)


Sn

vent  Powir  of  tl«

on

^&r

A,  Nilive

"as™

Sonan  liuunLvBled

ruled  with  Dob

CO.

I.  60°,

II.  55'.

m.  00°.

1  0,15

2  0.1

3  0,075

complete
little

complete

complete
strong

complete

In  this  case,  therefore,  we  have  demonstrated  a  thermolabOity
of  the  amboceptor'  which  shows  itself  especially  in  the  activa-
ting experiment  with  guinea-pig  complement,  but  also  in  that  with
its  own  dog  (complement).  Only  through  this  thorough  analysis
was  it  possible  to  furnish  for  Buchner's  third  negative  case  also
positive  proof  of  the  complex  constitution  of  normal  hemolysins.

After   ha\'ing   determined    that   certain   amboceptors   will    only


'  It  is  theretore  not  at  all  pemiiKsible  to  (Icfine  the  two  components  of  the
hH?molysin,  as  Gruber  would  do  (Uiscuasion  of  Gruber'a  AddreES,  Wiener  Klin,
Wochensch,  1901,  No.  50),  only  according  to  the  temperatarr,  and  to  say  that  at
a.  certain  degree  ot  lieat  the  ambocept-or  remainB  intact  while  the  complement
does  not.  As  long  ago  as  their  second  communication  Ehrlich  and  MorgeDRith
described  a  thermostable  complement  of  goat  serum  which  remained  intact  at
56°  C;  and  according  to  our  experiences  here  described  a  general  definition  of
amboceptors  as  bodies  which  witlistand  heating  to  55°  C,  is  absolutely  impoa-
sible.  The  itifluence  of  temperature  on  amboceptor  and  complement  mriea
from  case  to  cage.  Hence  that  these  two  factors  act  together  in  ha-molysis  we
know  only  from  this,  that  (idd  subatatires,  in  themeclfs  not  capable  n]  causing
aohttion,  when  combined,  effed  htBmolyma;  and  that  one  of  these  suhstancea  (the
complemml)  can  nei<er  alone  br  bound  by  the  blood-cells  but  altoayt  only  through
the  \nterixnlion  0}  the  other  (the  omboceplur).


CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.  189

bear  slight  warming,  in  order  to  remain  capable  of  reacting,  we  liad
to  abandon  our  custom  of  inactivating  sera  by  simply  healing  them
to  150°  C.  Thereafter  we  had  always  first  to  determine  the  minimal
inactivating  temiwrature  for  each  individual  case.  The  limits  of
temperature  can  usually  be  determined  accurately;  for  dog  scrum
it  is  49°  C.  We  have  also  tried  by  means  of  other  complements  to
activate  dog  serum  inactivated  at  5U°,  and  have  found  a  suitable
complement  not  only  in  guinea-pig  serum  but  also  in  human  serum.
In  this  case  also,  the  thermolability  of  the  amboceptor  showed  itself,
for  heating  to  60°  C.  destroyed  the  reactivatibility.  In  two  cases,
however,  the  power  to  reactivate  was  presc^^■ed  to  a  greater  or  less
extent  even  after  heating  to  60°  C.  In  like  manner  dog  serum
could  be  activated  by  the  complements  described  when  it  had  been
deprived  of  its  solvent  power  by  other  means.  ITius  the  comple-
ments of  dog  serum  were  absorbed  by  means  of  yeast,  and  by  means
of  an  an ti complement  serum  (from  a  goat)  whose  normal  amboceptor
for  guinea-pig  blood  had  been  removed  by  washing  with  guinea-pig
blood.  The  dog  sera  so  inactivated  manifested  their  amboceptor
proiierties  when  they  were  appropriately  activated.

In  the  first  two  negative  cases  of  Bnchner,  separation  in  the  cold
had  sliown  the  presence  of  amboceptors  in  the  sheep  and  rabbit  serum.
I  now  sought  by  means  of  activating  experiments  to  find  fitting
complements  for  these  amboceptors  in  other  sera.  Naturally,  after
the  above  experiences,  it  was  necessary  here  also  to  first  determine
the  minimal  inactivating  temperature.  For  sheep  serum  this  is
BO°C.,  for  rabbit  serum  51°  C.  If  sheep  serum  is  inactivated  by
half  an  hour's  heating  to  .50°  C,  it  is  easy  lo  restore  the  hemolytic
action  on  guinea-pig  blood  (Buchner's  Case  I)  by  the  addition  of
fresh  human  scrum.  In  this  way  the  complex  nature  of  the  normal
hffimolysin  of  sheep  aerum  can  be  demonstrated.  One  can  also  acti-
vate with  guinea-pig  serum,  although  then  a  feebler  solvent  action
is  obtained.  In  both  cases  the  thermolability  of  the  amboceptor
is  readily  demonslrated;  for  by  heating  tlie  sheep  serum  to  60°  C.
this  can  no  longer  be  activated,  or  only  in  very  much  leas  degree.^


'  la  addition  to  this  I  have  also  demonstrated  a  thermolability  of  the  am-
boceptors of  goat  serum  which  are  aptival«d  by  horfte  serum  and  act  on
rabbit  and  guinea-pig  blood.  Repeated  investigations  by  Dr.  Morgenrotb
have  shown  that  a  markedly  thennolsbile  amboceptor  ia  contained  al>{o  in  horse
serum.     This  amboceptor,  which  fita  giiineft-pig  blood,  and  can  no  longer  be


d


190  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

The  com l)i nation,  sheep  blood  and  rabbit  serum  (Buchner's
second  case)  preaenW  entirely  analogous  conditions.  Both  guinea-
pig  serum  and  human  serum,  the  latter  only  in  a  moderate  degree
contain  a  complement  which  activates  the  amboceptor  of  rabbit
serum.  The  rabbit  amboceptor,  however,  is  evidently  of  more  stable
constitution;  for  even  after  heating  to  60°,  its  solvent  power  can
be  completely  restored.  1  can  therefore  confirm  the  facts  found
by  Buchner  in  this  case,  namely  that  sheep  serum  ia  incapable  of
restoring  the  solvent  power  for  sheep  blood.  This,  however,  accord-
ing to  the  above  statement,  is  naturally  no  argument  against  the
complex  nature  of  the  hiemoysin  because  no(  every  aerum  need  con-
tain a  filling  compkment  jar  every  particular  amboceptor.

Provided  that  sufficiently  numerous  combinations  are  examined,
the  "  completion  method  "  as  a  rule  leads  to  the  positive  demon-
stration of  the  amboceptors.  The  "separation  in  the  cold"  on
the  contrary,  owing  t«  the  peculiarity  of  the  combining  relations
of  the  separate  components,  is  entirely  inapplicable  in  a  number
of  cases.

Gniber,  the  second  author  to  come  out  against  the  conception  of
the  complex  nature  of  normal  serum  hemolysins,  sought  to  demon-
strate amboceptors  in  a  number  of  normal  sera,  by  means  of  "  sepa-
ration in  the  cold."  In  view  of  the  preceding  it  is  not  surprising  that
he  failed  in  a  number  of  cases  to  effect  a  separation  of  the  hcemotysin.

Ehrlieh  and  Morgenroth  in  their  second  communication  on  hi»-
molysins  have  already  analyzed  the  conditions  for  separating  the
interbody  by  means  of  absorption,  emphasizing  "  thai  Ike  solution
of  the  problem  tiurefore  is  now  possible  only  under  either  of  the  two
above  mentioned  favorable  conditions;  (1)  When  Ike  luv  hnptopkore
groups  of  Ike  ijilcrliodi/  differ  greatly  in  tlteir  affinity;  and  (2)  wken,
by  means  of  a  combination  whose  discovery  depends  on  chance,  an  acti-
vating complcmtrnt  is  found."

The  limitations  of  the  two  methods  applicable  to  an  analysis
of  the  complex  nature  of  hipmolysine,  are  therefore  sharply  defined.
In  any  individual  case  when  one  method  fails,  it  will  always  be
be  necessary  to  make  use  of  the  other  in  order  to  gain  an  insight
into  the  constitution  of  the  hEemolyains  at  all  commensurate  with
the  means  at  our  disposal.     The  schematic  application  of  only  one

nctivnted  aUer  healing  lo  55°  (',  can  be  shown  to  exist  ia  aclitt  horse  eerum
(whicli  does  not  disHOlvc  guinea-pig  blood)  by  combining  and  completing  it  with

guinea- pig  serum.


CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.  191

method  can  lead  to  the  greatpst  errors.  In  this  respect  a  comparison
of  thie  results  obtained  by  Buchner  and  Gruber,  is  very  instructive,
for  among  their  cases  are  two  fombinations  which  are  designated
by  the  one  as  positive,  and  by  the  other  negative.

The  amboceptor  of  rabbit  serum  for  sheep  blood,  which  Buchner,
because  of  the  failure  to  reactivate  this  with  sheep  serum,  regarded
as  absent.  Gruber,  by  means  of  the  cold  separation  method,  could
demonstrate  as  present;  and  for  ox  serum,  whose  amboceptor  Buchner
had  already  demonstrated  by  the  activation  with  guinea-pig  serum,
Gruber.  through  the  failure  of  his  cold  absorption  method,  arrived
at  the  view  of  a  pure  alexin  action.

In  Gniber's  negative  cases,  which  embrace  the  following  com-
binations: I,  rabbit  blood — dog  scrum;  II,  rabbit  blood — ox  serum;
III.  gui  ea-pig  blood — ox  serum,  IV,  rabbit  blood — guinea-pig  serum;
I  have  syBtematically  sought  for  sources  of  fitting  complements
and  have  found  these  in  abundance.  Naturally  in  view  of  the  experi-
ences above  mentioned  the  inactivation  of  the  sera  was  effected
at  the  lowest  temperatures  possible;  thus  dog  serum  and  guinea-pig
serum  at  50°,  ox  serum  at  52°  C.  In  the  following  sera  (in  part  in
agreement  with  other  previous  experiences)  I  have  found  comple-
ments suitable  for  activation;

I.  For  the  amboceptor  of  dog  serum,  acting  on  rabbit  blood;  in  guinea-
pig  serum,  ox  serum,  goat  strum,  and  sheep  serum.

II.  For  tlw  amboceptor  of  ox  scrum,  acting  on  rabbit  blood;  in
guinea-pig  serum,  rabb^U  serum,  and  rat  serum.

III.  For  the  amfioceptor  of  ox  serum,  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood; —
in  guinea-pig  serum,  human  serum,  rat  serum,  horse  serum,  and  to
a  slight  extent  also  in  sheep  serum

Naturally  in  all  the  experiments,  control  tests  were  made  with
the  active  serum,  which  served  as  complement.  In  the  cases  desig-
nated as  positive  completion,  this  serum  by  itself  had  to  exert  no
hieraolj-lic  action  or  at  least  to  act  in  a  very  much  smaller  degree,

Gniber's  fourth  negative  case,  rabbit  blood  and  guinea-pig  serum,
offered  considerable  difficulties  because  the  combination  is  very
little  or  not  at  all  effective,  and  it  is  probably  because  of  this  that
Gruber  speaks  of  "  concentrated  guinea-pig  serum."  Among  a  large
number  of  guinea-pig  sera  examined  for  this  purpo,se,  we  found
only  two  sufficiently  hsmolytically  active.  But  here  also,  through
the  successful  activation  by  means  of  human  and  ox  sera  (sera,  to
be  sure,  which  by  themselves  dissolve  rabbit  blood,  but  which  still


192


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


effect  complete  haemolysis  as  complements  in  amounts  in  which  alone
they  are  entirely  inert)  we  could  furnish  positive  proof  of  the  presence
of  amboceptors.

Buchner  and  Gmber  have  therefore  described  a  total  of  seven
cases  said  to  show  pure  alexin  action;  and  these  cases  were  held
by  them  to  be  sufficient  to  decide  in  the  negative  the  entire  questioa
of  the  complex  nature  of  the  normal  serum  hiemolysina.  Against
this  we  have  in  all  these  cases  brought  positive  proof  that  the  "  alexin,"
coTiceivcd  by  Buchner  to  be  a  simple  unit,  always  jrroduces  its  effects
through  the  co-adion  of  two  components,  the  existence  of  which  ia
demonstrable  in  different  ways.  We  must  therefore  uphold  Ehrhch
and  Moigenroth's  view,  thai  normal  and  artificially  produced  hamo-
lysins  exert  their  action  according  to  exactly  the  same  mechanism.

We  do  not  yet  possess  a  method  generally  applicable  to  demon-
strate the  complex  nature  of  the  hajmolysin,  and  even  a  thorough
analysis,  therefore,  need  not  necessarily  achieve  the  desired  result  in
every  case.  The  method-  adopted  by  Mullcr'  for  demonstrating
the  amboceptors  in  chicken  serum,  which  is  hjEmolytic  for  rabbit
blood,  is  of  interest  in  this  connection.  When  the  usual  methods
failed  he  found  that  bouillon  injections  caused  an  increase  in  the
amount  of  complement  in  the  chicken  serum  without  affecting  the
amount  of  amboceptor.  This  led  him  to  recognize  the  complex
nature  of  the  liiemolysin,  a  fact  confirmed  by  the  successful  activa-
tion of  heated  chicken  serum  by  means  of  pigeon  serum.  When
therefore  in  isolated  cases  the  separation  does  not  succeed  accord-
ing to  the  methods  heretofore  employed,  such  results,  the  product  of
incomplete  methods,  most  certainly  do  not  argue  for  a  simple  alexin
action.  We  hope  that  the  employment  of  the  lowest  possible  tem-
peratures in  inactivation  will  result  in  increasing  "  completion  "
possibilities  and  make  the  demonstration  of  the  complex  consti-
tution of  the  hemolysins  easier  in  difficult  cases.  At  present  this
demonstration  has  failed  only  in  the  case  of  eel  serum  (which,  to
be  sure,  is  very  peculiar  in  its  ha-molytic  behavior),  for  thus  far  no
fitting  complements  have  been  found  for  this  serum.  In  all  other
cases  of  hemolysis  through  normal  sera,  which  have  been  investi-
gated for  this  purpose,  according  to  our  experiences  positive  proof
of  the  presence  of  the  amboceptors  has  been  furnished.

The  normal  bactericidal  sera  also  owe  their  bactericidal  power


CONCERNING  ALEXIN  ACTION.  I'Jb

to  the  co-action  of  two  substances.  Keiffer'  furnished  the  first
observations  which  led  to  this  view  when,  in  1895,  he  succeeded
in  restoring  the  bactericidal  power  of  inactivated  goat  serum  in  the
peritoneal  cavity  of  a  guinea-pig.  Moxter^  subsequently  demon-
strated the  presence  of  normal  bacteriolytic  amboceptors  by  means
of  reactivating  experimcnta  in  vitro.  And  according  to  the  numerous
investigations  of  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  in  this  Institute,  all  of
the  bactfiriolysins  of  normal  sera  which  they  investigated,  are  of
complex  constitution.  This  is  natural  because  in  the  cell-destrot/iiig
properties  of  normal  serum,  as  in  t/ie  development  and  increase  oj  these
properties  through  immunization  lite  mechanism  is  exactly  tite  same
in  principle,  although,  owing  to  the  tnvhiplicUy  of  the  reodion  products,
the  action  of  the  latter  appears  more  arnipUx.

In  my  investigations  of  the  ajtotoxic  properties  of  normal  serum
J  have  included  the  widely  distributed  spermotoxic  {unction.  Accord-
ing to  the  unanimous  opinion  of  all  authorities  the  speeiSc  spermo-
toxin  produced  by  immunization  consists  of  two  substances.  Thus
far,  however,  this  has  not  been  demonstrated  for  normal  spcrmo-
toxin,  and  Metalnikoff^  has  regarded  the  impossibility  of  reacti-
vating the  heated  normal  spermotoxic  serum  as  an  important  diag-
nostic means  to  differentiate  the  latter  from  the  specific  immune
serum.  In  opposition  to  this,  by  means  of  suitable  mixtures,  I
was  able,  here  also,  to  convince  myself  of  the  complex  nature  of  the
normal  spermotoxin.  After  the  spermotoxic  property  of  rabbit
serum  for  guinea-pig  spennotozoa  had  been  destroyed  by  heating
to  56°  C,  I  was  able  to  restore  this  by  the  addition  of  guinea-pig
or  horse  serum  provided  I  mixed  the  inactive  rabbit  serum  and  guinea-
pig  serum  in  the  pro|X)rtion  of  3:1  or  3:2.  In  that  case  the  guinea-
pig  spermatozoa  were  killed  after  12-15  minutes,  whereas,  in  the
control  teat  with  inactive  rabbit  serum  or  active  guinea-pig  serum
alone,  the  spermatozoa  showed  lively  movements  even  after  !J-Ii
hours,  The  proportion  of  amboceptor  and  complement  employed
by  me  is  in  direct  contrast  to  that  recommended  for  immune  sera  by
MetchnikofT  and  his  co-workers.     The  reason  for  this  will  be  under-

'  K.  PfeiFFer,  Weitere  Mittheilungen  iiber  die  Speiifischen  Antikorper  der
Cholera,  Zeitachr.  f.  Hygiene,  XX,  1895.

'  Moxter.  Uber  die  Wirkiin^wi^iBe  dpr  barterienauflfisenden  SuhBtarMn
der  tbieriachen  Silfte.  Centralbl.  f.  Bacieriol.,  XXVI.  ISM.

'  Metalnikoff,  Etudes  sur  la  Spermotoxine,  Annales  de  I'lnBtitut  Pasleur,
1000.


194  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

stood  when  the  high  degree  of  amboceptor  concentration  in  immune
sera  is  considered.  In  my  case  larger  amounts  of  guinea-pig  serum
must  be  avoided,  because  in  large  doses  the  guinea-pig  serum  by
itself  finally  exerts  a  toxic  action  on  guinea-pig  spermatozoa.  This
agrees  with  a  statement  of  London  (1.  c.)  that  most  all  normal  sera
contain  autospermotoxins.


Subsequent  Note. — In  the  meantime  the  French  translation  of  a  study  by
London,  which  had  already  been  published  in  Russian,  has  appeared  (Contribu-
tion ik  r^tude  des  spermolysines,  Archives  des  Sciences  Biologiques,  T.  IX,  1902),
which  shows  that  this  investigator  had  also  already  recognized  the  complex  con-
stitution of  the  normal  spermotoxin.

Our  views  concerning  the  complex  nature  of  hsemoylsins  have  recently  been
confirmed  by  Flexner  and  Noguchi  through  the  successful  separation  of  am-
boceptor and  complement  in  the  cold  (Snake  venom  in  relation  to  hsemolysis,
bacteriolysis,  and  toxicity,  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,  vol.  VI,  1902).


XVIII.    CONCERNING  THE  PLURALITY  OF  COMPLE-
MENTS OF  THE  SERUM.i

By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  H.  Sachs.

The  continued  study  of  the  hsemolysins  of  blood  serum  has  not
only  considerably  extended  our  knowledge  of  the  origin  and  mechan-
ism of  the  immunity  reaction  directed  against  cells,  but  has  revealed
to  us  an  unsuspected  complexity  of  cellular  metabolism  to  which
the  numerous  protective  bodies  circulating  in  the  blood  owe  their
existence.  It  is  probably  everywhere  conceded  at  the  present  day
that  the  specific  cytotoxins  produced  through  immunization  consist
of  two  substances,  amboceptor  and  complement;  and  we  must  regard
it  as  proven  that  the  cytotoxic  substances  in  normal  serum  are  also
of  complex  constitution.^  A  simple  alexin  action,  in  Buchner's  sense,
does  not  exist.  But  even  within  the  limits  of  this  complicated  field,
Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  through  their  experimental  work,  have
come  to  a  further  pluralistic  conception,  so  that  the  closer  analysis
of  the  factors  making  up  the  cytotoxic  function  of  a  serum  is  enor-
mously complicated.  Thus  it  has  been  found  in  immunization  with
cells,  that  not  merely  a  single  kind  of  amboceptor  is  developed  in
the  blood  serum,  but  that  a  large  number  of  different  types  of  amho-
ceptors  appear,  which  vary  both  in  their  cytophile  and  complemento-
phile  groups.  Furthermore,  a  number  of  facts  and  theoretical  con-
siderations (discussed  in  detail  in  the  Sixth  Haemolysin  commu-
nication) could  be  satisfactorily  explained  only  by  the  assumption
of  a  plurality  of  complements,  and  were  absolutely  irreconcilable
with  the  unitarian  assumption  of  only  one  complement  in  each  serum.

After  all  this  one  might  well  regard  the  pluralistic  conception
as  well  founded,  and  abandon  all  further  theoretic  argument  along
this   line.     But  Bordet,^  the  strongest  supporter   of   the   unitarian

*  Reprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902,  Nos.  14  and  15.

*  See  the  previous  study.

*  Bordet,  Sur  le  mode  d'action  des  scrums  cytolitiques,  etc.  Annales  de
I'Instit.  Pasteur,  May,  1901.

195


396  COLLECTEU  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.

charact€r,  in  a  recent  work  especially  designed  to  refute  the  plural-
istic view  of  the  complementfi,  haa  published  a  series  of  experiments,
which  in  his  opinion  necessarily  point  to  a  simple  alexin.  Bordet's
argument  is  based  on  the  discovery  of  the  interesting  fact  that  blood
corpuscles  or  bacteria  treated  with  an  inactive  immune  scrum  specific
for  themselves  were  able  to  deprive  a  normal  active  serum  of  all
ita  complement  activity.

Bordet  sensitized  blood  corpuscles  with  appropriate  amboceptors,
and  then  exjiosed  them  to  the  action  of  a  freshly  drawn  normal  serum.
If  now  he  waited  for  the  occurrence  of  hiemolysis  and  then  added
sensitized  cells,  baet«ria,  or  blood  coqjuscles  of  different  species,
they  remained  totally  unchanged,  although  the  serum  that  iiad  been
used  as  complement  was  capable  in  its  original  condition  of  destroy-
ing these  also.  When  fresh  senmi  was  first  brought  into  contact
with  sensitized  bacteria,  similar  results  were  obtained.  The  blood
corpuscles  subsequently  added  did  not  then  undergo  hfemolysis.

//  such  an  action  on  otic  of  the  sensitive  substrata  has  imce  taken
place,  the  acUve  sera,  as  a  rule,  arc  deprived  of  all  their  co?nplcment
functions,  from  which  Bordet  concludes  that  the  destruction  of  the
most  varied  elements  by  one  and  the  same  serum  must  be  due  to
a  single  complement.

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  these  experiments,  which  we  have
been  able  to  verify  in  numerous  cases,  at  first  sight  seem  to  sup-
port Bordet's  view.  If  one  a.ssumes  that  a  certain  serum  A,  which
is  capable  of  complementing  two  different  bodies  B  and  C,  one  bac-
tericidal and  the  other  ha'niolytic,  contains  only  a  single  comple-
ment, Bordet's  results  would  then  most  readily  be  explained  by
assuming  that  the  two  inmiune  bodies  are  identical  in  their  com-
plementophile  groups.  In  that  case,  of  course,  owing  to  the  pre^-ioua
exercise  of  the  one  function,  the  avaOable  complement  will  have
been  used  up,  so  that  nothing  is  left  for  the  exercise  of  its  second
function.  But  a  closer  examination  shows  us  that  this  t'ieti'  is  an
artificial  one,  and  does  not  correspond  to  the  fads  observed.  For  if
it  be  a.ssumed  that  this  particular  serum  A  contains  two  different
complements,  both  of  which  can  be  absorbed  by  the  amiwceptors  B
and  C,  Bordet's  experiment  will  find  an  entirely  different  explana-
tion. Now  previous  investigations '  have  shown  that  the  artifi-
cially developed  immune  sera  are  not  of  simple  constitution,  but
contain  a  number  of  different  amboceptors  possessing  different  com-

'  Ehrlich  and  Mo-genroth,  p.  56.


PLURALITY  OF  COMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  SEIiUM.


ly?


piemen tophile  groups.  To  one,  therefore,  conversant  with  this  con-
ception, Bordet's  conclusion  cannot  appear  otherwise  than  ioraed.
The  unity  of  the  complement  would  only  then  be  demonstrated
by  Bordet's  experiment  if  in  the  immune  serum  employed  for  absorp-
tion but  a  single  com  pie  men  top  hile  group  came  into  action,  and
not  a  plurality  of  groups.

Despite  these  objections  raised  against  liordet's  evidence,  and  in
spite  of  Ehrlich  and  llorgenroth's  previous  positive  demonstration
of  the  ]>lurality  of  the  complements,  it  seemed  advisable,  owing
to  the  irajjortance  of  the  question,  to  enter  once  more  upon  a  thorough
investigation  of  the  subject.  We  at  first  confined  ourael\'es  to  the
complements  which  effect  the  hemolytic  actions,  and  have  been
able  to  bring  forward  a  large  number  of  new  and  more  conclusive
proofs  for  the  diversity  of  these  complements  in  the  same  serum.
These  investigations  have  in  part  already  been  mentioned  by  Ehrlich
at  the  Congress  of  Naturalists  in  Hamburg.

The  method  of  the  experiments  was  guided  by  the  following
considerations.  If  only  a  single  complement  is  present  in  a  cer-
tain serum,  it  follows  that  all  the  complement  actions  of  this  serum
would  be  weakened  equally  by  any  given  influence,  chemical,  physi-
cal, or  thermic.  If,  on  the  contrary,  our  view  of  the  'plurality  of
comptemertts  is  correct,  it  should  be  possible  through  appropriate
experimental  conditions  to  influence  the  serum  in  such  a  way  that
imly  a  part  of  the  complements  will  be  destroyed,  while  others  remain
intact.  Not  only  the  absolute  inhibition  of  the  action  of  a  few  com-
plements, but  also  marked  quantitative  differences  in  the  impair-
ment of  the  individual  completions  can  only  be  satisfactorily  explained
by  the  assiimption  of  different  substances  as  carriers  of  these  prop-
erties. A  single  complement  would  have  all  its  functions  impaired
equally.

We  have  especially  subjected  the  complementing  property  of
goat  serum  to  a  thorough  analysis,  using  for  this  purpose  five  different
combinations  which  can  be  activated  by  goat  serum.  For  simplicity's
sake,  we  sliall  designate  them  by  the  following  numbers:

Case      I.  Guinea-pig  blood — inactive  norma!  goat  serum.

Case    II.  Rabbit  blood — inactive  normal  goat  serum.

Case  in.  Rabbit  blood — inactive  serum  of  goats  immunized  with
rabbit  blood.

Case  IV,  Ox  blood — inactive  serum  of  goats  immunized  with
ox  blood.


i


198


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN'  IMMITNITY.


Case   V.  Dog  blood — inactive   serum  of   goata  immunized  with

dog  blood.
The  various  means  by  wluch  we  have  succeeded  in  a  eepanttiOQ  of
the  single  complements  are  as  follows:

1.  Digestion  with  papain.

2.  Partial  destruction  with  an  alkali.

(        '3.  Partial  destruction  by  heating  to  50°  C.

4.  Combination  with  blood-cells.

We  discovered  that  invariably  under  the  influence  of  papain
digestion  four  complementing  actions  disappeared,  or  were  more  or
leas  strongly  diminished.  Only  a  single  complement  remained  intact,
namely,  that  fitting  the  amboceptor  developed  in  goat  serum  through
immunization  with  rabbit  blood.

In  these  experiments  20  ec.  goat  serum  mLxed  with  3  cc.  of  a  10%
papain  solution  were  placed  in  an  incubator  in  order  to  digest  the
complements.  We  found  that  the  proper  time  to  interrupt  the
digestive  process  was  usually  thirty  to  forty-five  minutes  later,
when  an  examination'  demonstrated  complete  preservation  of  the
complements  for  Case  Til  with  complete  disappearance  or  consider-
able diminution  of  the  others.  Of  the  large  number  of  our  experi-
ments made  in  this  connection  three  examples  may  be  cited.  See
Table  I.

TABLE  I.

Digestion  op  Goat  Seihtm  by  Means  op  Papain.


Solv.

„t  Power  of

the  Gutti  Semm.

E«iii

lei.

Kiam

nie  II.

E«m

1b  111.

(<■)  Dig«[«l.

(6)  NormiJ

(a)  Digeslo.;

Kb)  Noimid

(a)DreoM«,j.

Caw     I

0,5

0-25

0,5

0  !5

(i  5

0.2S

trace

ooiuplele

liioderule

completo

Case    11

1-0

complete

1.0

n

complete

ft.  iraoe

complete

Caaelll

complete

complete

complete

complete

Gomplete

complete

Case  IV

IJ.3
little

0  nil

complete

0  ,■!
little

0  07

(1  5

o.os

Case    V

0,5

O.OG

trace

.Im'l  c'm'ie

complete

'  In  all  our  experiments  the  a
■of  a  S*^  HU8pen,i[on,


t  of  blood  tued  aa  a  reagent  •kbx  1  ce.  ]


PLURALITY  OF  COMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  SERUM.


199


When  the  papain  was  allowed  to  act  longer,  the  resistant  com-
plement III  was  also  affected,  so  that  usually  after  one  and  one-half  to
two  hours  digestion,  the  goat  serum  was  entirely  deprived  of  all  its
complements.

Treatment  with  alkali  in  place  of  papain  digestion  gave  analogous
results.  We  made  use  of  soda  and  proceeded  as  follows:  10  cc.
goat  serum  to  w.  ich  1  cc.  7%  soda  solution  had  been  added,  were
kept  in  the  incubator  for  one  and  one-quarter  hours,  and  then  neutral-
ized with  hydrochloric  acid.  The  solvent  power  was  compared  with
a  goat  serum  which  by  the  simultaneous  addition  of  soda  and  hydro-
chloric acid,  had  been  brought  to  the  same  concentration  of  salt
without  having  been  subjected  to  the  damaging  influence  of  the
soda.i     (See  Table  II.)

TABLE  II.
Destruction  op  the  Goat  Serum  by  Means  op  Soda.


Solvent  Power  of  the  Goat  Serum.

(a)
After  Soda  Treatment.

(6)
Normally.

Case     I
''      II
**     III
'*     IV
"       V

0.5                    0
1.0                    0

0.12        complete
0.5                 0
0.3                 0

0 . 1          complete

0.6

0.03

0.04

0.04

Hence,  owing  to  the  action  of  the  soda  the  complements  for  Cases  I,
II,  IV,  and  V  have  completely  disappeared,  whereas  Complement  III
is  8tiU  present,  although  its  action  is  hut  one-fourth  of  what  it  was.

We  have  furthermore  effected  a  separation  of  the  complements  by
heating  the  goat  serum  to  49°-50°  C.  for  half  an  hour.  At  this  tempera-
ture the  solvent  action  of  normal  goat  serum  for  rabbit  and  guinea-
pig  blood  has  been  completely  destroyed  or  almost  so.  On  the  other
hand,  the  complement  action  for  the  artificially  produced  immune
bodies  is  more  or  less  preserved,  as  can  be  seen  from  Table  III.

The  experiment  shows  that  in  this  case  complement  IV  is  the
most  resistant,  in  contrast  to  its  behavior  with  papain  or  soda.  In
the  two  latter  cases,  complement  III  had  shown  itself  the  most  resist-
ant.   If  we  examine  the  table  more  closely  we  shall  further  see  a

*  The  resulting  salt  concentration,  by  the  way,  is  so  slight  that  the  solvent
power  was  in  no  way  decreased  thereby.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

TABLE  III.
AN  HnTiR's  Hbatinr  or  the  Goat  Sbbttm  to


SulVBnt  Power  o(

tba  GcMit  SeruB..

Uealcd.

Normally.

0H^^^^8olv«„v

Case     I

■'      11
"     III
"     IV
'■       V

1-0  trace

1.0    ■■

0,08  complete
0-035       "
0.75

0 , 1      complete

0,25

0,01

0,035       "

0.02

1    almost  nothing

difference  in  the  diminution  suffered  by  complement  V  and  that
suffered  by  complement  III.  This  is  so  marked  that  merely  a  com-
bination of  the  above  three  experiments  already  furnishes  positive
proof  that  the  complement  actions  it<,  III,  IV,  and  V  proceed  vnde-
prndentty  of  one  another,  and  are  effected  by  three  different  comple-
ments.

But  against  this  method  of  proof  the  objection  might  be  made
that  in  the  end  we  may  still  be  dealing  with  simple  [einheitiich]  com-
plementa  and  that  the  results  of  the  experiments  mentioned  do  not
necessarily  indicate  a  plurality  of  complements.  It  could  be  assumed
that  the  view  we  have  expressed  concerning  the  plurality  of  the
complements  was  true  only  in  a  certain  restricted  sense.  Thus  it
would  be  possible  that  the  complements  possessed  but  one  hapto-
phore  group,  but  a  plurality  of  zymotoxic  groups  of  which  one  effected
the  damaging  action  in  any  individual  case.  It  could  then  ea.sily
be  imagined  that  the  various  zymotoxic  groups  differ  from  one  another
in  their  behavior  toward  chemic  or  thermic  influences,  so  that  per-
haps one  was  injured  by  papain,  and  another  by  an  alkali.  In  order
to  decide  this  possibility  either  one  way  or  another  it  seemed  advis-
able to  undertake  absorption  experiments.  In  case  of  a  simple
complement  with  different  zymotoxic  groups,  the  complement  would
be  absorbed  as  a  unit,  whereas  in  the  other  case,  differences  such
as  we  have  already  observed  on  heating,  etc.,  would  be  expected  to
occur.

Because  of  the  great  significance  of  obsorption,  we  regard  these
experiments  as  particularly  valuable.  Our  first  experiments  were
made  to  see  if  the  complements,  like  so  many  bodies  known  to  chem-
istry would  adhere  to  granular  substances  of  various  kinds  by  virtue
of   surface   attraction.     Bone    charcoal,   skin    powder,   lycopodium.


^^^


i


PLLKALITY  OF  COMI'LEMENTS  OF  THE  SERUM.


201


and  diatom  eartli,  which  we  employed  for  this  purpose,  all  proved
more  or  less  unsuitable  for  the  absorption  of  complement.  A  stronger
absorbent  power  on  the  other  hand  was  exhibited  by  organized  mate-
rials, thus  confirming  the  statements  of  von  Dungern."  Suspensions
of  staphylococci,  when  used  in  sufficient  quantity,  were  able  to  abstract
the  complements  quite  energetically,^  In  like  manner  yeast  powder
is  an  excellent  means  to  deprive  a  serum  of  its  complement  prop-
erties. A  separation  of  the  complements,  however,  was  not  achieved
by  these  experiments.

We  are  inclined  to  believe  that  in  these  cases  the  fixation  of  the
complements  is  due  to  physical  absorption  and  not  to  definite  chemi-
cal union,  This  view  is  the  outcome  of  the  positive  results  obtained
in  the  absorptions  when  we  employed  blood-cells  which  had  been
mixed  with  suitable  amboceptors,  and  which,  according  to  our  views,
were  able  to  bind  complements  chemically.  If  blood-cells  which
have  been  saturated  (sensitized)  with  a  normal  immune  body  or
with  one  artificially  produced  are  shaken  with  a  certain  amount^
of  complementing  serum,  it  is  very  easy  to  determine  that  in  con-
formity with  the  results  of  Bordet's  experiments,  the  complement
properties  possessed  by  the  normal  serum  have  in  most  cases  com-
pletely disappeared  with  the  onset  of  haimolysis.  It  was  just  this
phenomenon  that  led  Bordet  to  his  unitarian  conception.  \'et  even
in  this  absorption  it  is  possible  by  means  of  suitable  methods  to
convince  one's  self  of  the  diversity  of  the  complements,  for  by  making
the  time  as  short  as  possible  only  those  complements  are  absorbed
which  possess  the  strongest  affinity  for  corresponding  complemcntophile
groups.  Naturally  experiments  of  this  kind  are  difficult  and  require
considerable  variation.  But  it  is  usually  possible  to  finally  devise
a  suitable  method  of  procedure.  An  interesting  case  studied  by
us  in  this  respect  is  the  combination  rabbit  blood  and  goat  serum
(Case  II).  With  sufficiently  rapid  digestion  {2  to  3  minutes  at  the
most,  possibly  with  the  aid  of  gentle  heat)  the  decanted  portion
showed  a  considerable  loss  of  complements  for  Case  IV  or  \',  or  tor
both,  without   suffering   any  injury  in  the  rest  of  its  complement

'  See  p.  36

'The  same  results  were  obtained  by  Wilde  (Bed.  ktin.  Wochenachr.  1901.
No.  34]  in  absorption  texts  with  anthrax,  cholera,  and  typhoid  bticteria^  but
to  conclude  from  this  that  the  aleicin  is  a  simple  unit,  as  Wilde  does,  is  not  per-
missible m  view  of  our  above  statementB.

•  This  amount  must  be  determined  separately  for  each  case.


202


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


functions.     We  were  able  to  observe  this  behavior  repeatedly  and
reproduce  the  following  as  an  illustration,

10  cc.  goat  serum  are  Bhaken  with  8  cc,  rabbit  blood  for  a  very
short  time  and  then  rapidly  centrifuged.  The  following  table  shows
the  solvent  power  of  the  decanted  fluid  and  of  normal  goat  serum.
The  figures,  I-V,  correspond  to  the  blood-cell  amboceptor  com-
bination employed  in  tlie  previous  tables.

TABLE  IV.
Bbibp  Absorption  op  Goat  Serum  with  Rabbit  Blood.


Solvent  Power  of  the  Goal  Soruni.

(a)
After  iba  Abaorption.

No^^ly.

■  Ca-w     I
"      II
"    III
.,      IV

0.25  complete

0.5           "

0  04

0.3S  Gomplola

O.Z

0.25comfdete

0.5

0-04

0.08  oomptato

0.03

Complements  I,  II,  and  III  have  been  completely  preserved,
IV  and  V  have  been  reduced  to  one-fourth  and  one-seventh  respec-
tively, thus  furnishing  another  proof  for  their  di\'ersity.  It  is  of
special  interest  that  in  this  brief  action  the  particular  activating
principle  (complement  11)  which  we  shall  term  the  "  dominant  com-
plement "  has  not  at  all  combined  with  the  cell,  whereas  other  com-
plements, which  are  of  no  consequence  so  far  as  the  solvent  process
is  concerned,  have  already  been  subjected  to  a  distinct  absorption.

With  the  absorptions  are  also  to  be  classed  the  experiments  con-
cerning Case  I,  which  we  have  made  with  guinea-pig  blood  stro-
mata  obtained  after  the  method  of  H.  Sachs  •  by  heating  the  blood
to  55°  C.  In  these  stromata  the  receptors  which  bind  the  ambo-
ceptors present  in  normal  goat  serum  have  been  preserved  capable
of  reacting.

These  experiments  demonstrated  the  absorption  of  the  comple-
ments for  the  two  normal  h!pmolysin.s  (Cases  I  and  II)  while  the
rest  of  the  complements  were  in  the  main  preser\-ed.^  An  experi-
ment of  this  kind  is  shown  in  Table  V.


'  In  this  also   it  is  necessary  first   to  determine  the   favorable   condition*
governing  the  experiment.     Thus,  in  order  to  completely  hinii  ihe  giiinea-p^


PLURALITY  OF  COMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  SERUBt


203


20  cc.  goat  blood  are  treated  with  the  stromata  from  53  cc.  guinea-
pig  blood.  After  absorption  has  occurred  the  mixture  is  centrifuged
and  the  complement  action  of  the  fluid  compared  with  that  of  nor-
mal goat  serum.     (See  Table  V.)

TABLE  V.
Absorption  qp  the  Goat  Serum  bt  Guinba-piq  Blood  Smoic^TA.


Solvent   Power

(a)  Of  the  Deoanted
Fluid.

(6)  Of  the  Normal
Goat  Serum.

Case     I

"    n

"    III

"     IV

ti       y

1.0  faint  trace
1.0     *'
0.1  complete
0.15  complete
0.15  complete

0.15  comidete
0.25        ^'
0.1  complete
0.04  complete
0.15  complete

-

Hence  after  the  absorption,  the  complements  of  the  normal  hemo-
lysins had  almost  completely  disappeared,  while  complements  III
and  V  were  entirely  preserved.  Complement  IV  occupies  a  place
between  these,  for  in  this  case  also  a  partial  absorption  could  not
be  avoided.  Its  behavior  very  prettily  confirms  the  demonstra-
tional  ready  made  by  us  of  this  complement's  peculiar  isolated
position.

Entirely  analogous  results  are  obtained  when,  instead  of  using
guinea-pig  blood  stromata,  a  series  of  experiments  is  made  with
red  blood-cells,  using  the  red  fluid  obtained  when  the  red  blood-cells
have  dissolved  directly  as  complement  for  another  combination.
In  such  experiments  we  could  show  that  the  blood  solution  thus
obtained  had  lost  complements  I  and  II  and  contained  only  the
complements  for  cases  III,  IV  and  V.    This  method  of  procedure


blood  hemolysin  (amboceptor  +  complement)  of  normal  goat-blood  serum,
it  is  necessary  to  absorb  with  a  large  excess  of  guinea-pig  blood  stromata.  It
then  readily  happens  that  some  complements  other  than  those  belonging  to
the  two  normal  hsemolysins  suffer  injury  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  This
was  observed  especially  in  several  cases  in  which,  in  order  to  render  easier  the
complete  binding  of  the  complements  for  the  normal  ha?molysins,  the  guinea-
pig  blood  stromata  had  been  sensitized  with  a  large  amount  of  inactivated
normal  goat  serum.  In  that  case,  evidently,  several  partial  amboceptors  present
in  the  goat  serum  in  relatively  small  amounts  and  possessing  affinities  also
for  the  other  complements  come  into  play.


204


COLLECTED  STUDIES  TN  IMMrNITY.


therefore  confirms  the  separation  effected  by  means  ot  the  stromata
whereby  the  complements  of  the  normal  hiemolysins  I  and  II  are
separated  from  the  rest.

Bordet  himself,  by  the  way,  has  described  such  a  case  concerning
the  combination  rabbit  blood — guinea-pig  acnmi.  This  experiment,
of  course,  was  not  to  be  reconciled  with  his  unitarian  view,  and  he
therefore  sought  to  explain  this  inconvenient  result  in  accordance
with  his  view  by  assuming  a  special  law  of  distribution  for  the
normal  hsemolysins,  together  possibly  with  an  inhibiting  action
exerted  by  the  products  of  tho  destruction  of  the  red  blood-cells
first  used,  on  further  solution  of  the  same.^  Against  this  we  should
like  to  emphasize  that  in  our  case  the  result  has  been  confirmed  by
the  experiment  with  blood  stnimata.  By  means  of  this,  since  the
stromata  plus  the  anchored  complement  is  removed  by  centrifug^ng,
Bordct's  assumptions  can  be  entirely  excluded.

Our  absorption  experiments  therefore  show  that  of  the  (wo  possi-
bUitifS,  namely,  of  a  complemcrU  wilk  seiwoi  different  zymoioxic  groups,
or  of  a  pluralily  of  different  complements,  Ike  latter  assumption  must
be  aaxpled.

Regarding  the  number  of  complements  to  be  assumed  for  normal
goat  serum,  as  based  on  our  experiments,  this  can  best  be  seen  from
the  following  table:


TABLE  VL


C^pl.™

ntiiw  Pomir

of  Oo.t   S.

rum  after

W

(h)

C")

(.d)

(O

1

The   Aet[on

AWjp^.™

^'"■^iTh""'

.^„

""SO-

Strommbi.

Cue     I

n

0

0

+

0

0

0

0

+

0

0

"    III

-1-

-t-

i

+

+

0

0

+

^

0

0

v»

-1-

+

'  This  objection,  moreover,  is  entirely  incomprehensible  to  us.    Acoording  .1
to  our  view,  normal  and  artiScially  produced  h^molysina  manifest  their  action  '
by  meons  □[  the  Eame  meclianism;    for  when  the  normal  anibooeptors  ore  re-
placed by  the  hont  of  ftmbot'eptorw  preBcnt  in  an  immune  serum,   new  compl»>
mentophile  groups  come  into   action,  and  with   these,  of  course,  new  partid
complements.


PLURAUTY  OF  COMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  SERUM,


205


This  shows  us  that  the  two  complements  I  and  II  (normal  hiemoly-

is)  cannot  by  these  experiments  be  differentiated  from  each  other,

iat  the  olhir  three  complements,  however,  can  absoluUhj  be  dislijiguisheH

iiy  llieir  behavior,  not  only  from  one  another  but  aho  Irom  the  first  group.

■£ence  in  the  fi\-c  different  comlnnations  tfie  existence  of  at  least  four

dtffercnt  complemenis  is  positively  demonstrated.    And  tliat  the  two

I  normal  hiemolytic  functions  of  goat  serum  are  also  effected  by  two

different  complements  followis  from  a  previous  cxjjeriment  of  Erhlich

and  Morgenroth.'     These  authors  showed  by  filtering  a  normal  goat

serum  through  Pukall  filters,  that  the  filtrate  contained  exactly  the

aame  amount  of  complement  for  guinea-pig  blood,  whereas  the  com-

iplement  for  rabbit  blood  was  almost  entirely  absent.     E.   Neisser

^d  Doring  ^  have  confirmed  this  result  in  the  case  of  human  serum.

The  necessary  consequence,  therefore,  of  our  experiences  with
goat  serum  is  the  demonstration  of  the  fact  that  in  the  fire  compleliona
txamined,  five  different  compleniaits  of  tlie  gout  scrum  come  into  play.^

We  have  also  examined  the  complementing  properties  of  the
:8era  of  other  animal  species,  and  have  arrived  at  results  which  abso-
lutely contradict  the  unitarian  view  of  the  complements.  These
igxperiments  concern  first  the  serum  of  rabbits.  We  shall  proceed
from  the  fact  determined  by  8chiitze  and  Scheller*  under  Wasser-
mann's  direction,  that,  following  intravenou.'f  injections  of  goat  blood.
the  rabbit  serum  completely  loses  its  property  to  dissolve  goat  blood.

The  question  now  was  whether  the  rabbit  serum  had  been
deprived  merely  of  this  one  complementing  function,  or  whether  it
had  also  suffered  lass  in  the  rest  of  its  complement  properties.

We  therefore  tested  the  power  of  rabbit  serum,  before  and  after
the  injection  of  goat  blood,  to  activate  the  immune  body  obtained
by  immunizing  rabbits  with  ox  blood.  As  the  essential  result  of
ma  numerous  investigations  we  established  the  fact  that  the  com-


'  See  page  5ft.

'  E.  Neisser  and  DOring,  Berl,  klin.  Wocbenai^hr.  1901,  No.  22.

'  Through  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  WendelstodC  in  Bonn,  we  leitm  that  thtLt
investigator,  by  means  of  an  int«resting  method,  hivs  aluo  succeeded  in  demon-
strating a  number  of  complements  in  goat  Kerum.  He  immunized  a  goat  with
eeveral  species  of  blood  and  vok  then  able  by  means  of  chemical  and  tbemuc
influencea  to  separate  the  complement.s  fitting  the  immune  bodies  produced,
flee  CentralblaH  t.  Bacteriologie,  in  which  Ibis  study  is  alwut  fo  appear

*  Schutze  and  Scheller.  ExperimentelJe  Beitruge  '.ur  Kennfiiisa  der  un
normalen  serum  vorkonuneoden  globuliciden  Substomen,  Zeitachrift  f.  Hygiene,
Vol.  30.1901.


i


2^6


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


plement  tor  goat  blood  disappeared  after  the  injection  while  that
for  the  immune  body  sensitizing  ox  blood  remained  intact.  The
following  test  may  serve  as  an  example;

A  rabbit  of  1900  g.  is  injected  intravenously  with  22  cc.  goat
blood.  The  change  in  the  solvent  power  of  the  goal  serum  which
results  from  the  injection  may  be  seen  from  the  following  table;


TABLE  VII.

Bqlvant  Power  of

he  Rabbit  Serum.

Betort  the  Injeclion.

After  tbe  laiection.

Goat  blood — inactive  normal  rabbit  serum
Ok  blood— inactive  serum  ot  a  rabbit  im-
munized with  ox  blood

0.05

1,0  no  solution
0.25coEn|det«

Similar  results  are  obtained  in  the  absorption  of  rabbit  serum
by  means  of  goat  blood  in  vilro,  so  that  this  experiment  already  justi-
fies us  in  assuming  two  different  complemenla  in  rabbit  serum.

In  one  of  these  experiments  with  goat-blood  injections  the  hae-
molysis of  pig  blood  by  means  of  rabbit  serum  was  also  tested,  and
it  was  found  that  the  complement  of  the  normal  hsmolysin  for  pig
blood,  like  that  for  sensitized  ox  blood,  had  remained  unchanged.
Neither  was  it  possible  by  means  of  intravenous  injection  of  pig
blood  to  separate  these  two  complements  of  rabbit  serum,  for  in
this  case,  contrary  to  their  previous  beliavior,  both  were  absorbed,
while  the  complement  for  goat  blood  remained  in  the  serum.  For
the  present  we  must  therefore  content  ourselves  with  the  knowledge
that  we  have  brought  forward  positive  proof  of  /fe  existence  oj  two
different  complements  in  rabbit  serum;  a  proof  which  is  strongly  cor-
roborated by  the  divergent  bchatyior  of  the  two  complcmaits  in  the
absorption  with  goat  blood  and  pig  blood  respeciivclif.

The  difference  between  the  two  complements  also  manifests
itaelf  in  their  different  vulnerability  to  papain.  While  the  com-
plementing power  of  rabbit  serum  toward  the  artificially  produced
immune  body  for  ox  blood  suffers  considerable  diminution  under  the
influence  of  papain  digestion,  the  complement  of  normal  hemolysin
for  goat  blood  is  hardly  affected,  so  tliat  this  experiment  also  sub-
stantiates our  demonstration  of  at  least  two  complements  in  rabbit
serum.

Some  rather  cursory  tests  were  finally  made  with  dog  and  guinea^


J


PLURALITY  OF  COMPLEMENTS  OF  THE  SERUM.


207


pig  serum  with  the  view  of  separating  the  complements  by  care-
fully heating  the  sera.  In  the  dog  serum  a  half  hour's  heating  to
49.5®  and  in  the  guinea-pig  senmi  to  49®  was  sufficient  to  enable
us,  by  means  of  the  differences  of  the  weakening  of  the  various  com-
plementing functions,  to  recognize  here  also  the  plurality  of  the  com-
plements.   The  results  of  these  experiments  are  shown  in  Tables  VIII

and  IX.

TABLE  Vni.

Half  an  Hour's  Heating  op  Doq  Serum  to  49**.5  C.


Blood-cell — Amboceptor  Ck>mbmation.


I.  Rabbit  blood — inactive  dog

serum

II.  Guinea-pig    blood — inactive
dog  serum

III.  Sheep    blood — inactive    dog

serum

IV.  Human  blood  — inactive  se-

rum of  goats  immunized

with  human  blood

V    Ox  blood — inactive  senun  of
eoats  immimized  with  ox

blood

VI.  Ox  blood — inactive  senun  of
rabbits  immunized  with  ox
blood


Solvent  Power  of  the  Dog  Serum.


(a)  Heated.


0.5
0.6
0.5


0

0
0


0 . 5  moderate


0.35  complete


0 . 5  strong


(b)  NormaL


0.25  complete

0.1

0.08

0.15

0.06

0.045


Solvent  Power
Still  Preserved.


0
0
0

less  than  i
less  than  ^


TABLE  IX.
Half  an  Hour's  Heating  of  the  Guinea-pio  Serum  to  49®  C.


Blood-cell — Amboceptor  Combination.

Solvent  Power  of  the  Guinea-pig
Serum.

Solvent  Power
Still  Preserved.

(a)  Heated  to  40o.

(6)  Normal.

I.  Rabbit       blood  —  inactive

guinea-pi^  senim

II.  Ox  blood — inactive  guinea-
pie  serum

1.0              0

0.5        trace
0.008  complete
0.025        "
0.025       "
0.5            "

0 . 5   complete
0.5

0.008      "

0.025      "

0.006      "

0.25

0
almost  0

III.  Ox  blood — ^inactive  serum  of
^oats  immimized  with  ox
blood

1

IV.  Ox  blood — inactive    serum
of  rabbits  immunized  with
ox  blood

1

V.  Sheep    blood — inactive   se-
rum of  goats  immunized

with  sheep  blood

VI.  Dog  blood — inactive  serum
of  goats  immunized  with
dog  blood

1

Li

i

208  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

If  we  review  all  our  observations,  they  show  that  in  the  ques-
tion of  the  complements  the  unitarian  conception  leads  to  a  con-
fused mass  of  inexplicable  contradictions,  and  that  it  must  there-
fore be  abandoned.  All  experiences,  on  lite  other  Itand,  Jiarmonize
best  with  the  oasumptiGn  of  a  number  of  different  complements  in  the
some  scrum.  Sober  consideration,  in  fact,  makes  this  appear  as
the  necessary  consequence  of  such  a  multiplicity  as  has  been  demon-
strated anew  by  these  experiments.  It  is  a  satisfaction  to  know
tliat  in  the  Institut  Pasteur  a  high  authority  (Metchnikoff ) '  has
also  given  up  the  Buchner-Bordet  conception  of  the  simplicity
[einheitlichkeit]  of  the  alexines,  and  has  come  to  the  conclusion
that  there  are  at  least  two  complements  in  the  same  serum.  Metch-
nikoff found  that  the  exudates  rich  in  macrophages  acted  Iiiemo-
lytically,  but  were  unable  to  effect  bactfiriolyais.  On  the  other  hand
the  exudates  rich  in  microphages  exerted  a  marked  bactericidal  action,
but  were  incapable  of  dissolving  even  sensitized  red  blood-cells.
Metchnikoff  concludes  that  these  two  kinds  of  cells  produce  two
different  complements,  one.  wliich  he  terms  mlcroci/tase,  effects  the
bacteriolytic  actions,  the  other,  macroajtasc,  is  the  carrier  of  the
functions  which  destroy  animal  cells.  He  emphasizes  that  the
demonstration  of  the  duality  of  complementji  does  not  affect  the
correctness  of  Bordet's  experiments,  and  he  says  in  explanation  of
Bordet's  results:  "  II  n'y  a  qu'i  admettre  que  !es  616ments  figurfe,
uue  fois  qu'ils  sont  in^r^gnfo  de  fixateurs  spficifiques,  deviennent
capables  d'absorber  non  seulcment  la  cytase  qui  les  dig6re,  raais
aussi  une  autre  qui,  sans  les  disaoudre,  se  fixe  simplement  sur  eux."

So  far  as  this  is  concerned  we  should  like  again  to  emphasize
that  we  al.so  have  not  questioned  the  correctness  of  Bordet's  experi-
ments, but  have  merely  objected  to  the  unitarian  conception  deduced
therefrom.  The  old  controversy  concerning  the  two  views  would  thus
be  ended,  and  definitely  decided  in  favor  of  our  mew.

'  MetcbnikoS,  L'tminimit^  (kns  les  malftdiew  tnfectieuscs,  page  '20G,  P&ris,
19(11.


XIX.    CONCERNING  THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION
OF  AMBOCEPTORS.'

By  Prof.  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  H.  Sachs.

I.  Blocking  of  the  Amboceptor  by  Complementolds.

The  complements  which  activate  the  amboceptors  of  btood  serum
are,  as  is  well  known  from  the  experiments  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgen-
roth,  like  the  toxins  characterized  by  two  groups  in  the  molecule,
viz.,  the  fiaptophore  group,  which  coaibines  with  the  complemento-
phile  group  of  the  amboceptor,  and  the  zymoioxic  group,  which
represents  the  actual  carrier  of  the  complement's  sjiecific  function.
In  complete  harmony  with  this,  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth^  could
show  through  the  production  of  anticomplements  by  heating  inac-
tivated sera,  that  the  complements,  like  the  toxins,  under  certain
circumstances  are  changed  into  inactive  modifications.  These  mod-
ifications are  still  able  to  excite  the  production  of  antibodies,  and
must  therefore  possess  their  haptophore  group  intact;  in  analogy
with  the  toxoids,  therefore,  they  are  called  compkmentoids.  Although
the  presence  of  the  complementoids  could  easily  be  shown  by  means
of  animal  experiments,  it  was  impossible  to  demonstrate  their  react-
ing power  by  means  of  htemolytic  test-tube  experiments.  The
reason  for  this  was  that  a  decrease  of  the  complement  action,  such
as  was  to  be  expected  in  the  inactivated  sera  (which  really  con-
stitute a  mixture  of  amboceptor  and  coniplcmentoid),  did  not  occur,
e\-en  when  the  complementoid  was  present  in  large  amounts.  Ehr-
lich and  Morgenroth  have  therefore  assumed  that  in  the  change  from
complement  to  complementoid,  the  affinity  oj  Ike  compUmenl's  hap-
tophore group  suffers  a  diminution.  A  similar  assumption  has  been
made  by  Myers  ^  for  the  toxoids  of  cobra  poison.

'  lleprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wucliensjchr.  IS02,  No.  21.

'  See  page  79.

•  Myers,  Cobra  PoiBoaSi  etc..  The  Lancut,  1S98.


■JIO


COLLECTED  8TDDIE3  IN  IMMUNITY.


It  ia,  of  course,  not  at  all  necessary  that  such  a  diminution  of
affinity  occur  with  all  complements;  and,  considering  the  great  dis-
tribution and  multiplicity  of  the  substances  included  in  the  con-
cept "  complement,"  this  is  a  priori  but  little  probable.  We  have
therefore  hoped  that  in  the  course  of  our  investigations  we  would
discover  a  suitable  combination  in  which,  on  the  formation  of  com-
plementoid,  the  diminution  oE  affinity  does  not  occur,  or  occurs  only
to  a  slight  degree.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  such  a  case  has  recently
presented  itself  to  us.

As  is  well  known,  normal  dog  serum  dissolves  guinea-pig  blood
energetically.  If  this  dog  serum  is  inactivated,  it  is  easy  to  restore
the  hemolytic  properly  with  active  guinea-pig  serum;  the  inacti-
vation,  however,  must  be  effected  at  suitable  temperatures,  50-51°  C,
for  at  higher  temperatures,  as  Sachs '  has  demonstrated,  the  ambo-
ceptor of  dog  serum  shows  itself  thermolabile.

That  is  why  Euchner  in  hie  experiments  could  not  activate  the
amboceptor  of  dogs,  for  at  the  inactivating  temperature  employed
by  him,  60°  C,  the  completion  with  guinea-pig  serum  is  no  longer
possible.  Continuing  the  analysis  of  this  interesting  case  we  made
a  curious  observation:  If  guinea-pig  blood-cells  were  treated  with
appropriate  amounts  of  inactive  dog  scrum  for  one  hour  in  an  incu-
bator and  the  mixture  then  centrifuged,  it  was  found  that,  con-
trary to  all  expectations,  the  sediments  could  no  longer  be  activated
with  guinea-pig  serum,  whereas  when  the  three  constituents  were
mixed  simultaneously,  prompt  bsemolysis  occurred.     (See  Table  I.)

Our  first  thought  was  that  the  amboceptor,  despite  the  relatively
long  contact  with  the  blood-cells  (one  hour),  had  perliaps  not  been
bound  by  these.  Such  behavior,  to  be  sm^,  although  conceivable
and,  as  we  shall  see  lat«r,  sometimes  actually  occurring,  would  be
exceptional.  In  this  case,  however,  we  could  readily  convince  our-
selves that  this  suspicion  was  groundless.  For  when  by  means  of
guinea-pig  serum  we  attempted  to  activate  the  guinea-pig  blood-
cells  digested  with  dog  serum  as  above  described,  without  first  rcTnoving
the  fluid  medium,  no  hemolysis  took  place.  And  we  could  see  by  the
behavior  of  the  fluid  obtained  by  centrifuging  the  blood  mLxture  as
described  that  the  amboceptor  was  not  present  in  the  fluid.  When
this  was  allowed  to  act  on  native  guinea-pig  blood  to  which  active
guinea-pig  serum  (complement)  had  been  added,  no  solution  could


'  See  pages  tSl  et  seq.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  AMBOCEPTORS.     211


TABLE   I.


Inactive  Dog
Serum.

cc.

SolveDt  Action  on  the  Quinea-pig  Blood .^

(A)

Blood  +  Inactive

Dog  Serum  kept  at

37*  for  One  Hour,

then  Centrifuged.

To  the  Sediments

0.5  cc.
Guinea-pig  Serum.

(B)

Blood  +  Inactive

Dog  Serum +  0.5  cc.

Guinea-pig  Senmi

Mixed
Simultaneously.

1.  1.0

2.  0.5

3.  0.35

4.  0.25

5.  0.15

6.  0

0

complete

almost  complete
0

*  The  amount  of  blood  used  in  our  experiments  is  always  1  cc.  of  a  6%  suspension  in  .  85%
salt  solution.


be  effected.     Hence  the  amboceptor  must  have  been  bound  by  the  blood-
cells.

How  then,  through  this  previous  binding,  had  the  amboceptor
lost  its  power  of  being  activated?  After  excluding  all  other  possible
explanations  we  were  forced  to  conclude  that  the  phenomenon  observed
is  due  to  a  blocking  of  the  complemeniophile  groups  of  the  dog  serum*s
amboceptor  by  the  complemenioids  still  present  in  the  inactive  serum.
The  correctness  of  this  view  has  to  our  minds  been  confirmed:

1.  By  the  isolated  binding  of  the  amboceptor  at  0®C.

2.  By  the  subsequent  blocking  of  the  amboceptor  bound  at  0®  C.^
by  means  of  free  complementoids.

3.  By  the  behavior  of  dog  serum  inactivated  by  shaking  with
yeast.

4.  By  the  combining  experiment  with  inactive  dog  serum  (inac-
tivated by  heat)  when  the  salt  content  of  the  fluids  was  increased.

We  shall  take  these  up  in  order.

1.  If  we  repeated  the  combining  experiment  above  mentioned,
modifying  it,  however,  so  that  the  amboceptor  was  anchored  by  the
blood-cells,  not  at  37®  C,  but  at  0®  C,  we  could  show  that  the  guineor
pig  blood-cells,  treated  in  this  way  at  0®  C,  were  all  activated  by  guinea^
pig  serum.     (See  Table  II.)

Now  we  know  that  at  0®,  as  a  rule,  only  the  amboceptor  is  bound
by  the  blood-cells,  and  that  the  complement  for  the  most  part  is
uninfluenced.  It  is,  therefore,  perhaps  quite  natural  in  those  cases
in  which  the  complementoids,  like  the  complements,  are  bound  by


COLLECTED  STITDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


Io.|tive^Dog

pin  Senun.  nfUir  Previously  havinj

(A)  At  0°,

(B)  At37».

1.  1.0

2.  O.S

3.  0,35

4.  0.25

5.  0.15

6.  0

0

0

the  amboceptors,  that  this  binding  will  not  take  place  if  the  experi-
ment is  performed  at  0°  C,  These  considerations  confirm  our  view
that  the  impossibility  of  activating  the  blood-cells  sensitized  at  37°  C.
is  due  to  a  blocking  of  the  complemeotophile  amboceptor  groups  of
the  dog  serum  by  the  complementoids  of  the  same  serum.

2.  It  still  remained  to  show  that  the  substance  which  prevented
the  binding  subsequent  to  the  binding  effected  at  0°C.,  was  really
present  in  the  fluid  medium.  This  could  easily  be  shown  in  the
following  manner.  Two  parallel  series  of  tubes  with  guinea-pig  blood
were  treated  at  0°  C.  for  one  and  one-half  hours  with  inactive  dog
serum  (i.e.,  containing  amboceptor -Fcomplementoid).  The  tubes  of
series  A  were  then  centrituged  and  the  sediments,  freed  from  fluid,
suspended  in  physiological  salt  solution;  the  tubes  of  series  B  were
left  unchanged.  All  the  tubes  were  now  placed  into  the  incubator
for  one  hour,  then  centrifuged,  and  the  sediments  mixed  with  active
guinea-pig  serum  and  physiological  salt  solution.  In  the  tubes  of
series  A  solution  en.sued,  the  blood-cells  of  series  B  remained  undis-
solved, as  can  be  seen  from  Table  III.

The  subslance  which  caused  the  hlock'ivg  oj  the  amboccpiers  was
therefore  contained  in  the  fluid  portion  of  the  blood  sensitized  at  0°;
for  in  series  A,  in  which  the  fluid  medium  was  decanted,  the  blood-
cells  although  subsequently  kept  at  37°  C,  could  still  be  activated.
In  series  B,  on  the  contrary,  the  complementoids  still  remaining
free  at  0°C.,  were  bound  when  subsequently  kept  in  the  thermostat,
and  so  prevented  the  "completion"  with  active  serum.  From  all
this  it  follows  that  we  can  be  dealing  only  with  complementoid  action
in  the  test-tube,  and  the  correctness  of  this  view  is  confirmed  in
another  way.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  AMBOCEPTORS.     213

TABLE  III.


Inactive  Dog
Serum.

CO.

Amount  of  Solution  of  Guinea-pig

Blood  on  the  Addition  of  0.4  oo.

Guinea-pig  Serum.

Series  A.

Series  B.

1.  1.0

2.  0.5

3.  0.35

4.  0.25

5.  0.15

6.  0

complete

atrong

moderate
((

0

0

3.  We  know  from  the  studies  of  v.  Dungern^  and  Erhlich  and
Sachs,^  that  yeast  constitutes  an  excellent  means  of  removing  the
complements  of  a  serum.  If  we  prepared  an  inactive  dog  serum  by
treatment  with  yeast  instead  of  with  heat,  or  if  we  allowed  the  com-
plementoids  of  a  serum  inactivated  by  heat  to  be  absorbed  by  yeast,
it  was  found  that  a  dog  serum  so  treated  was  no  longer  capable  of
causing  this  "blocking"  phenomenon.  Haemolysis  occurred  in  like
manner  whether  we  added  the  activating  guinea-pig  serum  at  once,
or  first  kept  the  blood-cell— dog-serum  mixture  in  the  thermostat
for  an  hour.    (See  Table  IV.)

TABLE  IV.


Dog  Serum.


cc.


1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.


1.0

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

0


Amount  of  Solution  of  Quinea-pig  Blood  on  the

Addition  of  0.4  oo.  Quinea-pur   Serum  after

Remaining  at  37"  C.  for  One   Hour.


Dog  Serum  Inactivated.


(A)

By  Shaking  with
Yeaat.*


complete


almost  complete

strong

0


(B)
•By  Heating.-


(a)  Shaken  with
Yea«t.»


complete


If


almost  complete

strong

0


(b)  Employed
Directly.


0


*  6  cc.  serum  are  shaken  with  0.2  grams  yetfst.

The  complementoids  had  simply  been  removed  by  the  yeast  and  the
isolated  amboceptors  reacted  in  rurrmal  fashion.


*  See  page  36  et  seq


'See  page  195  et  seq.


214  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.

4.  A  further  proof  of  the  correctness  of  our  view  was  furnislieil
by  the  results  of  the  combining  experiment  when  the  molecular  con-
centration of  the  fluid  medium  was  increased.  As  is  well  known  the
hemolytic  action  of  the  sera  is  retarded  and  even  entirely  prevented
by  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  salts  present.  The  investigations  of
Markl '  have  shown  that  imder  these  circumstances  the  amboceptor  is
bound  by  the  red  blood-cells,  whereas  the  complement  la  unable  to
take  hold.^  Through  extensive  investigations,  not  yet  published,  we
have  been  able  to  verify  this.  Under  these  circumstances,  provided
the  view  developed  by  us  is  correct,  it  should  naturally  be  possible
to  prevent  the  blocking  with  complementoids  by  means  of  suitable
concentrations  of  salts.  Two  parallel  series  of  tubes  with  guinea-pig
blood  to  which  inactive  dog  serum  had  been  added  wore  therefore
kept  at  37°  C.  for  one  hour,  ammonium  sulphate  having  first  been
added  to  one  of  the  series  in  the  strength  of  1.3%.  This  addition,  as
special  tests  showed  us,  suffices  to  entirely  prevent  the  haemolytic
action  even  of  targe  amounts  (1  cc.)  of  active  dog  serum.  The  result
of  the  experiment  corresponded  exactly  to  our  ex  [jec  tat  ions.  The
sediments  of  those  guinea-pig  blood-cells  which  had  been  treated
with  ammonium  sulphate  could  be  complemented  with  guinea-pig
serum,  whereas  in  the  other  series  no  solution  whatever  occurred.
(See  Table  V.}

The  aTialysis  of  this  case  furnishes  the  first  proof  by  means  of  test-
lube  experimenis  that  completnenloids,  the  inactive  modifications  of  the
complements,  actually  exist  in  the  inactive  serum.  To  be  sure,  even
heretofore  their  existence  could  not  appear  doubtful,  for,  in  our
opinion,  through  the  possibility  of  producing  antibodies,  proof  had
been  furnished  of  the  preservation  of  the  complement's  haptophore
group  in  the  inactivated  serum.^

'  Markl,  Oljer  Hemmang  der  Ilamolyso  durch  SnUe.  Zcitsclir.  f  Hygiene,
Vol.  39.  1902.

'These  conditiona  by  the  way,  in  our  judgment,  hai-e  no  connection  with
the  osmotic  conditiona  of  the  cell  membrane,  as  Markl  bclie\ea.  It  seems  to
ua  that  tho  action  of  the  salts  is  most  readily  explained  by  assuming  that  the
increased  concentration  hinders  the  chemical  union  of  amboceptor  and  com-
plement. That  the  salts  can  eicrt  such  an  antireactive  action  is  seen  by  the
fact  p()inted  oiit  by  Knorr  {MiJnc!i  and  Wochenseh.  1898.  Nob.  11  and  12)  that
t«tanu8  antitoxin  and  toxin  are  absolutely  prevented  from  combining  by  the
addition  of  10%  NaCi.

•  In  view  of  this  new  confirmation  I  should  not  want  to  deprive  the  reader
of  an  exposition  of  the  complementoid  theory  from  tho  standpoint  oE  an  opponent


THE  MEt'HANlJiM   O!'"  THE  ACTION   OF  AMBOCEPTOltS.     215
TABLE  V.


'°'&^-

SedimentH  ICenliirugfd.iifler  Ibn  tflxlures
b>d  bwu    kBtit  lo.  (Joe  Hour  nt  37°)  OQ
Ihe  Addition  ol  O.S  ce.  GuioM-rig  Serum.
ibe    Mix  I  urea    bavins    been     Previously
Treiiled  wilh

0.15«.307„(NH.l^O.

0.18  CO.  0.88%  HtCl.

1.  1.0

2.  0.5

3.  0.35

4.  0.26

moderate
little

trace

0

In  contrast  to  the  usual  behavior  we  must  assume  that  in  the
case  described  the  affinity  of  the  complement  has  not  suffered  any  con-
siderable decrease  through  Ihe  Jomiation  of  compkmenloid.  This  is
supported  also  by  an  experiment  which  we  made  in  order  to  deter-
mine the  lowest  temperature  at  which  the  anchoring  of  the  com-

(Proctocoll  der  fc.fc.  Gesellschaft  der  Aerite  in  Wien,  Wiener  klin.  Wochenachrifl,
1901,  No.  51):

"If  tin  animaJ  ia  injected  with  inactive  serum  of  the  same  foreign  species
instead  of  active  serum,  it  ia  found  that  its  serum  likewise  becomes  charged
with  anticomplement;  proof  that  the  alexin  also — like  everything  else  in  this
world — contains  a  haptophore  group  and  an  active  group,  the  latter  thia  time
termed  ^ymotoxic.  As  a  reeult  of  the  inactivation  the  zymotoxic  group  ia
destroyed;  the  haptophore  group  remaina  intact.  Hence  a  continuance  of
the  nsBimilation  of  comptementoid  and  the  production  of  the  anticomplement.
So  far,  90  good.  Now.  Iiuwever,  we  come  to  a  questionable  point.  If  tlie
complemeat  deprived  of  its  Eymoto\ic  group  still  posseHses  ita  haptophore
group,  it  muat  still  bo  able  to  satiafy  and  bind  its  ambopeptor.  How  then
does  it  happen  that  an  inactivated  antiserum  again  becomes  lytic  on  the  addi-
tion of  suitable  complement  (active  normal  ECrum),  a  phenomenon  which,
according  to  Ehrlieb  {despite  Dr.  Wechsberg).  h  due  to  the  formation  of  lysin
from  amboceptor  and  complement.  If  the  haptophore  group  of  the  amboceptor
Itaii  i^ready  been  bound  by  the  remains  of  the  old  complement,  the  'comple-
mentoid,'  it  surely  ia  unable  to  bind  cew  complement.  Hence  by  heating
(inactivating)  the  serum  the  haptophore  group  of  the  complement  cannot
have  remained  unchanged;  it  must  ha\'e  completely  lost  its  affinity  for  the
amboceptoi.  Now,  gentlemen,  I  should  like  to  know  what  ia  left  of  the  com-
plement after  this  heating?  The  xymotoxic  group  is  destroyed,  the  haptophore
group  BO  changed  that  it  is  not  recognizable.  Nothing  remains  of  the  comple-
ment except  Ehriich's  fervent  wish  that  a  little  of  it  might  bo  left,  because  other-
wise it  would  not  harmonize  with  the  thcoryl  It  ia  thia  wish  that  floats  around
urn  under  the  name  of  com  piemen  to  id."
fur  Gniberl      I  .-hjiU  refrain  from  any  personal  remarks  for  which  the


■  Thus


216


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMML'NITV.


plemeutoid  still  takes  pl&ce.  In  this  way  we  sought  to  fmd  an  approx-
imate criterion  for  relative  affinity  of  the  eomplementoid.  From
the  power  to  be  reactivated  possessed  by  the  guinea-pig  blood-cells
previously  treated  at  difTerent  temperatures  witli  inactive  dog  serum
it  was  seen  that  even  at  3°  C.  a  moderate  binding  of  complementoids
takes  place,  and  thai  complete  blocking  -pkenomena  can  already  be
obtained  at  8°  C,  as  is  seen  in  the  following  experiment:
TABLE  VI.


oiS^^i^.

(A)  0°  C.

<B)  3°C.

(C)  fl-C.

(13)  S-C.

1.  1.0

2.  0.75

3.  0.5

4.  0.35

complete

strong
moderat*

moderate
little

faint  trace

0

Nevertheless  we  believe  that  even  in  this  case  a  certain,  though
slight,  decrease  in  the  affinity  has  occurred  in  the  eomplementoid
formation.  At  least  the  tact  speaks  in  favor  of  this,  that  with  the
simultaneous  addition  of  inactive  dog  serum  (i.e.,  amboceptor  +  eom-
plementoid) and  active  guinea-pig  serum  solution  of  the  guinea-pig
blood  occurs.  Under  these  circumstances,  in  which  the  amboceptor
has  both  complement  and  eomplementoid  to  choose  from,  the  former
is  preferred.  When,  then,  we  find  that  it  Is  possible  by  previous  treat-
ment with  eomplementoid  to  block  the  compiementophile  group  of
the  amboceptor  for  the  complement  subsequently  added,  we  shall'
explain  this  most  readily  by  assuming  that  ajler  the  eomplementoid
has  been  anchored,  the  union  becomes  firmer.  Analogous  phenomena
are  common  in  immunity.    Thus  Donitz  *  has  shown  that  the  union

imuauul  tone  of  thia  attack  surely  offers  sufStient  provocution,  merely  expressing
my  OBtooishment  at  the  fact  that  Gruber'e  exposition  disregards  the  most
important  and  eiplanalory  point,  namely,  as  Morgenrolh  and  I  have  emphasised,
that  tn  the  change  into  eomplcmentmds,  the  cnmpUments  must  lauatly  tuffer  a
decrease  in  their  ajSinitit,  for  only  in  this  ipuy  can  the  abnence  of  aU  ditlurbttig  inter-
ference on  the  part  of  these  complemenloide  in  test-tube  experimeTila  be  explnineii.
If,  however,  Gruber  assumes  a  complete  destruction  of  the  complements  by
inaetivfttion  how  does  he  explain  the  fact  easily  verilieil  by  every  one,  namely,
the  production  of  antieomploraents  by  injection  into  the  organism  of  sertiin
which  has  been  heat«d7  Surely  a  mere  Vfish  floating  around  in  the  serum
cannot  suffice  to  produce  anticomplements. — Ehrlich.

'  DOnitz.  tJber  die  Grenien  der  Wirfcsamkeit  dea  Diphtherieheilseruma.
Arph    intprtiftt,  de  Pharmacodynam..  Vol.  V,  ISM.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  AMBOCEPTORS.     217

of  diphtheria  poison  in  the  animal  body,  at  first  a  loose  one,  soon
becomes  more  and  more  firm  so  that  it  cannot  be  broken  up  even
by  very  large  amounts  of  antitoxin.  Madsen's '  experiments,  to
liberate,  by  means  of  antitoxin,  tetanolysin  which  had  been  anchored
by  the  blood-cells,  also  confirm  this.

Blocking  by  means  of  complementoids  is  also  of  value  for  the
technique  of  demonstrating  the  presence  of  amboceptor.  Suppose,
for  example,  that  in  doubtful  cases  one  seeks  to  show  the  existence
of  the  amboceptors  in  the  usual  manner,  by  sensitizing  the  red  blood-
cells  and  subsequently  complementing  with  a  different  kind  of  serum.
In  this  case,  owing  to  the  blocking  action  of  the  complementoids,
an  absence  of  the  amboceptors  could  be  simulated.  In  this  connec-
tion it  is  of  considerable  int-erest  to  know  that  so  capable  an  investi-
gator 33  Euchner^  employed  the  above  method  for  analyzing  the
hemolysin  in  just  the  case  here  described.  Hia  attempts  to  demon-
strate the  amboceptor  by  this  method  (inapplicable  in  this  particular
instance),  as  well  as  by  means  of  the  amboceptor's  thermolability  ^
(already  discussed),  were  unsuccessful.


II.  Amboceptor  or  Sensitizer?

In  another  case  we  have  met  with  a  different  complication
equaUy  fatal  to  the  successful  demonstration  of  the  amboceptor  by
routine  procedures.  This  is  of  especial  interest  for  the  theory  of
hffimolysin  action,  and  concerns  the  hemolytic  property  of  ox  serum
for  guinea-pig  blood.  If  the  ox  serum  is  inactivated,  this  property
can  readily  be  restored  by  the  addition  of  active  horse  serum.  If,
however,  one  tries  by  means  of  active  horse  serum  to  complement
blood-cell  sediments  (obtained  by  centrifuging  guinea-pig  blood  after


I  ModseD,  Ober  Hcilversuchc  im  Reageniiglaa.    Zeitschr.  f .  Hjgiene,  Vol.  32,


I  Kflrper?    Berl.


'  H.    Buchner,    Sind    die   Alexine   einfache   oder   i
klin.  Wochenachr.  1891,  No.  33.

'  According  to  the  newer  researches  fdready  mentioned  it  would  be  con-
ceivable that  the  thermolability  of  the  amboceptors  is  simulated  by  this. —
that  the  complementoids,  in  themselvea  possessing  a  relatively  high  alfmity,
become  firmly  anchored  to  the  amboceptors.  However,  as  special  experiments
have  shown  us,  euch  is  not  the  case,  for  dog  serum  which  has  been  inactivated
by  shaking  with  yeast,  and  which  therefore  contains  oo  com  piemen  to  id,  likewise
loses  its  ability  to  be  activated  when  it  is  heated  to  60"  C.  It  does  not  lose
this  power  when  heated  only  to  SO'-Sl^C.


218


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMCJIITY.


these  have  been  treated  at  37°  C.  for  one  hour  with  inactive  ox
serum),  it  wOl  be  found,  just  as  in  the  previous  ease,  that  hsemoiysia
does  not  occur.

The  reason  for  the  non-actJvatibility  in  this  case  differs  essen-
tially from  that  in  the  case  previously  described.  The  chief  differ-
ence manifests  itself  in  the  behavior  of  the  decanted  f^uid  medium.
If  the  centrifuging  is  omitted,  and  active  horse  serum  is  added  to
the  sensitized  blood-cells  without  previously  removing  the  fluid
medium,  it  will  be  found  that  solution  occurs.  If  the  centrifuging
is  not  omitted,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  decanted  fluids  behave  in  an
analogous  manner,  for  when  mixed  with  active  horse  serum  they
will  dissolve  native  guinea-pig  blood.  A  complete  experiment  is
reproduced  in  Table  VII.

TABLE  Vll.


Amount  of  SotuIioD  ot  Giim»-D>B  Blood  o»  Ihe  AddilioD  of

o'J^r."™.

Th.H,lSn'..,...

had  been  kept  at
tor  oL  Houj.

CB)

The  Deeaoted
Fluids  from  (A)

TheUwn.ri/,?LMi.,„™ot
Blood  »Ed  Dx  Serum.

W

1.  0.5

2.  0.35

3.  0.25

4.  0.15

5.  0.1
B.        0

faint  trace
0

complete

strong
moderate

0

i    completo
BtroDK
0

CO„pl.„

almost

complete

Btroag

0

In  contrast,  therefore,  to  the  behavior  in  the  first  case  described

by  us,  the  amboceptor  has  remained  in  the  decanted  fluid,  and
has  therefore  not  been  bound  by  the  blood-cells,  or  only  lo  a  very
slight  degree.  Our  attempts  by  means  of  horse  serum  to  acti\-ate
the  guinea-pig  blood-cells  which  had  previously  been  treated  at
0"  C.  with  inactive  ox  serum  and  then  centrifugcd,  failed  as  a  matter
of  course;  and  the  result  was  the  same  when  the  ox  serum  had  been
freed  of  complementoid  by  shaking  with  yeast.

This  peculiar  behavior,  namely,  that  the  amboceptor  by  itself
does  not  unite  with  the  cell  at  all,  and  acts  only  after  it  has  com-
bined with  the  complement,  is  of  special  significance  for  the  method


THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  AMBOCEPTORS,     219

of  analyzing  hEEmolysins.  For,  entirely  aside  from  the  fact  that
under  these  circumstances  the  attempt  to  activate  the  centrifuged,
and  presumably  "sensitized,"  blood-cells  necessarily  fails,  it  will
be  seen  that  the  occurrence  of  this  complication  considerably  limits
the  appiication  of  the  second  method  employed  to  discover  the  com-
plex nature  of  hEemolysins,  namely,  separation  in  the  cold,  a  method
already  markedly  restricted.  This  method,  it  will  be  recalled,  depends
upon  the  fact  that  at  0°  C,  usually  only  the  amboceptors  are  bound
to  the  blood-cells,  not  the  complements  to  the  amboceptors.  In
the  case  just  described,  however,  the  union  of  amboceptor  and  cell
depend  on  the  combining  of  amboceptor  and  complement.  How,
then,  can  a  separation  of  the  two  components  be  effected  if,  on  the
one  hand,  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  tor  the  union  of  amboceptor
and  cell,  a  condition  which  obtains  here,  cannot  be  fulfilled  at  low
temperature,  and  if,  on  the  other,  it  in  ilaelf  precludes  any  sepa-
ration whatever?  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  Gruberi  failed  with
the  cold  separation  method  in  just  this  case  {guinea-pig  blood  +  active
ox  serum).

The  two  atypical  cases  here  described  are,  however,  peculiarly
adapted  to  throw  light  on  the  mechanism  of  hsmolysm  action.  In
the  first  case  the  fact  that  blood-cells  "  sensitized  "  in  the  usual
manner  withstand  the  action  of  the  complement  is  hard  to  explain
in  accordance  with  Bordet's  view.  But  the  behavior  shown  in  the
second  case  becomes  entirely  inexplicable  if,  like  Bordet,  we  believe
the  action  of  hfemolysins  to  consist  in  this,  that  the  amboceptors
(substance  sensibilatrice)  sensitize  the  blood-ceUs  and  so  render
them  vulnerable  to  the  action  of  the  complements  (Bordet's  alexins)
exerted  directly  upon  them.  For  here  we  have  demonstrated  that
a  sensitization  does  not  take  place;  the  amboceptor  by  itself  is  not
at  all  bound,  and  becomes  effective  only  on  the  addition  of  comple-
ment. If,  however,  we  were  to  assume  that  in  our  case  the  com-
plement nevertheless  attacks  the  cell  directly  so  that  then  the  ambo-
ceptor can  be  found,  we  should  arrive  at  a  theory  as  unlike  Bor-
det's as  that  held  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.  But  such  a  theory,
strange  to  say,  would  apply  only  to  this  and  perhaps  a  few  other
cases,  that  is,  only  to  a  few  exceptions.  Although  superfluous,  a
Buitable  experiment  was  also  made  in  this  case  and,  as  might  have


'Gruber,  Zur  Theorio  der  Antikorper.     Munch,  med.  WoobeiiKlir.  1901,
No.  19.    See  also  H.  Sachs,  1.  c.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


been  expected,  it  was  found  that  the  complement  as  such  was  not
bound  by  the  cell.

The  facts,  however,  are  very  readily  explained  if,  following  Ehrlich
and  Morgem'oth,  we  regard  the  amboceptor  as  a  coupler  possessing
two  haptophore  groups.  Owing  to  a  mutual  combination  this  traos-
mita  the  action  of  the  complement  to  the  cell.  In  the  case  just
described,  it  follows  at  once  that  the  cytophiJe  group  of  the  ambo-
ceptor possesses  a  very  slight  affinity  to  the  cell  receptor.  We  have
therefore  only  to  assume  that,  in  contrast  to  the  usual  behavior,  the
amboceptor  in  this  case,  while  itself  unable  to  combine  with  the
cell,  by  combining  with  the  complement  takes  on  increased  affinity
and  so  becomes  capable  of  action.

The  significance  of  the  variations  in  affinity  will  be  discussed
connectedly  at  a  subsequent  time.  We  shall  content  ourselves
here  by  pointing  out  that  an  understanding  of  the  phenomena  of
immunity  is  impossible  without  the  assumption  that  certain  hapto-
phore groups  become  increased  or  decreased  in  their  chemical  energy,
owing  to  changes  in  the  total  molecule.  Chemically,  such  an  assump-
tion is  a  niatt«r  of  course.  We  believe  that  the  observations  described
above  constitute  additional  proof  that  amboceptor  and  comple-
ment combine  with  each  other.

In  the  main  this  question  has  already  been  decided  by  the  beau-
tiful investigations  of  M.  Neieser  and  Wechsberg  *  on  the  deflection
of  complement  by  an  excess  of  amboceptor.  The  objections  raised
against  these  experiments  by  Gruber^  and  by  Metchnikoff  ^  have
been  completely  met  by  the  recent  investigations  of  Lipstein.*

The  case  last  described  by  us  is  to  a  certain  extent  an  expert-
mmlum  crncis  tor  the  correctness  of  the  views  formulated  by  Ehrlich
and  Morgenroth  for  the  mechanism  of  hemolysin  action.  We  there-
fore believe  that  Bordet's  sensitization  theory  has  become  unten-
able, and  that  now  this  question,  just  as  that  concerning  the  plurality
of  complements,  is  definitely  closed.


SoBsEQiiBNT  AnnrriOM. — According  tt
guinea-pig  blootl-cells,  which,  because  of
can  no  longer  be  dissolved  by  guinea-pig


inveatigations  of  Dr.  Sachs,
vith  inactive  dog  serum,
I,  owing  to  blocking  by  com-


'  See  page  120  et  acq.

'Grub«r,  Protocoll  der  k.k.  Gesellachaft  der  Aerzte  in  Wien,  Wiener  klin.
Wocheoflchr.  1901.  No.  50.

*  Metchnikoff,  I'lmmunit^  dans  les  malad.  infect.,  page  313,  Paris,  1901.
'  See  page  132  et  seq.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  AMBOCEPTORS.     221

plementoid,  are  still  dissolved  by  the  complements  of  dog  serum.  The  source
of  the  dog  serum  complement  was  the  fluid  decanted  from  guinea-pig  blood-
cells  which,  by  treatment  with  active  dog  serum  at  O^C,  had  abstracted  as
much  of  the  amboceptor  from  the  latter  as  possible.  These  experiments  there-
fore show:

1.  That  the  complement  of  dog  serum  suffers  a  diminution  of  affinity  in
changing  to  complementoid.

2.  That  the  complement  present  in  guinea-pig  serum  possesses  a  weaker
affinity  than  the  complement  of  dog  serum  with  analogous  action.


XX.  DIFFERENTIATING  COMPLEMENTS  BY  MEANS  OF
A  PARTIAL  ANTICOMPLEMENT.'


The  question  whether  the  serum  of  one  and  the  same  Bpecies
contains  a  plurality  of  complements  or  only  a  single  one  seems  to
us  to  have  been  positively  decided  in  favor  of  the  pluralistic  concep-
tion. This  decision  has  been  brought  about  mainly  by  the  obser\'a-
tiona  of  Ehrlieh  and  Jlorgenroth,^  of  Wassermann,^  Wechsberg,*
Wendelstadt/''  and  by  the  recently  published  studies  of  Ehrlieh  and
Sachs.*  Nevertheless,  we  shall  briefly  describe  an  experiment  which,
in  a  single  instance  at  least,  constitutes  a  proof  for  the  plurality  of
the  complements.  Our  object  in  doing  this  is  not  that  the  number
of  arguments  may  be  further  increased,  for  they  are  already  amply
Bufficient,  but  that  we  may  caU  attention  to  a  method  of  demonstra-
tion which,  haa  not  heretofore  been  employed.

Because  of  purely  tfichnical  difficulties  the  most  rational  and
simplest  method  of  differentiation,  namely,  by  means  of  anticomple-
ments,  has  not  thus  far  been  employed  in  this  question.  As  is  well
known,  it  is  very  easy  by  immunizing  with  serum  containing  com-
plement or  complementoid  to  obtain  potent  anticomplements.  Such
anticomplement  sera,  liowever,  usually  contain  anticomplements  cor-
responding to  the  sum  of  all  the  complements  originally  injected,'
and  are,  tlierefore,  not  adapted  to  the  separation  of  complementa,

'  Iteprinted  from  the  Centralblalt  f.  Bftct.  Originol  \'ol.  XXXI,  No.  12,
1902.

>See  pages  11,  56,  86.

'Wassemiann,   Zeitscbr.   I.  Hyg.,   Vol.  XXXVD,   1901.

*  Wechsberg,  Sitziing  d.  k.  k.  Gea.  d.  Aerate  in  Wien,  Wiener  klin.  Wochen-
•chr.  1901.  No.  48.

'  Wendelatadt.  Oeotralblatt  f.  Bad.    Part  I,  Vol.  XXXI,  No.  10.

'  See  page  195  et  eeq.

'  See  page  63  et  aeq.


DIFFERENTIATING  COMPLEMENTS.

At  least  this  had  been  the  ease  thus  far,  for  a  partial  anticomplement,
one  acting  only  against  a  single  complement,  had  not  been  obsen^ed.

Through  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  Cnyrim  we  detained  a  normal  anti-
complement  which  possessed  the  desired  properties,  and  we  there-
fore gladly  availed  ourselves  of  this  favorable  opportunity  to  demon-
strate, by  means  of  the  elective  binding  of  anticomplement,  the
difference  between  two  complements  in  one  and  the  same  serum,  a
difference  that  had  not  heretofore  been  demonstrated.'

This  normal  anticomplement  was  an  ascitic  fluid  derived  from  a
case  of  cirrhosis  of  the  liver;  it  exerted  a  marked  antihaemolytic
action  in  one  particular  case.  By  means  of  an  experiment  we  first
determined  that  this  action  was  due  to  the  presence  of  an  anticomple-
ment and  not  of  an  anti-inmiune  body.  This  showed  us  that  the
ascitic  fluid  exerted  practically  no  influence  on  the  anchoring  of  the
immune  body  in  question  to  the  red  blood-cells.

The  serum  whose  complements  we  examined  was  guinea-pig
serum,  which  activated  two  amboceptors  obtained  by  immunization.
These  amboceptors  were  contained  in  the  inactive  serum  of  a  rabbit,
A,  which  had  been  immunized  with  ox  blood;  and  in  the  inactive
serum  of  a  goat,  B,  which  had  been  immunized  with  sheep  blood.
Corresponding  to  this,  ox  blood  was  used  for  case  A,  and  sheep  blood
for  case  B.  The  inactive  ascitic  fluid  does  not  dissolve  these  species
of  blood  even  after  the  addition  of  guinea-pig  serum

To  begin,  we  saturated  ox  blood-cells  with  the  specific  amboceptor
by  adding  0.01  cc.  immune  body  A  to  each  I  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension
of  the  cells.  This  is  about  ten  times  the  amount  which  on  the  addi-
tion of  sufficient  complement  (0.1  cc.  guinea-pig  serum)  effected
complete  solution.  The  mixture  was  placed  in  the  incubator  and
frequently  shaken.  At  the  end  of  one  hour  it  was  centrifuged,  the
fluid  poured  off,  and  the  blood-cells,  loaded  with  amboceptor,  sus-
pended in  salt  solution.  In  exactly  the  same  manner  sheep  blood-
cells  were  treated  with  the  inactive  senim  B,  0.2  cc.  for  each  1  cc.
of  the  5%  suspension.  On  the  addition  of  guinea-pig  serum  to  these
blood-cella,  hffimolysis  ensued  very  quickly  in  the  thermostat;  in
both  cases  it  required  O.OOS  cc.  guinea-pig  serum  to  fully  dissolve  1  cc.  of
the  suspension,  while  0.0065  cc.  caused  incomplete  solution  and  0.002

'  In  tho  fallowing,  for  tbe  Hake  or  simplicity,  ne  shul!  speak  only  oF  two
coroplementa,  whereas  we  wish  iiere  to  remark  that  two  groups  of  complemeDts
are  probably  to  be  understood,  each  group  made  up  of  a  host  of  angle  comple-
roents  which  it  is  impossible  thus  far  to  analyze.


224


COLLECTED  STTJDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


only  a,  slight  degree  of  solution.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  it  waa
especially  fortunate  that  the  complementing  amounts  should  happen
to  be  identical  in  the  two  cases.

A  parallel  series  of  experiments  was  then  undertaken  with  these
two  cases,  as  follows:  Varying  amounts  of  the  guinea-pig  serum  were
mbied  each  with  0.4  cc.  of  ascitic  fluid  inactivated  at  56°  C,  and
the  mixtures  kept  at  room  temperature  for  halt  an  hour,  after  which
the  binding  waa  entirely  completed.^  Thereupon  the  blood-cells
loaded  with  amboceptor  were  added.  The  result  of  these  experiments
is  shows  in  the  following  table:

Case  A  (Ox  Blood + Amboceptor).


Ouiosu-pig  Serum  Alons.


0.008    complet«  solution

O.OOri.5  vcBlige

0.005   BtroDK

0.0055  considerable

0.003

0.0025  moderate


"Btt


0.1      almost  complc
0.08

0.065  ronwdemble
0.05    fairly  littlo
0.035  very  little
0.03    trace
0,025     "
0.03        0


?  Blood + Amboceptor).


Guinea-pig  Sanim  Alooa.

GuiDea-pif  Sanim  +  0.4  do.

O.OOa    complete  solution
0.0OU5  almost  complete
0.005        "
0.0035  strong

O.OOS    complete
0.0065  almost  complete
0.005         "             ^'
0 .0035  strong

We  see,  therefore,  that  in  case  A  the  complement  protects  com-
plelety  against  2i  times  the  complete  solvent  amount  of  complement,
while  the  amount  ot  serum  required  to  effect  complete  solution  increases
more  than  twelve  times.  In  case  B,  on  the  contrary,  the  complete
solvent  dose  of  guinea-pig  serum  remains  unchanged,  and  the  series
proceeds  just  as  though  there  had  been  no  addition  of  anticomple-
ment.

These  experiments,  which  were  repeated  many  times,  therdore


'  The  union  of  complements  and  anticomplemeDts,  aimlogous  to  the  behavioi
of  certain  toxins  and  antitoxins,  is  dependent  on  the  time.  Ileon:  here  ^ho
this  had  to  be  considered  and  sufficient  time  aJloived  for  llie  mixture  to  act


DIFFERENTIATING  CX)MPLEMENTS.  225

show  that  the  ascitic  fluid  contains  an  anticomplement  ^  which  fits
into  that  complement  which  is  activated  by  amboceptor  A,  whereas
anticomplements  for  the  complement  of  amboceptor  B  are  absent.
Hence  we  are  justified  in  differentiating  in  guinea-pig  serum  at  least
two  complements  with  different  haptophore  groups.

It  may  be  hoped  that  continued  investigations  of  normal  body
fluids  will  bring  to  light  numerous  other  favorable  cases  which  will
make  possible  differences  along  the  lines  indicated.  For  although
in  normal  serum  the  complication  of  haptins  present,  such  as  ambo-
ceptors, complements,  complementoids,  antiamboceptors,  and  anti-
complements,  is  very  great,  the  conditions  here  are  certainly  simpler
than  in  the  serum  of  immunized  animals;  for  in  the  latter  there  are
also  present  innumerable  primary,  and  (owing  to  internal  regulative
processes)  secondary  reactive  products.

^  Erhlich  and  Morgenroth  have  discussed  the  nature  of  anticomplements
at  length  in  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  10.  They  conclude  that
the  origin  of  these  bodies  is  ^his,  that  foreign  complements  combine  with  the
complementophile  group  of  certain  cell  receptors.  According  to  this  view
the  anticomplements  are  nothing  else  than  thrust-off  amboceptera  whose  com-
plementophile groups  possess  a  higher  affinity  than  is  usually  the  case.  It  is
curious,  therefore,  that  Gruber,  nine  months  later  (Sitzg.  der  k.k.  Ges.  der
Aerzte  in  Wien,  Wiener  klin.  Wochenschr.  1901),  presents  this  view,  which
had  been  recognized  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  receptor  theory,  as  an
entirely  new  objection  against  just  this  theory.


XXI.  CONCERNING  THE  COMPLEMENTOPHILE  GROUPS

OF  THE  AMBOCEPTORS.!

By  Prof.  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich  and  H.  T.  Marshall,  M.D.,  Fellow  of  the  Rockefeller

Institute  of  Medical  Research.

The  studies  of  the  past  year,  especially  the  recent  conclusive
work  of  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  ^  show  that  we  may  regard  it  as  definitely
proven  that,  in  contrast  to  the  unitarian  conception  of  Bordet,  there
is  a  plurality  of  complements  in  the  serum.

This  knowledge  largely  supplements  oui*  views  concerning  the
mechanism  of  lysin  action,  and  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the
principles  of  the  amboceptor  theory.  The  latter,  in  contrast  to  the
untenable  sensitization  theory  of  Bordet,  has  become  still  more
firmly  established  through  the  recent  experiments  carried  out  in  the
Institute  by  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,^  Lipstein,^  and  Ehrlich  and
Sachs.^

If  we  consider  that,  as  is  shown  especially  by  Borders  experi-
ments,® an  amboceptor,  after  having  been  anchored  by  cellular  ele-
ments, can  almost  completely  rob  a  serum  of  its  complement,  and  if,
further,  we  regard  what  we  now  know  about  the  plurality  of  comple-
ments, we  shall  of  necessity  be  led  to  a  view  concerning  amboceptors
according  to  which  an  amboceptor  is  capable  of  binding  a  number  of
different  complements  simultaneously.  Attention  was  called  to  such
a  possibility  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  ^  when  they  stated:  "Finally,
it  is  possible  that  an  immune  body,  besides  one  particular  cytophile

*  Reprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  25.

>  See  page  195.        *  See  page  120.        *  See  page  132.        *  See  page  209.

*  Bordet,  Annal.  de  Tlnstitut  Pasteur,  May  1901.
'  See  pages  88  et  seq.

226


COMPLEMENTOPHILE  GROUPS  OF  THE  AMBOCEPTORS.    227

group,  contains  two,  three,  or  more  complementophile  groups."
According  to  this  latter  view,  therefore,  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  an
amboceptor  possesses  one  haptophore  group  specifically  related  to  a
certain  receptor  of  cell  or  of  a  foodstuff,  and  that  it  also  possesses  a
nunAer  of  complementophile  groups.  The  term  amboceptor  would
thus  indicate  that  two  different  substances,  foodstuff  and  comple-
ment, are  anchored  by  this  body  and  brought  into  close  relation  with
each  other.    This  is  illustrated  in  the  following  diagram.

Fia,  1.


(_a)  receptor  of  the  cell;  (b)  haptophore  group  of  the  amboceptor;  (c)  domi-
nant complement;    (d)  non-dominant  complemeot.

Comjdementophile  groups  of  the  amboceptor:  (a)  for  the  dominant  com-
plement; (^  for  the  non-dominant.

The  next  question  to  be  considered  is  whether  it  is  necessary,  in
order  to  gel  the  specific  lysin  effect,  for  aU  these  complementa  to  come
into  action.  Recent  experiments  indicate  that  this  is  not  the  case,
but  that  among  the  number  of  complements  only  a  few  are  necessary
in  any  single  instance  in  order  to  obtain  the  effect.  These  complei-
menta  are  termed  "dominant  complements,"  the  rest  are  " non-dominant
eompUmetiis."


328  COLLECTED   STUDIES   IN   LMMUNITY.

A  case  described  by  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  makes  this  clear,  and
we  shall  therefore  !>rielly  reproduce  it  here; '

'IVo  amboceptors  are  concerned,  namely,  the  normal  ambocep-
tor of  goat  serum  for  rabbit  blood,  and  an  amboceptor  oblained
by  immunizing  goats,  which  is  anchored  by  ox  blood-cells.  We
shall  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  designate  these  amboceptors  as  A
and  B,

\aturally  both  these  amboceptors  are  activated  by  goat  serum,
in  which  we  shall  have  to  assume  at  least  two  complements  x  and  b.
For  immune  body  A,  x  is  the  dominant  complement;  for  fi  it  is  b.
If  in  one  of  the  two  combinations,  for  example,  in  that  of  rabbit
blood-cells  loaded  with  immune  body  A,  the  senmi  is  allowed  to  act
long  enough,  both  complements  will  be  bound;  that  is,  dominant
and  non-dominant.  The  result,  however,  is  entirely  different  if  the
action  be  made  as  short  as  possible.  In  this  case  the  fluid  obtained
on  centrifuging  the  blood-cells  still  contains  the  dominant  comple-
ment X,  while  it  has  for  the  most  part  lost  the  non-dominant  com-
plement b.  We  obser\'e  the  surprising  result  that  the  immune  body
A  with  which  the  blood-cells  are  loaded  combines  with  the  non-
dominant  complement  before  it  combines  with  its  own  dominant
complement.

In  this  ca.se,  tlierefore,  amboceptor  A's  co  m  pie  men  tophi!  e  groups
which  combine  with  the  complement  must  possess  a  higher  affinity
for  the  non-dominant  complement  b  than  for  the  dominant  comple-
ment X.  Here  then  the  binding  of  the  non-dominant  complement  is
independent  of  the  binding  of  the  dominant  complement.  Such  a
behavior,  of  course,  is  not  a  general  rule;  it  was  not  long  before
a  case  was  found  in  which  the  contrary  was  true,  i.e.,  in  which  the
non-dominant  comjAemetU  does  not  combine  until  after  the  dominant
complement  has  been  bound.

The  demonstration  of  this  relation  succeeded  only  because  in  &
certain  human  ascitic  fluid  an  an ti complement  was  present  which
acted  only  against  part  of  the  complements  of  a  scrum.  The  peculiar
behavior  of  this  anticompjement  has  been  described  in  a  recent  com-
munication by  Marshall  and  Morgenroth,^  and  is  also  readily  seen
in  the  following  experiment.    The  complements  here  concerned  are


'  For  the  sake  of  clearness  the  case  has  here  been  Homenhat  RimpliHed.    The
details  of  this  experiment  are  found  in  Elirlich  and  Saolu,  page  1<I5,
'See  page  222.


COMPLEMENTOPHILE  GKOUPS  OF  THE  AMB0C:EPT01:S.    229

present  in  normal  guinea-pig  serum.  This  serum  reactivates  two
immune  bodies,  of  which  one,  immune  body  A,  was  obtained  by  treat-
ing rabbita  with  ox  blood,  and  the  other,  immune  body  B,  by  treat-
ing a  goat  with  sheep  blood.  These  immune  bodies,  naturally,  acted
respectively  on  ox  blood-cells  and  sheep  blood-cells.  This  anti-
compkTneni  is  strongly  active  in  case  A,  while  it  is  entirely  without
effect  in  case  S.  From  this  we  may  conclude  that  the  complements
concerned  in  these  two  cases,  and  which  we  may  designate  as  x  and
b,  are  unlike.

A  further  question  was  whether  immune  body  A  binds  other  com-
plements in  guinea-pig  aenun  besides  its  own  dominant  complement.
In  order  to  determine  this  the  following  experiment  was  made:  First,
ox  blood-cells  and  sheep  blood-cells  were  saturated  with  their  re-
spective amboceptors  A  and  B,  and  then  to  each  cubic  centimeter  of
the  5%  blood  suspension  varj'ing  amounts  of  guinea-pig  serum  were
added  as  complement.  In  the  first  case  0.0073  cc.  guinea-pig  serum
sufficed  to  cause  complete  solution;  in  the  second  case  0.005  cc
was  required.

Thereupon  another  test  was  made  exactly  like  the  preceding  with
ox  blood  and  immune  body  A.  After  the  mixture  had  remained  in
the  thermostat  at  37°  0,  for  H  hours  and  haemolysis  was  practically
completed,  the  same  quantity  of  ox  blood-cells  laden  with  immune
body  (0.05  cc,  ox  blood  freed  from  serum  and  made  up  to  the  original
volume)  was  added  anew  and  the  mixtures  kept  m  the  thermostat
tor  two  houra  longer.  The  haemolysis  which  had  then  taken  place,
observed  by  allowing  the  mixture  to  sediment  in  a  refrigerator,  indi-
cated the  amount  of  complement  x  left  after  the  first  hamolysis  and
available  for  the  case  A.

At  the  same  time  a  similar  experiment  was  made  in  which,
after  the  first  hemolysis,  sheep  blood-cells  saturated  with  ambo-
ceptor were  used  in  the  place  of  the  ox  lilood-cclls.  In  this  case,
after  determining  the  amount  of  complement  originally  present,
that  of  complement  6,  left  after  the  first  haemolysis,  could  also  be
found.

In  this  a  considerable  loss  of  complement  is  observed  for  both
cases;  for  it  now  requires  0.075  cc,  of  the  complementing  guinea-
pig  serum  to  cause  complete  solution  for  case  A  and  0.025  cc.  tor
case  B,  so  that  1/10  and  1/5  respectively  of  the  original  complejnent
are  still  preserved.  This  shows  that  the  binding  of  complement  a,
dominant  for  ca.se  A,  is  accompanied  by  a  binding  of  complement  ^,


230


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


dominant  for  case  B  but  non-dominant  for  case  A.  It  was  next
necessary  to  determine  whether  or  not  in  case  A  the  absorption  of
the  non-dominant  complement  j3  is  dependent  on  the  binding  of  the
dominant  complement  a.  Owing  to  tlie  peculiar  nature  of  the  anti-
complement  it  is  possible  to  ])revent  the  binding  of  complement  a
for  case  A,  whereas  the  binding  of  complement  ^  for  case  B  is
not  affected.  On  the  addition  of  0.4  cc.  of  the  anticompiement
serum  the  amount  of  complement  necessary  for  complete  solution  ■
increases  from  0.0075  cc.  to  0.2  cc,  i.e.  26  times,  whereas  no  change  i
occurs  for  case  B,  0.005  of  the  guinea-pig  serum  still  causing  com-
plete solution.

If,  therefore,  the  binding  of  the  complement  ,8  by  ox  blood-celb
laden  with  amboceptor  A  is  dependent  on  the  binding  of  the  domi-
nant complement  a,  it  must  be  possible  by  the  addition  of  the  fluid
containing  the  anticomplement  to  prevent  this  binding.  The  ex-
periment is  made  as  follows:

First,  0.4  cc.  anlicomplcment  serum  is  mixed  with  varying
amounts  of  guinea-pig  scrum.  After  this  mixture  has  remained  at  |
room  temperature  for  half  an  hour  the  ox  blood-cells  laden  with
amboceptor  are  added  and  the  whole  kept  in  the  thermostat  for
li  hours,  when  the  undissolved  blood-cells  are  centrifuged  off.  The
decanted  fluid  is  mixed  sheep  blood-cells  loaded  with  their  ambo-
ceptor. The  result  shows  that  in  this  case  a  decrease  of  complement
h  for  B  has  not  occurred,  for  the  tube  containing  0.005  guinea-pig
serum  shows  complete  solution.  The  following  table  will  make  the
results  plain :


Complete  Solvent  Amounts  of

GUIVEA-PIG    SerPM.

^^t:>.^i^

After  BiDdinglhe
Meuisof  AmbD-

After  BiudLnmbe
IVitQiilemenl  by

IV.
Amount   of  Com-
plement Vmi  by

Blood  ^»Uii  (Cms
Menis  of  OA  <J.

Case  -4

Case  B-    .-.

0.0075
0.005

0.075
0.025

0.2
0.005

0  005

By  means  of  this  experiment,  therefore,  it  has  been  proved  that  J

in  this  case  binding  of  (he  nfin-dominanl  complfmenl  ensJiea  only  after  \

t  con-ei^fmding  complemeniophiU-  group  of  immune  body  A  has  atfl


CX)MPLEMENTOPHILE  GROUPS  OF  THE  AMBOCEPTORS.    231

chored  the  dominant  complement  a.  We  shall  probably  not  be  wrong
if  we  assume  that  in  this  case,  owing  to  the  occupation  of  the  com-
plementophile  group  for  a,  there  is  an  increase  in  affinity  of  the  com-
plementophile  group  for  ^.  The  subject  of  haemolysins  contains
many  analogies  for  such  a  behavior.  Thus  it  is  quite  common  that
not  until  the  haptophore  group  of  an  amboceptor  is  bound  to  a  cell
does  the  complementophile  group  of  the  same  possess  sufficient
affinity  to  anchor  the  complement.

-  Such-  an  arrangement,  whereby  a  single  amboceptor  is  able  to
bind  a  number  of  different  complements,  is  certainly  not  useless.
Owing  to  their  zymotoxic  groups  the  complements  can  manifestly
exercise  quite  different  actions,  so  that  the  digestion  of  highly  com-
plex food  molecules — in  which,  of  course,  we  must  see  the  physiological
function  of  the  amboceptor  mechanism — is  surely  made  easier.  Such
an  arrangement  seems  still  more  adapted  to  the  purpose  when  we
consider  that  the  cytophilic  haptophore  group  of  an  amboceptor  is
fitted,  not  to  the  entire  food  molecule  as  such,  but  only  to  a  partial
group  of  the  food  molecule.  The  possibility  is  thus  given  for  a  par-
ticular amboceptor  to  anchor  foodstuffs,  which  are  almost  entirely
different  but  happen  to  agree  in  the  possession  of  this  one  partial
group.  Granted  that  this  is  the  case,  the  presence  of  only  a  single
complement,  acting  only  in  one  or  the  other  possibility,  would  be
dysteleological,  whereas  a  plurality  of  complements  would  insure  the
greatest  possible  effect  on  the  most  varied  foodstuff  molecules.  He-
cent  investigations  have  brought  to  light  a  great  many  examples
which  show  that  in  extracellular  and  intracellular  digestive  pro(  esses
various  ferments  act  together  or  in  sequence.  Thus,  as  Hofmeister  ^
states,  we  already  know  of  ten  different  ferments  in  the  liver-cell:
"A  maltase,  a  glycase,  a  proteolytic  ferment,  a  nuclein-splitting
ferment,  an  aldehydase,  a  lactase,  a  ferment  which  converts  the
firmly  bound  nitrogen  of  amido  acids  into  ammonia,  a  fibrin  ferment,
and,  with  some  probability,  a  lipase  and  a  rennin-like  ferment."  Even
in  so  simple  an  organism  as  the  yeast-cell,  according  to  Delbriick  2
at  least  five  endoferments  are  demonstrable.

If  one  cares,  one  can  regard  an  amboceptor  whose  various  comple-
mentophile groups  are  occupied  by  different  complements  as  a  kind

*  Hofmeister,  Die  chemische  Organisation  der  Zelle.    Vortrag.    Braunschweig,
1901.

'  Ddbriick,  Jahrbuch  des  Vereins  der  Spiritusfabrikanten,  Vol.  II,  1902.


232  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

of  polyemyme.  Analogous  views  have  been  expressed  by  Nencki^
for  the  ferments  of  the  digestive  tract.  Even  though  his  conception,
that  pepsin  is  a  single  ferment  with  different  active  groups  (pepsin
group,  rennin  group,  plastin-forming  group),  does  not  entirely  apply,
we  must  say  that  his  conception  of  such  polyenzymes  is  fully  justi-
fied. The  properties  of  the  amboceptor  above  demonstrated  will,  we
believe,  speak  in  favor  of  the  essential  soundness  of  the  view  of  this
eminent  chemist.

1  Nencki  and  Sieber,  Zeitschr.  f .  pbydol.  Chem.  1901.


XXII.    CONCERNING  THE  COMPLEMENTIBILITY  OF

THE  AMBOCEPTORS.*

By  Dr.  J.  Morgenroth,  Member  of  the  Institute,  and  Dr.  H.  Sachs,  Assistant

at  the  Institute.

I.  A  Presumptive  Law  Concerning  the  Ckimplementibility  of  Normal
Amboceptors  and  those  Obtained  by  Immunization.

Gruber  2  believes  he  has  discovered  an  essential  difference  in  the
complementibility  of  the  normal  amboceptors  of  blood  serum  and
those  produced  by  immunization.  He  says:  "The  amboceptors^
of  the  normal  sera  never  seem  to  make  the  erythrocytes  of  another
species  sensitive  to  their  own  serum,  .  .  .  and  I  think  I  can  say  before-
hand that  the  specific  amboceptors  regularly  make  the  erythrocytes
soluble  in  their  own  serum.  This  would  constitute  an  essential
difference  between  the  two."

If  Gruber  believes  Ehrlich  has  ever  maintained  that  the  ambo-
ceptors of  normal  and  of  immune  sera  are  identical,  this  is  a  mis-
understanding. On  the  contrary,  the  studies  at  this  Institute  *  have
emphasized  that  the  immune  sera,  owing  to  the  manifold  variety
of  the  reaction  products  developed  in  the  inmiunization,  contain  a
great  host  of  different  partial  amboceptors  whose  cytophile  and
complementophile  groups  can  vary  greatly.  Normal  serum,  on  the
contrary,  possesses  only  few  types  of  amboceptors  identical  with
those  of  the  immune  serum.  Hence  if  there  is  to  be  any  question  at
all  as  to  the  identity  of  normal  and  artificially  produced  amboceptors,
this  can  only  be  a  partial  identity.  Sp)ecial  proof  by  Gruber  of  their
non-identity  in  order  to  controvert  the  opposite  view  was  therefore
unnecessary.    However,  since  what  Gruber  advances  is  incorrect  and  in


*  Reprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  27.

*  Gruber,  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  49.

*  Gruber  terms  this  "  preparator."
^  See  especially  pages  88  et  seq.

233


234


COLLECTED  STUDIES  L\  IMMUNITY.


contradiction  to  our  experimental  resuJts,  let  us  examine  his  evidence
somewhat  more  closely.

In  supi)ort  of  his  first  assertion,  that  "the  amboceptor  of  the
normal  sera  seems  never  to  make  the  erythrocytes  of  another  species
sensitive  to  their  own  serum,"  he  advances  the  following  eight  com-
binations (see  Table  I);

TABLE  1.


Number.

SpMiM  ol  BI.W  and
ComptomBnL.

A.b™...r.

1

rabbit

ox

2
3

guinea- pig
rabbit

dog

4
5

6
7
8

guinea-pig
rabbit

sheep
rabbit

sheep

It  seems  entirely  to  have  escaped  Ciruher  that  only  a  few
lines  previously  he  denies  the  existence  of  amboceptor  in  the  first
three  of  these  combinations.  Hence  he  should  not  have  included
these  as  evidences  of  the  amboceptor's  non-activatibility,  for  bis
own  experiments  had  shown  him  that  in  these  hsemolyains  no  ambo-
ceptors could  have  been  pre.5ent.'  From  our  own  experiments  we
know  that  the  next  three  combinatioiLs  (4-C)  usually  lead  to  solution
of  the  blood;  there  remain  therefore  only  two  cases  (7  and  8)  which
we  may  consider  as  evidence  of  Gmber's  contention.^  Against  these
two  cases  c^n  be  placed  a  single  case  described  by  Gruber,  one  which
he  advances  to  support  his  second  statement,  "that  the  specific
amboceptors  make  the  erythro'ytes  soluble  in  their  own  serum."
Gruber  believes  he  can  say  in  advance  that  this  is  regulariy  the  case.

'  Since  then,  however,  amboeeptore  hat'e  also  been  demonstrated  ii;  tliese
casea.     (See  H.  Sachs,  page  ISl.)

>One  of  these  cases  deals  with  the  combination  guinea-pig  bloods-chicken
Berutn.  From  Ehrlich  and  Morgenrotb's  earlier  communications  (see  pages  &S
et  aeii.l  Gruber  could  liave  seen  that  between  animal  Bpecles  fo  far  removed
aa  chicken  and  guincB-pig  the  chances  of  complement ibillty  are  not  ajj  great
aa  they  are  between  manimaUan  species.  If  Gruber  therefore  employs  as  evi-
dence such  distantly  related  species  lie  must  neceKsarily  also  ha^e  uiied  widely
separated  specieH  when  complementing  the  immune  sera.  We  lia^e  no  doubt
at  all  that  by  immimi^ing  distantly  related  species  (birds)  with  gninea-pig
blood,  amboceptors  can  be  obtained  which  are  not  complemented  by  guinea-
pig  serum,  or  at  least  not  regularly  so.


COMPLEMENTIBILITY  OF  THE  AMBOCEPTORS.


235


Gruber  has  prophesied  correctly.  To  one  who  has  familiarized
himself  with  the  plurality  of  the  amboceptors  it  will,  to  be  sure,
appear  a  matter  of  course  that  the  erythrocytes  loaded  with  specific
amboceptors  usually  find  suitable  complements  which  cause  their
solution,  as  in  most  other  sera,  so  also  in  their  own  serum.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  according  to  our  own  experience,  the  amboceptors  of
the  immune  sera  seem  as  a  rule  to  make  the  blood-cells  sensitive  to
their  own  serum.  But  the  far-reaching  difference  between  the  im-
mune sera  and  normal  sera  which  Gruber  sees  in  this  fact  does  not
exist.

In  the  following  table  we  have  collected,  either  from  personal
knowledge  or  from  the  statements  of  other  authors,^  those  cases  in
which  the  combinations  blood-cells  a -f  inactive  normal  serum  (am-
boceptor) 6 -f  complement  a  lead  to  haemolysis,  in  contradiction  to  their
behavior  as  stated  by  Gruber.     (See  Table  II.)

TABLE  II.


Number.

Species  of  Blood  and
of  Complement.

Amboceptor.

1
2
3
4

5      •
6
7
8
9
10

guinea-pig

goat

sheep

guinea-pig

rabbit
guinea-pig

dog
calf
rabbit

sheep

horse

ox
ft

man
rabbit

This  table,  which  makes  no  pretense  at  completeness,  shows  that
the  solubility,  in  their  own  serum,  of  blood-cells  loaded  with  normal
amboceptor  is  quite  common.  This  becomes  still  more  evident
when  we  consider  that  the  combinations  mentioned  include  only  a
limited  number  of  the  most  common  experimental  animals,  and  that
hy  using  other  species  still  more  combinations  would  be  found.

Gruber's  statements  therefore  are  all  the  more  surprising  since  a
large  part  of  the  cases  here  reproduced  have  already  been  described
in   the  literature.     Just  this  activatibility  of  normal  amboceptors


'  Erhlich  and  Morgenroth,  page  11 ;  Neisser  and  D6ring,  Berl.  klin.  Wochen-
schr.  1901,  No.  22;  H.  Buchner,  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  33;  H.
Sachs,  page  181.


236


COLLEtTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMU.MTY.


by  means  of  serum  corresponding  to  the  blood-cella  employed  has
very  recently  been  employed  by  Buchner  *  exclusively  as  a  reaction
for  the  presence  of  normal  amboceptors.

Although  the  principle  advanced  by  Gniber  as  an  invariable
means  of  differentiation  has  failed,  we  are  far  from  identifying  normal
and  specific  amboceptors.  As  already  stated,  we  believe  that  in  ttip
sense  above  described  it  has  been  proved  that  they  vary.  Here  we
should  like  to  emphasize  that,  despite  individual  multiplicity,  all
amboceptors  belong  essentially  to  a  common  class  of  similarly  react-
ing substances.

To  us  these  observations  appear  of  interest  also  in  another  direc-
tion. Baumgarten  ^  ascribes  the  hscmolysia  in  a  foreign  serum
entirely  to  the  influence  of  the  amboceptors,  which  he  identilies  with
the  agglutinins.  He  says  that  "while  in  themselves  incapable  of
effecting  hsemolysis,  they  put  the  red  blood-cella  into  such  a  condition
that  they  allow  their  haemoglobin  to  escape  e^'en  on  relatively  slight
osmotic  disturbances."  Just  these  slight  osmotic  disturbances.
according  to  Bauragarten,  are  caused  by  the  foreign  sera  whose
osmotic  tension  is  changed  by  heating  (inactivation).  Hence  Baum-
garten  regards  the  assumption  of  comi)lements  as  entirely  unnecessary.
In  opposition  to  this  we  would  like  to  call  to  mind  the  numerous
combinations  described  by  us  (even  Bordct  has  describetl  such  for
the  hemolysins  obtained  by  immunization),  in  which  the  blood-
cells  dissolve  in  their  own  serum,  i.e.  in  the  ideal  isotonic  medium,
it  they  have  pre\'iously  been  treated  with  an  inactive  serum  (ambo-
ceptor) of  a  different  species.  Such  cases  clearly  indicate  that  hae-
molysis by  means  of  blood  serum  has  nothing  to  do  with  isotonic
conditions;  that  it  is  rather  due  to  a  poisonous  action  which  depends
on  the  coaction  of  two  components— amboceptor  and  complement.

II.    Concerning  the  Varlabllftr  ot  the  Complements.

The  plurality  of  the  complements  containeil  in  a  senun  has  been
proved  by  the  most  varied  experiments.  A  separation  ot  the  indi-
vidual complements  of  the  serum  has  been  undertaken  in  various
sera  by  means  of  chemical  or  thermic  influences,^  by  binding  with


'  Buchaer,  Berl.  klin.  Wochenachr.  1901,  No.  33.

'  Baumgnrten,  ibid.,  No.  5(1.

'  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  see  pages  11  et  seq.;    Ehrlich  and  Siichs,  pages

I  et  Mil,;   Wendelstadt,  CentralblatC  f.  Boct.  1902,  Vol.  31,  No.  H.


COMPLEMENTIBILITY  OF  THE  AMBOCEPTORS.


237


blood-cells  loaded  with  amboceptors,^  by  filtration  through  porous
filters,^  and  by  the  action  of  a  partial  anticomplement.^  Eut  it
does  not  in  all  cases  require  even  these  methods  of  separation;  all
that  is  necessary  is  a  thorough  and  continued  study  of  the  constituents
of  the  native  serum  of  a  given  species.  Variations  can  thus  be  observ  ed
therein  which  lead  at  once  to  the  view  of  a  plurality  of  complements.

After  several  years'  observation  we  found  horse  serum  to  be
of  especial  interest  in  this  respect,  and  we  shall  therefore  briefly
discuss  the  complements  of  this  serum.

Horse  serum  is  particularly  well  adapted  for  complementing
experiments,  because,  as  a  rule,  it  exerts  but  slight  hiemolytic  effect
by  its.elf.  Sheep  blood,  ox  blood,  goose  blood,  and  others,  so  far
as  we  know,  are  not  dissolved  at  all  by  horse  serum,  while  so  far  as
guinea-pig  blood  and  rabbit  blood  are  concerned  there  is  an  extraor-
dinary amount  of  variation,  some  horse  sera  exerting  considerable
hsemolytic  effect  on  one  or  both  of  these  blood  species,  others  having
no  effect  whatsoever.  In  this  respect  not  only  did  the  sera  of  different
horses  behave  quite  differently,  but  we  aIso  observed  marked  chrono-
logical variations  in  the  senim  of  one  and  the  same  normal  horse.
These  show  how  much  the  ha}molytic  properties  of  an  individual's
serum  can  vary.  The  behavior  of  the  serum  (always  examined  in  the
fresh  condition)  on  the  different  days  is  seen  in  the  following  table:


TABLE  III.


Date.


June  19.


June  22.


July  15.


Amount  of
Serum.


2.0
1.5
0.5


2
1


0
5


1.0
0.5

2.0
0.6
0.3


Hflenfolyflis  of


Rabbit  Blood
(6%  1.0).


very  little

trace

0

trace
minimal

0

complete

strong


Guinea-pig  Blood
(5%  1.0).


0
0
0

complete

little
tt


0
0
0


^  Ehrlich  and  Sachs,  1.  c.

'  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  page  56;    £.  Neisser  and  D6ring,  Berl.  klin.
Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  22.

'  Marshall  and  Morgenroth,  pages  222  et  seq.


238  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Hence  within  three  days  the  seriim  of  the  horse  has  become
strongly  hemolytic  for  guinea-pig  blood  without  altering  its  hremo-
lytic  property  for  rabbit  blood,  whereas  within  a  further  three  weeks
its  proi^erties  have  almost  become  reversed,  since  now  it  does  not
dissolve  guinea-pig  blood  at  all,  and  dissolves  rabbit  blood  (which
at  first  was  but  slightly  affected)  very  strongly.  It  is  worthy  of
note  that  in  almost  every  horse  serum  which  we  examined  for  the
purpose  we  found  a  coasiderable  amount  of  amboceptor  for  guinea-
pig  blood.  This  ambo^epfor  was  characterized  by  a  particularly
high  degree  of  thermolabilily,  being  invariably  destroyed  by  heat^
ing  to  55°  C.  A  complement  for  the  same  is  very  often  absent,  and
even  when  present  it  is  only  on  the  addition  of  considerable  amounts
of  fresh  guinea-pig  sennn  that  this  amboceptor  becomes  manifest.

The  cause  of  this  varying  hsemolytic  property  of  the  horse  scrum,
which  is  in  contrast  to  the  extraordinarily  constant  amount  of  normal
hsemolysin  present  in  other  sera,  e.g.  goat  serum  and  dog  serum,  is
perhaps  due  in  part  to  the  unusual  lability  of  the  complements  here
concerned.  We  often  observed  that  a  horse  serum  which  dissolved
guinea-pig  or  rabbit  blood  completely  lost  this  propertj',  or  nearly
BO,  by  keeping  the  serum  on  ice  for  twenty-four  hours,  a  behavior
which  we  never  met  with  in  other  sera.

In  a  similar  manner  horse  serum  shows  its  variability  when  it  ia
employed  pureij'  as  a  source  of  complement.  We  ha^'e  frequently
used  horse  serum  as  complement  in  the  following  combinations:


Number.

Blood.

Ap.b™p..r.

1

3

5
6
7
S

guinea-pig
rabbit

guinea-pig
slieep

goat  serum
aog  serum

^og^rX*

ueruni  of  a  goat  immunized
\v[(h  fiheep  blood

Of  all  these  cases  only  the  complement  for  6  and  for  S  was  present
in  considerable  amounts.  So  tar  as  the  other  six  complements  were
concerned  we  observed  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  ex-
periments which  we  had  made  some  years  ago  in  Steglitz  and  those
made  during  the  past  two  years  in  Frankfurt.     Whereas  formerly


COMPLEMENTIBILITy  OF  THE  AMBOC^EPTORS.

ail  of  the  completions  of  normal  amboceptors  succeeded,  we  found
in  Franlifurt  that  we  obtained  negative  results  in  the  great  majority
of  the  experiments.  The  complements  necessary  for  the  completion
of  almost  all  normal  amboceptors  were  absent,  while  complements
were  present  for  a  certain  normal  amboceptor  (guinea-pig  blood,  ox
serum),  and  for  one  obtained  by  imnmnizing  a  goat  with  sheep  blood. ^

This  behavior  indicates  clearly  enough  a  plurality  of  the  comple-
ments in  a  serum,  and  we  do  not  doubt  that  further  investigations
will  show  the  same  to  be  true  for  the  partial  complements  of  other
sera.  The  occasional  absence  of  one  or  the  other  complement  will
most  easily  be  dbcovered  just  in  the  completion  of  normal  amlmceptors,
for  here  but  few  amboceptors  have  to  be  considered.  Of  the  numerous
amboceptors  produced  by  immunization  in  many  cases,  at  least  a  few
will  find  fitting  dominant  complements.  According  to  our  obser\-a-
tions,  conclusions  can  be  drawn  only  with  the  greatest  care  from
isolated  negative  completion  experiments.  One  cannot  conclude  that
an  amboceptor  is  absent  from  the  impossibility  to  reactivate  normal
inacti^'e  sera  by  means  of  several  other  active  sera.

For  the  evaluation  of  baclericidal  sera  in  anhnal  experiments
we  believe  it  to  be  especially  important  to  consider  cases  of  thii
kind.  The  entire  absence  or  a  marked  diminution  of  complements  ^
which  functionate  as  dominant  complements  for  certain  bactericidal
amboceptors  may  lead  to  a  disturbance  in  the  regularity  of  a  series
of  experiments,  disturbances  which  show  themseh'es  in  the  fact  that
now  and  then  an  animal  dies  of  the  infection  even  though  in  the  zone
of  sufficient  immune  senim  to  protect  the  animal.  Such  irregularities
are  quite  common  in  the  usual  test  series  and  manifest  themselves
frequently  in  the  evaluation  of  bactericidal  sera,  where  they  then  are
very  dbtmbing.

'  la  respect  to  its  complements  horae  serum  occupiea  a  special  place  among
most  other  sera  used  in  the  laboratory.  Thus,  for  example,  we  were  rarely
Buccesaful  in  complementing  the  amboceptor  of  a  rabbit  immunized  with  ox
blood; '  we  never  found  a  complemeuC  in  hoise  Eera  for  the  amboceptors  of  geese
or  goats  immunized  with  ox  blood.  That  the  locality  plays  a  certain  role  in
these  phenomena  follows  from  our  obBervationa  thai  here,  in  contrast  to  the
slatemonta  of  so  reliable  an  observer  as  P.  Midler  in  Grnz,  rabbit  blood  is  not
dissolved  by  duck  Berum  to  any  appreciuble  extent.

'Another  abnormal  phenomenon  nliicli  is  oft«n  observed  in  this  connec-
tion, the  disturbing  action  of  large  amounts  of  the  immune  senini,  is  explained
by  the  peculiar  deSection  of  complements  by  an  excess  of  amboceptor,  as
has  been  determined  by  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  (see  pages  120  et  scq).


240  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

It  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  such  variations  of  the  complement
are  responsible  for  the  occasional  failures  of  bactericidal  sera  in
practice^  especially  if  we  consider  that  in  diseased  conditions  a  marked
diminution  or  a  disappearance  of  the  complements  can  take  place
(Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  Metchnikoff,  Wassermann,  Schiitze  and
Scheller).


XXIII.     THE  PRODTTCnON  OF  ILEMOLYTIC  AMBOCEP-
TORS  BY  MEANS  OF  SERUM  INJECTIONS.i

A  Ckintribution  to  Our  Knowledge  of  Receptors.

By  J.  MoROENROTH,  Member  of  the  Institute.

As  a  result  of  the  side-chain  theory  of  immunity,  and  especially
in  consequence  of  the  conception  of  "receptor"  which  this  theory
brings  with  it,  our  views  concerning  the  cytotoxins  have  to  a  great
extent  been  emancipated  from  the  morphological  point  of  view  and
placed  on  a  chemical  basis.  This  is  seen  most  clearly  by  looking  at
the  complex  hemolysins  of  serum,  for  of  all  the  various  cytotoxins
these  have  been  most  clearly  analyzed.

As  is  well  known,  if  an  animal  is  injected  with  erythrocytes  of  a
foreign  species,  there  develop  in  the  serum  of  this  animal  new  sub-
stances, the  hcemolytic  amboceptors  (immune  bodies).  The  ambo-
ceptors are  bound,  above  all,  by  the  red  blood-cells  of  that  species
whose  blood  was  used  for  the  injection,  and  it  is  through  this  binding
that  the  amboceptors  make  possible  the  hemolytic  action  of  the
complement  contained  in  fresh  serum.  According  to  the  side-chain
theory  the  anchoring  of  the  amboceptors  is  the  result  of  chemical
processes,  which  again  are  based  on  the  existence  of  certain  groups
of  the  blood-cells'  protoplasm,  the  receiptors.  If  on  the  basis  of  this
theory  one  has  once  clearly  seen  that  the  specific  binding  is  strictly
a  chemical  reaction  between  receptor  and  amboceptor  (or  rather
between  their  haptophore  groups),  it  becomes  quite  evident  that  the
morphological  structure  of  the  cell  concerned  in  the  reaction  is  some-
thing quite  secondary.  This  is,  of  course,  apart  from  certain  prac-
tical points  which  are  mainly  the  indicators  of  the  deleterious  action
exerted  by  the  coaction  of  amboceptor  and  complement.  Among
these  would  be,  in  this  case,  escape  of  haemoglobin;  in  the  cases  of
other  cytotoxins,  disintegration  and  solution  of  the  cell,  cessation

^  Reprint  from  the  Munch,  med.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  25.

241


242


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


of  the  motion  of  Sagella  and  cilia.  The  specific  binding  of  the  am-
boceptors ia  therefore  not  dependent  on  a  coarser  or  finer  morpho-
logical structure:  i(  can  occur  wherever  the  spedficaUy  related  receptors
are  present.

For  the  doctrine  of  immunity  these  views  constitute  a  new  and
really  concise  definition  of  specificity.  The  latter  thus  loses  the
systematic  character  originally  given  it  by  botany  and  zoology  and
must  from  now  on  be  regarded  purely  chemically,  as  absolutely
dependent  on  the  conceptions  aa  to  the  nature  of  the  cell's  receptors.
Every  ■product  of  immunizalion  is  specific  for  those  receptors  by  which
it  was  cailed  forth,  iirespeetii'e  of  where  tlie  receptors  may  6e.'  When
injected  into  an  animal  the  receptor  produces  antibodies,  and  these
again,  when  they  meet  the  receptor  under  suitable  conditions,  are
bound  by  the  receptor.  This  binding,  in  our  conception,  always
remains  specific.  It  matters  not  whether  the  receptor  is  peculiar
to  the  protoplasm  of  that  species  of  cell  which  originally  excited  the
immunity,  or  whether  it  belongs  to  a  different  kind  of  cell  of  the
same  species  or  to  one  of  a  strange  species.

Hence  the  principle  of  specificity  of  the  amboceptors  produced  by  immu-
nization is  not  violated  when,  for  example,  v.  Dungem  oblaioB  Jutmolytic
amboceptors  by  injectioDs  of  ciliated  epithelial  debris,  such  aa  is  contained  ia
goat  milk.  v.  Dungem  '  has  very  properly  pjointed  out  thiH  fact  in  emphasising
the  community  of  the  receptors.  The  same  holds  tnie  for  the  h«DmoI}^ic  am-
boceptors obtained  by  Moxter  '  by  injections  of  spermatozoa.  Sever&l  different
zoological  species,  such  as  goat,  sheep,  and  ox,  possess  a  number  of  common
receptors  in  their  blood-cells,'

On  the  basis  of  the  side-chain  theory  aa  it  has  Just  been  laid
down  it  is  almost  a  matter  of  course  that  these  receptors  of  the
protoplasm  which  excite  the  production  of  the  amboceptors  are
normally  present  dissolved  in  the  body  fluids,  a  physiological  proto-
type of  what  occurs  to  such  a  high  degree  in  consequence  of  immu-
nization."


'  See  the  explanations  by  Ehrlich  concerning  the  receptor  apparatus  of  the
red  blood-cells  in  Schiussbetrachtungen,  Vol.  VIII,  of  Nothnagels  spczielle
■pathol.  und  Therspie,  Vienna,  1901.

'v.  Dungem.  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr,  1899,  No.  38.

'Moxler,  Deutsche  med.  Wochenschr.  1900,  No.  I.

'  Ehrlich  and  Moi^nroth,  page  88.

'  It  has  already  been  shown  that  as  a  result  of  injection  of  amboceptors  into
e  animals  a  considerable  number  of  cell  receptors  are  thrust  off,  whidi


PRODUCTION  OF  H.^MOLYTIC  AHBOCEFTORS.


243


The  extraordinary  multiplicity  of  such  dissolved  substances  in
blood  serum  has  already  been  pointed  out  by  Ehrlich.^  "The  chief
tools  of  the  internal  metabolism  arc  the  receptors  of  the  first,  second,
and  third  order.  They  are  constantly  being  used  up  and  produced
anew,  and  can  readOy  therefore,  when  overproduced,  get  into  the
circulation.  Considering  the  large  number  of  organs  and  the  com-
plexity of  the  protoplasm's  chemistry  it  need  not  be  surjDrising  if
the  blood,  the  representative  of  all  the  tissues,  is  filled  with  an  infinite
number  of  the  most  diverse  receptors.  Of  these  we  have  thus  far
learned  to  distinguish  the  various  kinds  of  tj-sins,  agglutinins,  coagu-
lins,  complements,  ferments,  antitoxins,  anticomplements,  and  anti-
ferments."

These  free  receptors  when  injected  into  a  suitable  foreign  animal
species  should  therefore  show  their  identity  with  those  of  the  cells
by  the  fact  that,  like  the  latter,  they  produce  immune  bodies  identical
with  those  produced  in  the  usual  wa}'.

A  few  isolated  observations  have  been  made  in  this  direction,
but  the  conclusions  following  therefrom  according  to  the  theory  have
not  been  drawn.  Thus  v.  Dungem''  has  observed  the  development
of  a  hiemolysin  directed  against  chicken  erj'throcytes  as  a  result  of
injections  of  chicken  serum  into  guinea-pig  serum,  and  Tschiatovitseh  *
has  observed  the  formation  of  a  htemolysin  (besides  agglutinins)  on
injecting  rabbits  with  horse  serum.*

For  some  time  past  I  have  made  experiments  of  this  kind  to  demon-
strate the  existence  in  goat  serum  of  free  receptors  identical  with
receptors  of  goat  er>-throcytes.  These  studies  were  prompted  by
the  observation  that  a  few  normal  goat  sera  exerted  a  slight  inhibiting
action  on  the  amboceptors  of  rabbits  immunized  with  ox  blood,  an
action  which  Ehrlieh  and  Morgenroth  had  shown  to  be  due  to  an
anti-immune  body.'     I  am  led  to  publish  these    experiments  now


then  fimctionaie  as  i

23andS8.

'  Ehrlieh,  Sclilussbetrachtungen,  1.  e.

•  V.  Diingem,  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr.  1891

'  TschiBto^-ilsch,  Annal.  Inst.  Pasteur,  1899.


bodies.     See  Ehrlicli  and  Morgenroth,  pages


'The  increase  in  ha^molytit
the  iniectioD  of  chichen  blood-pla
I90I)>  reatH  apparently  only  on  ar
fflent  of  new  amboceptors.

'  See  pages  88  ot  seq.


I  of  rabbit  scrum  for  chicken  blood  after
described  by  Nolf  (Anna!.  Inst.  Pasteur,
of  complement,  uot  on  the  develop-


244  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

because  of  a  rattier  important  contradiction  which  exists  between
tht'in  and  certain  exiJcrinienta  recently  published  by  Schattenfroh.'
This  author  found  tlmt  one  can  produce  htmutlytic  immune  bodies  for
goat  blood  by  injecting  rabblta  with  goai  urine.  He  was  unable,
however,  to  obtain  these  immune  bodies  by  injection  of  the  corre-
sponding serum.  It  must  at  once  be  regarded  as  extraordinary  that
immune  bodies  which  evidently  are  excreted  through  the  kidney  regu-
larly and  plentifully  should  be  absent  from  the  serum  itself.  It
would,  of  course,  have  been  possible  to  say  that  the  concentration
of  the  receptors  in  the  serum  was  small  compared  to  that  in  the  urine,
as  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  urea,  uric  acid,  and  other  substances.
But  the  casual  antiamboccptor  action  of  the  serum  prevented  this,
and  |K)inted  to  the  presence  in  this  of  the  dissoh-ed  receptors.  .\8  a
matter  of  fact,  therefore,  the  "interesting  contradiction"  described
by  Schattenfroh  aa  existing  between  the  action  of  the  urine  and  the
senmi  does  not  obtain;  for  it  is  possible  by  injecting  rabbits  with
goat  serum  completely  deprived  of  blood-cells  to  produce  specific
amlK)ceptors.  These  amboceptors,  to  be  sure,  do  not  become  mani-
fest if  the  usual  methods  of  investigation,  such  as  have  been  em-
ployed by  Schattenfroh,  are  followed.  They  are,  however,  readily  and
surely  demonstrated  if  one  attends  to  certain  fine  details.

As  a  rule  a  hscmolytic  serum  obtained  by  specific  immunization
will,  when  fresh,  dissolve  the  corresponding  blood-cells;  for,  as  v.
Dungem  has  shown,  in  immunization  with  blood-cells  the  comple-
menta  usually  do  not  in  any  sense  suffer  a  change.  Only  one  excep-
tion is  thus  far  known  in  this  respect,  namely,  the  injection  of  goat
scrum  into  the  organism  of  a  rabbit.  Ehrlich  and  Moregnroth  ^  have
shown  that  the  injection  of  goat  serum  into  rabbits  is  followed  by
the  loss  of  certain  complements  of  the  rabbit  serum,  a  loss  which  is
caused  by  the  development  of  a nticom piemen ts  directed  against
the  complements  of  their  own  senma.  These  a nti complements  are
therefore  to  be  regarded  aa  auto-anticomplements.  They  not  only
suffice  to  neutrahze  the  complements  present  in  the  senmi,  but  are
al)le  to  bind  complement  eubaetiucntly  added.  Thus  the  amboceptor
of  a  rabbit  mixed  with  goat  serum  is  completely  o!>scured;  for  if
the  immune  serum  ia  employed  frcah,  the  fitting  complements  enabling
it  to  act  are  lacking,  while  if  the  serum  is  inactivated  and  one  seeks

'  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  31.
'  See  pages  71  et  seq.


PRODUCTION  OF  ILEMOL'iTIC  AMBOCEPTORS.  245

to  activate  it  by  the  addition  of  normal  rabbit  serum,  the  comjije-
ments  of  the  latter  will  be  made  inert  by  the  auto-anticomplenient
preaent.  Since  these  auto-anticomplements,  however,  have  no  in-
fluence on  the  binding  of  the  amboceptor,  the  rational  mode  of  pro-
cedure is  at  once  indicated.  The  blood-eells  are  mixod  with  the  serum
of  the  immunized  rabbits  and  the  mixture  allowed  to  stand  until
the  amboceptors  present  have  lieen  bound  by  the  blood-eells.  The
latter  are  then  separated  by  centrifuge,  the  supernatant  fluid  which
contains  the  cause  of  the  trouble,  the  auto-antiromplement,  being
removed.  If  the  blood-cells  are  now  mixed  witli  fresh  normal  rabbit
serum,  the  hemolysis  which  ensues  in  the  incubator  will  show  the
presence  of  the  anchored  amboceptor.  iShould  this  method,  which
guards  against  all  errore,  prove  successful,  one  can  also  get  round
the  difficulty  in  an  easier  manner  by  using  guinea-pig  serum  as  com-
plement. Against  this  serum,  according  to  our  experience,  the  auto-
anticomplement  is  ineffective.  This  method,  however,  does  not
suffice  if  we  wish  to  obtain  results  which  permit  of  only  one  inter-
pretation. In  order  surely  to  avoid  another  source  of  error  it  is
well  to  modify  the  test  still  further.

It  haa  been  found  that  normal  rabbit  serum  possesses  a  con-
siderable though  variable  hemolytic  action  for  goat  blood  (see
Table  I).  Tlie  question  whether  we  are  dealing  with  an  amboceptor
artificially  produced  or  with  one  which  was  originally  present  requires
detailed  preliminary  examination  and  control  tests,  and  even  then  is
very  uncertain  because  the  amboceptor  normally  present  finds  a
supply  of  complement  in  guinea-pig  serum  more  plentiful  even  than
that  in  rabbit  serum  itself,  as  can  be  seen  on  reference  to  the  table.
This  difficulty  is  avoided  without  further  trouble  if  the  amboceptors
produced  by  immunization  and  which  it  is  desired  to  find  are  taken
out  of  the  fluid  by  means  of  ox  blood-cells  instead  of  goat  blood-cells.
Because  of  the  partial  community  of  receptor  of  these  two  blood-
cells  this  is  perfectly  allowable.  As  a  rule,  too,  normal  rabbit  serum
dissolves  ox  blood  only  ver}-  little,  even  though  considerable  comple-
ment ia  present.     (See  Table  I.)

l"he  experiments  from  which  the  conclusions  are  drawn  in  this
study  were  therefore  always  made  with  ox  blood.  One  cc.  of  a  5%
suspension  of  ox  blood-cells  is  mixed  with  varying  amounts  of  serum
from  a  rabbit  immunized  with  goat  serum,  the  mixture  kept  at  3S°  C.
on  a  water-bath  for  one  hour,  then  centrifuged,  and  either  fresh  rabbit
serum  added  after  the  supernatant  fluid  had  been  decanted,  or  acti-


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IS  iMMUKITY.

TABLE  1.
F  Goat  Bix)od  (t  cc.  5%)  bt  Fresh  Serum  or  Nobmal  RABsm.


K2

..

11.

■■■

IV.

V.

V.

VII.

0.05

Sa

""ihtta"

liul.

ve?y  mc£

compleu

fair
0

0,25
0.O75

OOffipteU.

compbt,
itrong  ^

eotnplete

™mpk«<

»f!one

oom  Plate
Blroog

0,05
0.025

■•       \

c.1o%C

(   2

=

■■

=

Sf     1

0

0

'-"s""

0

flint  trace
0

"v"

-£?•

J  of  O.S.  do  not  by  tbEo»


vation  was  effected  by  the  addition  of  normal  guinea-pig  Benun.
The  ha^molytic  action  of  the  immune  sera  is  seen  in  Table  II.

Rabbits  were  treated  nitb  goat  serum  whieh  had  been  ca.refull}'  freed  from
aU  blood-cells  by  continued  ceatrifuging.  Usually  the  serum  was  inactivated
by  heating  It  to  55°  C.  for  liolf  an  hour,  then  it  waa  injected  intra peritoneally.
As  a  rule  the  animals  received  two  to  three  injeetions  of  increasing  doses  of  serum,
in  oil  about  35-90  cc.  More  frequent  injeetions  caused  no  greater  formatioD
of  amboceptorR,  a  behavior  which  corresponds  to  that  seen  with  the  injection
of  ox  blood  or  gout  blood.

These  experiinenls  show  that  specific  amboceptors  were  developed
in  all  the  rabbita  treated  with  goat  serum.  Quantitatively  this  was
subject  to  individual  fluctuations  just  as  is  seen  following  the  injec-
tion of  blood-ceils;  in  some  cases  the  development  was  quite  con-
siderable. Most  of  the  sera  were  examined  itesh  for  their  action  on
ox  blood,  and  invariably  showed  themselves  without  action  even  in
doses  of  0.5  cc'     The  addition  of  largo  amounts  of  normal  rabbit

'  The  method  here  emjdoyed  to  disclose  amboceptors  whose  presence  is
masked  can  often  be  used  with  Bucees.s.  Dr.  Marsliall  and  I  shall  shortly  report
an  analogous  case  dealing  with  the  amhoeeptort  at  a  pathological  exudate.


PRODUCTION  OF  HiEMOLYTIC  AMBOCEPTORS.


247


TABLE  II.

1.0  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood.

A.  Blood + amboceptor  are  kept  at  37^  C.  for  one  hour.  After  centrifuging
the  fluid  is  decanted  and  the  sediment  mixed  with  2  cc.  physiological  salt
solution  and  0.2  cc.  rabbit  serum  as  complement.

Complete  Haemolysis.

0.05  cc.

0.05  "


Serum  rabbit


I

n


tt


tt


ni.


0.25


tt


B.  Blood+ahboceftor+0.1-0.2  Guinea-piq  Serum  as  Complement.


Serum  rabbit     IV 0.1      cc.

V 0.05    "

VI 0.05    "

VII 0.028  "

Vin 0.013  "

IX more  than  0.25

X 0.05

XI less  than  0.05


tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt


I  <
tt
tt


serum  does  not  suflSce  to  overcompensate  the  auto-anticomplement
present.  For  example,  the  serum  of  rabbit  III  shows  the  following
solvent  action  after  the  addition  of  0.6  cc.  rabbit  serum:


0.5  cc
0.26  '*
0.15"
0.1


tt


0
trace


tt


very  little


0.075  cc very  little

0.05    " "

0.025  " trace


tt


The  abnormal  course  of  this  slight  haemolysis  shows  very  well
the  interference  of  anticomplement  on  the  one  hand  and  of  the
amboceptor  on  the  other.

The  similarity  of  the  amboceptor  produced  by  injections  of  goat
serum  to  that  produced  by  injections  of  blood  is  more  plainly  seen
by  the  fact  that  the  anti-immune  body  obtained  by  immunization
acts  against  the  former  amboceptor  just  as  well  as  against  the  latter.
Table  III  shows  this  behavior  very  well.

The  anti-immune  body  used  was  contained  in  the  inactivated
serum  of  a  goat  which  had  been  injected  several  times  with  the  serum
of  rabbits  immunized  with  ox  blood.  0.3  cc.  of  this  anti-immune
body  serum  were  mixed  with  varying  amounts  of  the  amboceptor  sera
to  be  tested  and  the  mixtures  kept  at  room  temperature  for  one  hour.
Thereupon  1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension  of  ox  blood-cells  was  added  to


24S


COLLECTED  STUDFES  IN  LMMUNITY.


each  specimen,  which  was  then  kept  on  a  water-bath  at  38°  C.  for
une  hour,  after  which  the  mixtures  were  centrifuged.  The  blood-
cell  SEsdiment  was  again  susi>ended  in  salt  solution  and  0.15  cc.  guinea-
pig  serum  added  as  complement.  The  solution  which  then  ensued
was  a  measure  for  the  bound  amboceptor,  or  for  the  deflection  by  the
antiamboceptor.  Control  tests  were  made  with  0.3  cc.  normal  in-
active goat  serum  in  parallel  experiments.


+0,3  Anliamboceplor.

+  0,.'i  Normal  Inactive
UoBl  Serum.

0.25

0.15

0-1

0.075

0.05

0,025

complete  solution

strong

little

very  little

0

0

complete  Kolution
strong

0.2

complete  solution

complete  mlution

0,15

fltrong

0.1

0.075

0-06

0

0.05

0

moderate

0,025

0

little

0.012

0

0.009

0

0

TTie  antiamboceptor  b  thus  seen  to  ofTer  exactly  the  same  pro-
tection agaiiLst  the  amboceptors  obtained  as  a  result  of  goat-blood
injections  and  those  resulting  from  goal-serum  injections,  whereby
their  identity  is  demonstrated.

The  presence  of  free  receptors  in  the  urine  and  serum  leads  to  the
conclusion  that  an  active  receptor  metabolism  exists  in  the  organism
of  the  goat;  in  other  words,  that  receptors  are  constantly  reaching
the  serum  from  the  cells  and  are  then  excreted  by  the  kidney.
Whether  one  is  here  dealing  with  decomposition  products  or  with
the  products  of  some  secretion  or  other  cannot  be  determined.     The


PRODUCTION  OF  HiEMOLYTIC  AMBOCEPTORS.  249

fact  that  free  receptors  leave  the  serum  to  reappear  in  the  urine  seems
to  make  it  probable  that  they  have  no  significance  for  the  organism
itself.  On  the  contrary,  one  may  suspect  that  these  are  products
of  regressive  metabolism  which  are  eliminated  from  the  body  as
useless.  The  explanation  that  the  free  receptors  originate  from  the
breaking  down  of  red  blood-cells  or  other  cells  is  entirely  sufficient.
It  may  be,  however,  that  there  is  a  physiological  thrusting-off  of
the  same  which  bears  some  relation  to  their  nutritive  fimction.  In
view  of  the  elimination  through  the  urine,  it  seems  improbable  that
this  constitutes  a  regular  function  as  anti-immune  body  against  the
action  of  a  possible  autolysin.  That  certainly  would  be  an  imsuita-
ble  process.  In  fact  the  free  receptors  evidently  do  not  generally
possess  the  character  of  antiautolysins,  as  Besredka  ^  believes,  for
by  injecting  a  rabbit  with  ox  serum  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  any
haemolytic  amboceptors.  This  corresponds  to  the  negative  results
obtained  by  London  ^  on  injecting  guinea-pigs  with  rabbit  serum.

One  thing  is  clearly  shown  by  the  presence  of  dissolved  substances
capable  of  producing  amboceptors,  namely,  that  without  the  idea
of  "receptors"  a  universally  applicable  conception  of  the  origin  and
mode  of  action  of  the  cytotoxins  is  impossible,  as  is  also  a  clear  con-
ception of  the  nature  of  "specificity."

Subsequent  Note, — In  a  recently  published  study  (Miinch.  med.  Wochen-
schr.  1902,  No.  32)  P.  Th.  Miiller  reports  on  the  production  of  hflBmolytic
amboceptors  by  treating  pigeons  with  guinea-pig  serum,  and  he  accepts  the
views  here  developed.

^  Besredka,  Annal.  de  ITnstitut  Pasteur,  Oct.  1901.

'  London,  Arch,  des  Sciences  biologiques,  St.  Peterabuig.


232


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


The  6gures  in  Table  1  show  that  in  the  four  similar  cases  here
examined  the  relation  between  the  amount  of  amboceptor  and  of
the  complement  required  is  such  that  in  the  presence  of  larger  anumrHs
of  amboceptor  smaller  doses  of  complemenl  suffice  for  complete  biatwlysis.
The  relation  is  not  exactly  the  same  in  the  se])arate  cases,  as  can
readily  be  seen  from  the  figures  of  columns  2  and  4.  In  one  case  (I)
increasing  the  amboceptor  eight  times  reduced  the  amount  of  com-
plement required  only  to  — ,  whereas  in  another  case  (IV)  increas-
ing the  amount  of  amboceptor  only  four  times  reduced  the  comple-
ment required  to  ^.    This  shows  us  at  once  that  there  is  no  definite

ratio  between  the  two  factors.     The  causes  of  this  varying  relation
will  be  discussed  later.

The  phenomenon  in  question  is  much  less  marked  in  the  casea
reproduced  in  Table  II,  in  which  the  combination  was  ox  blood-}- the
amboceptor  ot  specifically  immuoized  rabbitsH-guinea-pig  serum  or
rabbit  serum  as  complement.


Ambowplor.

.h^-frrn?,if

CompUiBcnt
SufGcwnt  for

the  ^oimU  ot

0.002

IX

0.035

1

o.ooe

2iX

0,015

2l

0.01

SX

0.01

3:5

0.05

25  X

0.008

1
4.4

0.1

MX

0.008

1
4.4

0.2

100  X

0.008

1

4.4

0.4

400  X

0.01

1
3.5

AMBOCEPTOR.  COMPLEMENT,  AND  ANTICOMPLEMENT.       253


TABLE   II— ConHnued.
B.  The  Same,  but  Rabbit  Serum  as  Complement.


Amount  of
Amboceptor.

Proportion  of

the  Amounts  of

Amboceptor.

Amount  of
Complement
Sufficient  for

Complete
Solution.

Proportion  of

the  Amounts  of

Complement.

I

•

0.005

IX

0.5

1

0.01

2X

0.17

1
2.9

0.05

10  X

0.12

1
4.2

0.1

20X

0.14

1
3.6

0.2

40X

0.14

1
3.6

0.4

SOX

I

0.15
I.

1
3.3

0.005

IX

0.6

1

0.01

2X

0.17

1
2.5

0.05

10  X

0.12

1
5

0.1

20  X

0.14

1
4.3

0.2

40X

0.14

1
4.3

0.4

SOX

0.15

1
4

II

I.

0.005

IX

0.75

1

0.0075

lix

0.6

1
1.25

0.015

3X

0.14

1
5.3

0.03

6X

0.17

1
4.4

0.06

12X

0.14

1
5.3

0.12

24  X

0.12

1
6.3

254  COLLECTED  STaDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Here  we  see  that  the  emplojinent  even  of  \'ery  high  multiples  of  the
amtoceptor  effects  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of  complement  required
of  one-third  to  one-aixth  at  the  most.  But  what  is  particularly  char-
acteristic for  this  case  is  the  fact  that  the  minimal  amount  of  com-
plement is  almost  reached  with  a  small  multiple  of  the  "amboceptor
unit,"  ^  and  that  it  does  not  materially  change  with  a  further  in-
crease of  the  amboceptor.  Thus,  in  Table  II,  A,  we  see  that  when
five  times  the  amboceptor  unit  is  employed  the  amount  of  comple-
ment required  is  0.01;  when  25,  50,  or  100  times  the  unit  is  employed
the  complement  is  0.008.  Table  II,  B,  shows  that  with  the  employ-
ment of  two  to  three  times  the  amboceptor  unit  the  maximum  of
complement  action  is  already  attained.

An  entirely  analogous  behavior  is  shown  by  the  cases  in  Table  III,
in  which  the  same  blood  and  the  same  amboceptor  are  used  as  in
Table  I,  but  m  which  different  kinds  of  complement  are  added,
namely,  sheep  serum  and  horse  serum.

These  cases  constituts  the  transition  to  those  reproduced  in  Table
IV  which  deal  with  ox  blood  +  the  amboceptor  of  goats  treated  with
ox  blood  +  three  different  complements,  namely,  guinea-pig,  rabbit,
and  sheep  serum  respectively.  In  these  also  a  limit  is  reached  beyond
whitk  the  decrease  of  complement  required  is  but  slightly  or  not  at  all
affected  by  an  increase  in  the  anwunt  of  amboceptor.

We  see  therefore  that  with  an  increase  of  the  amount  of  amboceptor
the  amount  of  complement  required  at  one  time  drops  to  a  greater  or  less
degree,  at  another  time  it  remains  unchanged.  Upon  what  does  this
phenomenon  depend?  In  order  to  explain  this  we  must  consider  three
factors  which  may  be  combined  with  one  another,  and  which  must  be
considered  in  each  individual  case.  These  are:  1.  The  receptors
present  in  the  red  blood-cell.  2.  The  conditions  of  affinity.  3.  TTie
plurality  of  the  amboceptors.

So  far  as  the  first  point  is  concerned  we  know  that  the  amount  of
receptors  of  the  red  blood-cells  may  exhibit  great  differences  in  any
individual  case.^

'Weuse  the  term  "  umliocpptor  unit"  to  sjiecify  that  amount  of  nmboceptor
which  on  the  adiiilion  of  the  optimal  amount  of  complement  just  HUfiieesfor  com-
plete hiEmolyBiH.  In  the  same  sense  R.  Pteiffer  unea  the  t«nn  "immunity  unit"
when  speaking  of  bactericidal  sera.  Corresponding  to  the  smboceptor  unit
the  "receptor  unit"  is  that  amount  of  receptor  which  binds  the  amboceptor

'See  Ehrlich,  Schlusabetrachtungen  in  Nothnagels  spec.  P.ithologie  und
Therapie,  Vol.MII,  Vienna,  Holder.  1901;  and  Thrlichnnd  Morgcnrolh.  page  71.


AMBOCEPTOR,  COMPLEMENT,  AND  ANTICOMPLEMENT.       255.


TABLE  III.

A.    1  cc.  6%  Sheep  Blood + Amboceptor  of  Goats  Treated  with  Sheep-
Blood  +  Sheep  Serum  as  Complement.


B.  The  Same

,  but  with  Horse  Serum  as

Complement.

Amount  of  the
Amboceptor.

Proportion  of

the  Amount  of

Amboceptor.

Amount   of

Complement

which  Huffioes

for  Complete

Solution.

Proportion  of

the  Amounte  of

Complement.

A.

0.1

1     X

0.15

1

0.25

2.6X

0.035

1
4.3

0.5

5     X

0.05

1
3

0.75

7.5X

0.05-0.036

3^4.3

B.

O.l

IX

0.5  almost

1

0.2

2X

[complete
0.1

1
5

0.4

4X

0.1

1
5

0.8

8X

0.1

1
5

One  erythrocyte  may  possess  just  so  many  receptors  for  a  cer-
tain poison  as  are  necessary  to  bind  a  single  solvent  dose,  i.e.  there
is  present  just  a  receptor  unit,  whereas  in  other  cases  such  a  multiple
of  the  receptor  unit  may  be  present  that  a  hundred  times  the  ambo-
ceptor unit  is  bound.  In  bacteria  the  latter  condition  is  present  to  a
still  very  much  greater  degree:  agglutinins  (Eisenberg  and  Volk)
and  bacteriolytic  amboceptors  (R.  Keififer)  are  bound  in  enormous
excess,  frequently  as  high  as  many  thousand  times  the  effective
amount.  It  is  therefore  entirely  clear  that  these  conditions  must
exercise  a  deciding  influence  on  the  fact  whether  an  increased  amount
of  immune  serum  decreases  the  amount  of  complement  required
or  not.  It  may  be  regarded  as  self-evident  that  in  all  those  cases
in  which  only  the  single  effective  dose  can  be  bound,  i.e.  in  which
only  one  amboceptor  unit  is  anchored,  an  excess  of  amboceptor  can
never  exert  a  favorable  influence;  on  the  contrary  an  increase  in  the


256


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


amount  of  complement  can  readily  result  owing  to  the  deflection
phenomenon  whose  significance  was  first  pointed  out  by  M.  Neisser
and  Wechsberg.i

TABLE  IV.

A.   1  cc.  6%  Ox  Blood  +  Amboceptor  op  Goats  Treated  with  Ox  Bloods-
Guinea-pig  Serum  as  Complement.

B.  The  Same  +  Rabbit  Serum  as  Complement.

C.  The  Same + Sheep  Serum  as  Complement.


Amount  of  the
Amboceptor.


Proportion  of

the  Amounts  of

Amboceptor.


Amount  of

Complement

which  SufiSoes

for  Complete

Solution.


Proportion  of

the  Amounts  of

Complement.


0.1
0.2
0.4
0.8


IX
2X
4X
8X


0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01


1
1
1
1


B.


0.1

IX

•0.15

1

0.2

2X

0.15

1

0.4

4X

0.15

1

0.8

8X

0.15

1

c.


0.1
0.2
0.4

IX
2X
4X

0.1
0.1
0.1

1
1

1

0.8

8X

0.075

1
1.4

The  problem  is  more  difficult  in  those  cases  in  which  the  red  blood-
cells  contain  a  plurality  of  receptor  units  and  therefore  bind  a  mul-
tiple of  amboceptor  units.  In  these  cases  the  result  of  the  experi-
ments will  depend  mainly  on  the  following  factors.

We  know  that  as  a  rule  the  affinity  of  the  amboceptor's  comple-
mentophile  group  is  increased  when  the  cytophUe  group  is  anchored
by  the  receptors.  If  this  relative  increase  of  affinity  is  very  large,
the  added  complement  will  combine  exclusively  with  the  anchored
amboceptor,  and  in  certain  doses  will  effect  solution.    In  this  case


'  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,  see  page  120.


AMBOCEPTOK,  COMPLEMENT.  AKD  ANTICOMPLEMENT.      257

the  requireti  equi\'nlence  will  already  be  reached  with  the  amount  of
complement  just  sufficient  for  solution,  and  ^n  increase  of  the  com-
plement action  by  loading  the  blood-cells  with  additional  ambo-
ceptor will  not  occur.

The  conditions,  however,  are  entirely  different  if  the  affinity  of
the  complementophile  group  of  the  ancliored  amboceptor  for  the
complement  is  only  ver\'  slight;  in  other  words,  when  we  are  dealing
with  an  easily  dissociated  combination  in  a  reversible  process.  In
that  case,  in  accordance  with  a  well-known  chemical  law,  the  more
of  one  of  the  elements  ts  in  excess,  the  more  of  the  completed  combinalion
will  remain  intact.  Hence  if  there  are  very  few  receptor  units  in  the
blood-cells,  it  will  be  necessary  to  add  ^'ery  much  complement  in  order
to  diminish  the  amount  of  dissociation  and  to  cause  the  formation
of  an  effective  unit  of  hiemolysin;  if  more  receptor  units  arc  present,
less  complement  will  suffice.  The  tables  here  given  present  numerous
considerations  which  show  that  little  amboceptor + muck  complement
and  mvck  amboceptor + little  complement  lead  to  the  formation  of  the
same-  amount  of  complement-amboceptor  combination  (hemolysin
unit)  anchored  by  the  receptors.

A  most  conspicuous  rfile,  however,  is  played  by  the  fact  that  the
immune  serum  is  not  a  simple  substance,  hut  is  made  up  of  partial  ambo-
ceptors to  which  various  dominant  complements  of  Ike  sera  correspond.
Of  especial  importance  in  this  respect  are  partial  amboceptors  present
in  immune  serum  in  small  amounts  (and  which  tlicrefore  can  only
come  into  action  when  high  multiples  of  the  immune  scrum  are
employed),  but  which,  for  their  completion,  find  a  partial  complement
which  is  particularly  -plentijiil  in  the  completing  serum.  Such  a
partial  amboceptor  present  in  these  small  amounts  (such,  for  example,
as  haa  been  demonstrated  in  the  senim  of  rabbits  treated  with  ox
blood)  constitutes  one  of  the  main  explanations  for  the  phenomena
above  described.

From  these  considerations  wo  see  that  the  various  phenomena
which  we  obser\'e  in  the  interdependence  of  the  amounts  of  ambo-
ceptor and  complement  required  may  have  entirely  different  causes,
but  that,  by  regarding  all  of  the  three  above-mentioned  factors,  these
phenomena  can  be  explained  very  naturally.  Under  these  circum-
stances it  is,  of  course,  not  permissible  to  generalize  from  one  particular


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


n.    Amonnt  ol  Amboceptor  and  Antlcomplement  Required.

The  following  observations  deal  with  the  quantitative  relations
existing  between  the  amount  of  amboceptor  and  that  of  the  anticom-
plemcnt  required  to  prevent  hemolysis,  In  a  number  of  cases  we
determined  the  amount  of  anlicomplement  which  just  suffices  to
prevent  the  solution  of  red  blood-cells  loaded  with  varying  amounts
of  amboceptor,  when  that  amount  of  complement  was  present  which
always  just  sufficed  for  complete  solution.

The  majority  of  our  experiments  again  refer  to  the  solution  of
Bheep  blood  by  an  immune  serum  (deri\'ed  from  a  goat)  whose  ambo-
ceptor ifl  complemented  by  guinea-pig  serum.  This,  it  will  be  re-
calletl,  is  the  case  in  which  with  large  amounts  of  amboceptor  the
complement  required  decreases  considerably.  For  the  antlcomple-
ment we  made  use  of  the  serum  of  a  goat  which  had  previously  been
treated  with  repeated  injections  of  rabbit  serum.  This  serum,  as
can  be  seen  from  a  previous  communication,  does  not  only  protect
against  the  complement  of  rabbit  serum,  but  also  against  those  of
guinea-pig  serum.

To  begin,  the  amount  of  completing  guinea-pig  serum  was  deter-
mined which,  with  varying  amounts  of  amboceptor,  sufficed  for
the  complete  solution  of  1  cc.  5%  sheep  blood.  After  this  the  quan-
tity of  antieomplement  required  in  each  instance  to  effect  neutrali-
zation was  determined,  whereupon  complement  and  antieomplement
were  mixed  and  kept  at  37°  C,  in  an  incubator  for  half  an  hour.
Blood  and  amboceptor  were  then  added.  Such  an  experiment  is
reproduced  in  Table  V.

As  shown  in  the  table  by  the  degree  of  hemolysis,  the  pecuhar
behavior  is  obscrv-ed  that  with  small  amounts  of  amboceptor  0.015
cc.  antieomplement  scrum  neutralize  the  complement  of  0.05  in  guinea-
pig  serum,  whereas  with  large  amounts  of  amboceptor  0.35  cc,  anti-
complement  senun  are  required  to  neutralize  0.006  guinea-pig  serum.
If  we  calculate  the  amount  of  complementing  serum  neutralized  in
both  cases  by  1  cc.  antieomplement  serum,  we  find  that  in  one  case
it  is  3.3  CO.,  in  the  other  0.017  ce.  Hence  when  large  nmonnta  of  ambo-
ceptor are  employed  the  antieomplement  acts  195  times  weaker.
The  required  amount  of  antieomplement  is  therefore  absolutely
dependent  on  the  quantity  of  the  amboceptor  employed.  This
becomes  most  evident  by  the  fact  that  even  with  equal  amounts  of


AMBOCEPTOR,  COMPLEMENT,  AND  ANTICOMPLEMENT.      259


complement  required,  but  with  varying  additions  of  amboceptor  (see
columns  a  and  b  of  Table  V),  different  amounts  of  anticomplement
(corresponding  to  the  amount  of  amboceptor  present)  are  required
to  neutralize  the  complement,  more  being  required  with  larger  amounts
of  amboceptor.  In  these  cases,  therefore^  the  amount  of  anticomplemeni
required  is  far  from  being  a  simple  function  of  the  amount  of  comple-
ment, but  is  dependent  on  the  amount  of  amboceptor  present.

TABLE  V.
A.


Amount  of  the  Amboceptor.


0.3
0.06
0.01
0.005


Amount  of  the  Complement  Sufficient  for
Complete  Solution.


0.005
0.005
0.01
0.035


B.


Amount  of

a

b

e

d

Anticomple-

Amboceptor, 0.3.

Amboceptor,  0.05.

Amboceptor,  0.01.

Amboceptor,  0.005

ment.

Complement,  0.006

Complement.  0.006

Complement,  0.01.

Complement,  0.05.

0.35

0

0

0

0

0.25

faint  trace

0

0

0

0.15

trace

0

0

0

0.1

II

0

0

0

0.075

moderate

faint  trace

0

0

0.05

complete

trace

faint  trace

0

0.035

moderate

little

0

0.025

II

complete

II

0

0.015

II

.    *'

complete

0

0.01

II

tt

li

faint  trace

0

II

11

tt

complete

In  several  other  combinations,  which  we  analyzed  in  a  similar
manner,  we  met  with  the  same  behavior  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.
In  Table  VI  such  an  experiment  is  reproduced;  it  deals  with  the
solution  of  ox  blood  by  an  amboceptor  derived  from  rabbits  and
complemented  by  guinea-pig  serum.  As  in  the  previous  case,  inactive
serum  of  a  goat  treated  with  rabbit  serum  served  as  anticomplement.

In  this  case  when  small  amounts  of  amboceptor  are  present  1.0
cc.  of  the  anticomplement  serum  neturalizes  1.0  cc.  guinea-pig  serum;
with  larger  amounts  of  amboceptor  it  neutralizes  only  0.067  cc;
i.e.,  about  fifteen  times  less.


!C0  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

TABLE  VI.
Oi  Blood +Ambocf.ptoi(  of  an  Ox-blood  Rabbit+Gitinba-ph)  Seruu.


Amtwcepior.

ESeot  CompleM  Bolutioa.

0,2
O.OlM

0.05
0,075

AnlicoDiplB.

^^^X-0%,

"SSSS-oT

0  75

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

0.1

0.075

0  05

0.035

0.025

0  015

0.01

0

strong

almost  complete

0

0

0

0

0

0
trace
little

strong
almost  complet*

The  study  of  the  phenomena  of  uiimuniKatinn  has  taught  us  that
nothing  is  so  liable  to  error  a-s  premature  generalization.  Hence
wc  were  not  at  all  surprised  to  find  that  there  are  cases  in  which,
in  contrast  to  that  above  described,  the  quantity  of  anticomplement
required  appeared  exclusively  to  be  a  function  of  the  amount  of
complement,  and  in  no  way  dependent  on  the  degree  of  occupation
of  the  receptors  by  amboceptors.  Curiously  enough  this  case  con-
cerns the  combination  first  described,  namely,  sheep  blood,  ambo-
ceptor of  goats  treated  with  sheep  blood,  and  guinea-pig  serum  as
complement,  imih  this  difference,  however,  that  in  this  case  the  anti-
complement  was  not  the  same,  since  it  was  derived  from  a  rtibbit  treated
with  guinea-pig  serum.  This  anticomplement,  therefore,  so  far  as  its
relation  to  guinea-pig  serum  was  concerned,  can  be  termed  "iso-
genic" in  contrast  to  the  anticomplement  previously  used,  which
can  be  termed  "alloiogenic,"  since  it  was  derived  by  injecting  rabbit
serum.    The  experiment  is  shown  in  Table  VII.

Here  we  see  that  neutralization  of  the  ten  times  larger  amount  of
complement,  such  oa  is  made  necessary  by  the  smaller  amount  of
amboce]>tor,  requires  ten  times  as  much  anticomplement  as  it  does
with  one-tenth  the  quantity  of  complement  when  lai^r  amounts
of  amboceptor  arc  used.


AMBOCEPTOR,  COMPLEMENT,  AND  ANTICOMPLEMENT.       261
TABLE  Vll.


Amounl  of

Compleui  Solution.

Aaiuuiit  ot  Comi.le-
™ptoU.  T«'t.

Amount  of  AnHeom-
jjltmeat  Inquired
for  Complete  Neu-

0.1
0.2

0.02
0.0025

0.025
0.0035

0-04
0  005

The  results  of  the  experiments  in  the  various  cases  are  diametric-
ally opposite,  for  in  one  case  there  is  a  relation  l>etween  complement
and  amount  of  anticompleraent  required  with  different  quantities  of
amboceptor,  In  other  cases  there  b  a  wide  divergence.  How  are
these  phenomena  to  be  explained?

To  begin,  let  us  assimie  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  that  comple-
ment and  an ti complement  are  of  simple  constitution.  In  that  case,
it,  aa  all  our  experiments  show,  the  affinity  of  complement  is  much
greater  for  anticomplemcnt  than  for  amboceptor,  the  neulralization
of  complement  and  anticomplement  should  follow  etoichiomelric  laws.
As  a  matter  of  fact  this  is  what  we  found  in  the  last  case  (1  able  VII).
In  the  first  two  eases,  however,  the  results  diverge  so  widely  from
this,  and  are  moreover  so  far  beyond  the  limile  which  might  be  caused
by  errors,  that  from  this  fact  alone  it  necessarily  follows  that  con-
ditions of  affinity  cannot  by  themselves  suffice  for  an  explanation.
We  are  therefore  compelled  to  call  to  our  aid  another  factor,  one
which  we  have  already  emphasized,  namely,  the  pluTulily  oj  the  coviple-
menls  and  anticompiemerUs.

Let  us  assume  that  in  this  case  two  dominant  complements,  ■
A  and  B,  came  into  play  in  the  complementing  serum.  The  serum
serving  as  anticomplement  must  therefore  contain  the  corresponding
anticomplement  a  or  ^.  It  is  self-evident  that  the  corresponding
anticomplements  are  present  in  tbe  isogenic  serum;  that  they  may
also  appear  in  the  serum  obtained  by  injection  of  a  different  serum,
e.g.  of  rabbit  serum,  is  shown  by  previous  experience.  It  is  not  at
all  necessary  to  assume  that  rabbit  serum  contains  exactly  the  same
complements  A  and  B  present  in  guinea-pig  serum;  it  suffices  to
assume  a  partial  identity  for  the  rabbit  serum's  complements  {Ai  and
Bt),  namely,  an  identity  in  the  haptophore  group.

FoDowing  the  terminology  of  the  theory  of  numlwrs  in  which  "friendly
ntimliers"  {numeri  amicahilcH)  are  fpoken  of.  one  could  designnte  complements
of  difTerent  species  which  correspond  in  their  haptophore  groupg,  &s  "friendly
complements."


4


262


(X)LLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


Now  if  one  injects  any  serum  containing  two  dififerent  comple-
ments, the  production  of  partial  anticomplements  will  to  a  great
extent  depend  on  the  relative  amount  of  the  two  complements.  For
example,  if  in  one  case  there  is  considerable  complement  A  and  but
little  B,  while  in  another  case  there  is  considerable  B  and  little  A,
the  anticoraplement  will  be  directed  for  the  greater  part  against  A
in  the  one  case,  and  against  B  in  the  other.  It  is  therefore  readily
understood  that  with  isogenic  sera  the  yield  of  anticomplements  can
correspond  fairly  well  to  the  nuxture  of  complements  present  in  the
injected  material,  for  the  average  composition  of  this  mixture  is
quite  constant.  A  serum  thus  results  which  to  a  certain  extent  is
fitt^  fjo  the  complements  of  the  serum  injected.

Since,  however,  a  serum  contains,  not  two  complements  as  we
have  assumed  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  but  a  large  number  of  com-
plements, it  can,  of  course,  happen  even  with  isogenic  anticomple-
ments that  a  disharmony  will  occur  so  far  as  certain  fractions  of
complements  are  concerned.  The  following  case  shows  that  even
with  an  isogenic  anticomplement  the  relative  proportion  between
complement  and  anticomplement  with  different  amounts  of  ambo-
ceptor is  not  maintained.     (See  Table  VIII.)

TABLE  VIII.

Human  Blood -f  Amboceptor  of  a  Human-blood  Rabbit + Rabbit  Serum 4-
Anticomplement  from  the  Goat  Treated  with  Rabbit  Serum.


Amount  of  Amboceptor.

Amount  of  Ck>mplement  Neoeasary  for
Complete  Solution.

0.2
0.2
0.05

0.05
0.05
0.075

Anticomplemen  t .

Amboceptor,  0.2.

Amboceptor,  0.1.

Amboceptor,  0.05.

Complement,  0.05

Complement,  0.05.

Complement,  0.1.

0.1

0

0

0

0.075

0

0

0

0.05

trace

0

0

0 .  035

<  (

0

0

0.025

little

trace

0

0.015

moderate

<  <

trace

0.01

almost  complete

little

moderate

0

complete

complete

complete

In  this  case  1.0  cc.  anticomplement  neutralizes  4.0  cc.  complement  when
0.5  cc.  amboceptors  are  present,  1.42  cc.  when  0.1  cc.  amboceptor  is  present,
and  only  0.67  cc.  complement  with  0.2  cc.  amboceptor.


AMBOCEPTOR,  CUMPLEME.NT,  AJJD  ANTI COMPLEMENT.      263

A  priori,  it  i3,  of  course,  conceivable  that  in  the  rabbit  the
complements  Ai  and  Bi  exist  exactly  in  the  same  projxirtion  as  do
complements  A  and  B  in  the  guinea-pig,  but  we  must  admit  that
this  would  be  a  coincidence.  In  all  probability  the  development
of  the  alloiogenic  anticomplement  will  result  in  a  serum  in  which  the
proportion  of  the  two  anticoraplements  is  absolutely  different,  so
that,  for  example,  anticomplement  B  will  be  present  in  much  smaller
amount  than  in  the  isogenic  anticomplement  serum.  The  behavior
of  this  will  then  be  as  follows:  A  certain  quantity  of  the  Lwgenic
anticomplement  serum  produced  by  guinea-pig  serum  {presupposing
that  its  constitution  is  uniform)  will  neutralize  guinea-pig  serum  in
euch  a  way  that  complement  A  and  complement  B  of  this  mixture
are  neutralized  at  the  same  time.  If  we  proceed  to  do  the  same
with  the  alloiogenic  anticomplement  serum,  we  find  that  in  the  mix-
ture of  anticomplement  and  guinea-pig  serum,  complement  -4  Is
completely  neutralized,  but  that  a  larger  or  smaller  excess  of  com-
plement B  is  still  unsaturated.  In  those  cases  in  which  comple-
ment A  is  the  dominant  complement  both  mixtures  will  prove  neutral;
when  amboceptors  are  employed  for  which  B  is  the  dominant  com-
plement, only  one  of  the  mixtures  will  be  neutral,  the  other  will  still
be  active.

Now  we  shall  assume  that  with  the  employment  of  large  amounts
of  amboceptor,  a  partial  amboceptor  comes  into  action  which  ia
present  in  the  immune  serum  in  relatively  small  quantity.  This  partial
aralxjceptor  is  complemented  by  complement  B  contained  in  guinea-pig
aenim,  whereas  the  preix>nderating  amboceptor  is  sensitized  by  comple-
ment A.  Complement  B  finds  a  plentiful  amount  of  anticomple-
ment in  the  isogenic  immune  serum,  liut  not  in  the  alloiogenic  serum.
In  the  latter  case,  therefore,  disproportionately  much  serum  contain-
ing B  anticomplement  wOl  be  required  in  order  to  inhibit  the  com-
plement action  when  large  quantities  of  amboceptor  are  present.  If
the  difference  becomes  so  great  that  the  anticomplement  against
complement  B  is  present  only  in  very  slight  amounts,  we  shall  have
a  condition  like  that  described  l.iy  Marshall  and  Morgenroth  (see
page  222).  They  found  an  ascitic  fluid  which  was  effective  only
against  a  particular  complement  of  a  serum,  while  it  was  entirely
inert  against  another  serum  of  this  same  species.

We  have  cndeavorerl  to  establish  this  point  of  view  on  a  wider
experimental  basis.  With  this  end  in  view  we  first  used  small  amounts
of  amboeejitor,  adding  \'ariou3  multiples  of  the  complementing  dose


•i04  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

of  serum  and  then  determining  the  amount  of  anticomplement
required  in  each  ease.  In  one  of  the  experiments  we  made  a  parallel
test  with  a  Uirge  excess  of  amboceptors.  The  results  showed  that
under  these  circumstances,  for  each  of  the  cases  and  with  a  certain
amount  of  amboceptor,  the  anticomplement  required  is  proportionate
to  the  amount  of  complement.    This  is  shown  in  Table  IX,

TABLE  IX.

1  cc.  5%  Shbbp  Blood  +  Amboceptor  of  Goats  Iumumzed  with   Sheep
Blood  +  Giiinba-piu  Sescm  ^
The  serum  of  a  goat  treated  with  rabbit  serum,  i


Neceuary  lor  Con


A.  LiUU  Amboceptor  (  —


Amboceptvr  Unit).
I  0.22


B.   Much  Amboceptor  (=25  Amboceptor  Units),
0.125        I  0.006  I  0.24

0.125  0-012  0.42

0.125  0.024  0  8


1  CC,  5%  Ox  Blood  +  .^MBocEPTon  of  a  Goat  Immunized  wrra  Ox  Blood+

Rabbit  Sehum  ab  Coupleuent.

The  Mrum  of  a  goat  treated  nilh  rabbit  seruin  as  anticompletneiit.


Afflount  of

..fe"^..

0.16*

0.15

0,15

0.2
0.1
0  05

0.1

0,05
0  025

Here,  then,  we  are  dealing  with  the  same  phenomenon  which  in
the  domain  of  antitoxin  immunity  we  know  as  the  muUiplicoHon  of
the  Lq  dose.  From  our  standpoint  this  is  easily  explained,  for  if
at  any  point  in  the  saturation  of  the  blood-cells'  amboceptors  a
certain  amount  of  the  complement  dominant  in  this  case  Is  neutral-
ized by  a  certain  quantity  of  anticomplement,  the  other  conditions
will  in  no  way  be  altered  by  a  doubling,  quadrupling,  etc.,  of  the


AMBOCEPTOR.  COMPLEMENT,  AND  ANTICOMPLEMENT.

complement,  and  the  amount  of  complement  and  that  of  anticom-
plement  required  remain  in  the  same  ratio.  A  definite  relation  there-
fore exists  in.  every  grade  of  amboceptor  saturation  between  the  amount
of  complement  and  that  of  anticomplement  required.  This  is  in  con-
trast to  the  great  differences  which  appear  when  the  occupation
.  with  amboccptora  varies.  The  relation  just  described  indicates  that
we  are  here  dealing  mUk  a  chemical  process  jollcrwing  stoichiometric  laws.

We  should  like  to  menlion  further  tbat  this  peculiar  behavior  observed  by
US  is  of  Bome  importanc*  in  refuting  an  objection  made  by  Gniber  (I.  c.)  against
Wechsberg,  Ah  is  well  known,  Gruber  believed  he  had  shown  that  in  the
bactericidal  eera  anticomplementa  were  present  produced  by  the  immuniza-
tion. This  he  held  (o  be  very  important,  tiince  according  to  his  view  it  showed
tbat  the  deflection  of  complements  by  exceos  of  amboceptors,  whieh  had  been
described  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,  was  incorrect.  This  is  not  the  place  to
enter  into  the  great  improbability  of  Gru be r's  deductions,  for  this  has  already
been  well  pointed  out  by  Wechsberg,  by  Lipstein,'  and  by  I,evaditi.'  Wechs-
berg *  repeated  Gruber's  experiments,  but  was  unable  to  confirm  Ids  results.
Sacha  also  wiis  unable  to  do  this.  Gruber  has  now  objected  to  Wechsberg'a
work  on  the  score  of  a  gross  error,  saying  that  Wechsberg  worked  with  weakly
sensitized  blood-^^Us,  whereas  he  had  used  strongly  sensitized  blood-cells.
Wechsberg  had  therefore  used  considerably  more  complement  than  he.  and
had  in  connequence  required  much  more  anticomplement  for  neutralization,
so  tbat  the  presence  of  sniall  quantities  of  anticomplement  could  easily  have
escaped  Wechsberg.

From  what  has  been  said  abovt.  kovrever,  Jutt  the  contrary  occurs;  uitk  itUaio-
ffenie  sera  larger  amounls  of  anticomjiUment  arc  used.  That  the  anticomple-
ment which  would  be  produced  artificially  by  injections  of  bacteria  (even  if
that  be  r^arded  as  conceivable)  would  eminently  be  alloiogenic  need  not
further  be  emphasized.  It  is  shown  by  Table  VIII  tliat  the  conditions  which
Gruber  assumed  to  exiat  do  not  obtain,  even  with  an  isogenic  anticomplement,
in  Gruber's  case  (human  blood  +  human-blood  rabbit +rabbit  scrumV  It  is
unnecessary  to  enter  further  into  Gruber's  objections,  for  Wechsberg '  has
succeeded  through  the  demonstration  of  complementophile  amboceptoids  in
finding  the  source  of  the  differences.  These  amboceptoids  have  tneantime
been  found  independently  by  E.  Neisser  and  Friedemann  '  and  by  P.  Th.  Miiller,'

It  is  immaterial  in  judging  of  this  phenomenon  whether  in  the  anticomple-
ment^ary  sera  used  by  Gniber  the  diverting  amboceptoids  developed  as  a  result
of  long  standing  or  under  the  inSuence  of  too  high  an  inactivating  temperature.
The  main  thing  is  that  even  the  phenomenon  observed  by  Gruber  and  used

'  Lipstein.  see  pages  132  et  seq.

'  Levaditi.  Compt.  rend.  Soc.  de  Biol.  1002.  No.  25.

'Wechsberg,  Wiener  klin.  Wochenschr,  1902,  Nos.  13  and  28.

*Ibid,

■  Neisser  and  FViedemann,  Berl,  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902.  No.  29.

•  P.  Th.  Miiller,  Miinch.  med.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  32.


266  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

by  him  as  an  objection  conBtitutes  a  new  and  telling  demonstration  of  the
correctness  of  the  amboceptor  theory.

Thus  we  see  that  the  antieomplement  experiments  give  us  a
further  insight  into  the  mechanism  of  hemolysin  action.  This  in
its  turn  shows  that  the  simple  unitarian  conception  must  be  aban-
doned to  be  replaced  by  the  view  maintained  by  us  that  the  exciting
substances  as  well  as  the  reaction  products  arising  in  immunization
are  exceedingly  manifold  in  character.


XXV,    THE  HiEMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN

EXTRACTS.*

By  Dr.  S.  Kobschun,  of  Charkow,  and  Dr.  J.  Morgenroth,  Member  of  the

Institute.

The  first  observations  concerning  the  hsemolytic  properties  of
organ  extracts  were  published,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  by  Metchni-
kofr.2

Proceeding  from  his  observation  that  in  the  peritoneum  of  the
guinea-pig  goose  blood-cells  are  taken  up  by  certain  phagocytes,
the  macrophages^  and  digested  intracellularly,  Metchnikoff  sought  to
demonstrate  digestive  actions  in  vitro  in  extracts  of  such  organs
which  are  rich  in  macrophages.  He  regarded  the  hsemolytic  function
as  an  indicator  of  this  digestive  action.  He  found  that  extracts  of
certain  organs  of  guinea-pig  (but  not  guinea-pig  serum)  exerted  a
haemolytic  action  on  goose  blood;  the  lymphoid  portion  of  the  omen-
tum showed  this  action  quite  regularly,  the  mesenteric  glands  fre-
quently, and  in  a  limited  number  of  eases  the  spleen.  Of  the  other
organs  the  pancreas  showed  a  marked,  and  the  salivary  glands  a
weak  haemolytic  action;  the  bone  marrow,  liver,  kidney,  brain  and
spinal  cord,  ovaries,  testicles,  and  adrenals  were  inert.

Metchnikoff  found  the  haemolytic  substance  to  be  a  soluble  ferment
contained  in  the  macrophages;  he  termed  it  "macrocytase"  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  the  bactericidal  ferment  derived  from  microphages,
which  he  calls  "microcytase."      It  shows  itself  to  be  a  *'cytase"^

*  Reprint  from  the  Beriin.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  37.

'  Metchnikoff,  Annal.  de  PInstit.  Pasteiu:,  Oct.  1899;  see  further  references
in  Metchnikoff,  rimmunit^,  Paris,  1901.

'  Metchnikoff  and  his  pupils  use  the  term  "cytase"  for  our  complements
as  well  as  for  the  complex  cytotoxins  (ha?molysins,  bacteriolysins,  etc.)  of
normal  sera.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  although  in  numerous  instances  these
have  been  shown  to  consist  of  amboceptor  and  complement  this  fact  has  not
been  sufficiently  regarded  by  this  school  (see  especially  the  recent  studies  by
Sachs,  pages  181  et  seq.,  and  Morgenroth  and  Sachs,  page  233).

267


268  COLLECTED  8TCTD1ES  IN  IMMUNITY.

by  its  behavior  toward  heat,  completely  losing  ita  action  on  being
heai«d  to  56°  C.  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.

Observations  in  this  same  direction  have  been  made  by  Shibayama  *
and  Klein,^  and  a  comprehensive  study  by  Tarassevitach  ^  has  recently
appeared  from  MetchniliofT's  laboratory.

Shibayama,  working  in  Kitjisoto's  lalwratory,  studied  the  action
of  extracts  of  guinea-pig  organs  on  dog  blood  and  obtained  hiemolysia
with  those  of  spleen  and  lymph  glands,  but  not  with  those  of  bone
marrow  and  other  organs.  Without  further  analysis  he  classes  as
identical  the  htemolytic  substances  of  the  organs  and  the  specific
hsemolysins  which  appear  in  the  scrum  after  immunization  with  dog
blood-cells.  This  leads  him  to  the  following  conclusion:  "From  the
facts  mentioned  it  can  readily  be  seen  that  the  hsemolytic  side-chains
of  the  guinea-pig  are  already  physiologically  present  in  the  spleen  and
lymph-glands  and  that  the  injection  of  dog  blood  aids  their  hyper-
production."

Klein  prepared  the  organ  extracts  by  crushing  them  with  quartz
gravel,  then  mixing  with  an  equal  amount  of  physiological  salt  solu-
tion and  filtering  in  the  cold.  The  only  constant  effect  was  the
htemolytic  action  of  the  extract  of  pancreas;  in  a  few  cases  the  ex-
tract of  kidney  and  of  intestinal  mucosa  also  dissolved  the  red  blood-
ed Ls.

Metchnikoff's  experiments  were  continued  in  his  laboratory  by
Tarassevitsch,  who  studied  principally  the  organs  of  guinear-pigs,
rabbits,  and  dogs.  Corresponding  to  Metchnikoff's  first  experiments,
he  tested  the  hemolytic  action  mostly  on  avian  blood-cells,  but  also
on  those  of  mammals.  In  the  guinea-pig,  in  the  great  majority  of
cases,  he  found  the  extracts  of  omentum,  mesenteric  lymph-glands,
and  spleen  to  be  hiemolj'tic.  Besides  this  pancreas  extract  and  in
many  cases  salivary  gland  extract  were  hcemolytic.  In  general  the
hemolytic  action  of  the  organ  extracts  of  rabbits  is  weaker  than  that
from  the  organs  of  guinea-pigs.  Omentum,  spleen,  and  mesenteric
glands  frequently  were  ha^molytic;  the  salivary  glands  acted  feebly;
bone  marrow,  liver,  and  thymus  were  not  hiemolytic.  According  to
Taraasri-Hsck,  therefore,  only  Ike  macro-phagic  organs  arid  the  digestive
glands  possess  a  h<emolytic  action.

'  Shihiiyama.  Centralblatt  f.  Baet.,  Vol.  30.  !90l,  No.  21.
'  Klein,  K.  k.  Gcs.  der  Aerzte  in  Wien,  Sitzung  von  Dec.  20,  19<J1,  reported
in  Wiener  klin.  WocLenschr.  1901,  No.  52.

'  THrasBevitsch,  Sur  les  Cytases,  Annul.  Ue  I'ltiat.  Post.  1902.


THK  H-EMOL'Y'TIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     269

If  the  organ  extracts  are  heated  to  56°  C.  for  half  or  one  hour
the  hemolytic  property  disappears  in  many  cases;  in  other  t-asea  it
i3  diminished;  very  rarely  it  remains  unchanged.  According  to
Taraaaevitach,  this  variation  from  the  "cytases"  (which  in  general
are  destroyed  by  heating  for  half  an  hour  to  56"  C.)  is  only  an  apparent
one.  In  the  organ  extracts  the  "macrocytase"  is  not  completely
liberated,  but  is  held  back  to  a  great  extent  by  the  cell  detritus  pres-
ent in  the  emulsion.  It  leaves  the  detritus  only  \ery  slowly  and
incompletely,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  entire  emulsion  is  always
more  active  than  the  fluid  jmrtion  obtained  by  centrifuging,  and
also  that  by  filtering  through  pajjcr  the  clear  fluid  is  depri\'ed  of  the
greater  part  of  the  properties  which  the  entire  emulsion  possesses.
This  filtered  fluid,  in  which,  according  to  Tarassevitsch,  all  the
"cytases"  present  are  in  dissolved  form,  is  said  to  behave  toward
thermal  influences  hke  hemolytic  serum.

Finally  according  to  Tarassevitsch  the  thermostability  of  the  entire
extracts  ia  not  very  great.  If  he  heated  his  extracts  a  Utile  higher,  one
to  two  hours,  to  58.5",  GO",  62",  the  kiBTnolytic  property  disappeared  com-
pietdy.

From  this  behavior  toward  thermic  influences  Tarassevitsch
concludes  that  the  relationship  of  the  hiemolytic  substances  of  the
organ  extracts  to  the  "cytases"  of  serum  is  perfectly  clear,  and  that
it  ia  incorrect  to  ascribe  a  hiemolytic  property  which  can  be  de-
stroyed at  such  low  temperatures,  to  osmotic  phenomena  or  to  tt  o
presence  of  "de  quelques  substances  chimiques."  Hence,  as  Metchni-
koff  assiimed,  the  organs  ui  question  contain  a  macrocytase,  and  this
circumstance  proves  that  the  macrophagic  organs  must  play  a  rfile  in
the  formation  of  the  natural  and  the  artificial  ha^molysins.

In  the  following  pages  we  shall  describe  certain  experiments  in
which  we  have  reached  essentially  different  results  from  those  obtained
by  Metchnikoff  and  Tarassevitsch.

The  emuisioa  of  tho  organs  was  prepared  aa  follows;  The  organs  removed
from  the  eisnnguinated  aninials  are  nibbed  up  wary  finely  with  sea-sand  whicli
has  first  been  purified  with  hydroclJoHc  acid.  Then  5  to  10  times  their  weight
of  physiological  suit  solution  ia  added  and  the  mixture  thoroughly  shaken
in  a  elmkiDg-machine  lor  two  hours,  whereupon  tlie  coarser  particles  are  re-
mo\^  through  several  hours'  centrifuging.  A  more  or  less  uniformly  clouded
fluid  remuina.  Tho  organ  extracts  were  employed  as  frcBJi  as  possible,  though
it  waa  found  that  they  could  well  be  preserved  by  freezing  them  at  —10°  to
- 15"  C


COLLECTED  STLTIES  IN'  IMMUNITY.

In  Etudying  the  htpmolytic  action  blood-cells  n'era  used  which  had  been
freed  from  serum  aa  much  as  possible.

The  scries  of  tubes  wus  kept  in  the  thermostat  at  37°  C.  for  two  to  three  houn
and  overnight  in  the  refrigerator  at  S°  C.  In  the  presence  of  large  amounts  of
organ  extracts  hiPmolysis  proceeds  rapidly;  with  small  amounts  it  is  very  slow.
The  tubes  must  be  freiiuently  shaken  while  being  kept  at  37°;  the  result  can
only  be  judged  of  on  the  following  day.

To  begin  we  sought  to  gain  a  general  idea  of  the  hiemolytio  action
of  several  organ  extracts  on  various  ajwcios  of  blood.  The  extracts
of  intiatine  and  of  stomach  of  the  mouse  as  well  aa  that  of  the  stomach
of  giiinea-piga  and  of  the  pancreas  of  oxen  always  showed  a  strong
hajmolytic  action  on  all  species  of  blood  which  we  examined.  1.0  cc.
to  0..5  cc.  of  the  extracts  sufficing  to  completely  dissolve  1  cc.  5%
blood  of  rabbit,  guinea-pig,  mouse,  rat,  goat,  sheep,  ox,  pig.  hoise,
dog,  or  goose.  The  rest  of  the  organ  extracts  examined,  namely
guinoa-pig  intestine,  rat  intestine,  rat  stomach,  varied  in  their  h.-emo-
lytic  property  with  different  bloods,  qualitatively  as  well  as  quanti-
tatively. Extract  of  guinea-pig  spleen  dissolved  only  dog  blood  and
guinea-pig  blood;  extract  of  mouse  spleen  possessed  a  feeble  hemolytic
action  on  guinea-pig  blood  and  pig  blood.  Extract  of  guinea-pig
adrenals  dissolved  Iwth  the  blood  species  examined  in  this  case,  viz.,
guinea-pig  blood  and  goose  blood.  We  found  the  extract  of  spleen,
mesenteric  lymph  nodes,  pancreas,  stomach,  intestine,  and  adrenals
of  one  dog  to  be  strongly  hEemolytic  for  guinea-pig  blood,  whereas
in  another  case  the  spleen  showed  itself  absolutely  inert,  although
the  pancreas  was  strongly  hemolytic.  This  variation  in  the  hiemo-
lytic  action  on  various  blood-cells  hoa  already  been  noticed  by  other
investigators,  and  we  therefore  desire  merely  to  call  attention  to  a
point  which  thus  far  has  not  been  regarded,  namely,  that  tke  organ
exlracts  are  able  to  dissolve  the  blood-cells  of  Ike  same  species  and  even
of  the  same  individual  from  which  they  are  derived.

Thus  according  to  our  experience  emulsions  of  guinea-pig  stomach,
spleen,  adrenal,  kidney,  and  intestine,  of  mouse  intestine  and  stomach,
of  rat  intestine  and  stomach,  of  ox  pancreas,  dissolve  the  red  blood-
cells  of  their  own  8i)ecics.  The  relation  existing  between  this  action
on  the  blood  of  the  same  species  and  hEemolysis  of  foreign  species  of
blood  is  shown  by  the  following  two  cx]>eriments.     (See  Table  I.)

clumps  in  the  organ  extract.^  which  before  had  been  free  from  visible  particles.
These  clumps  tould  be  (separated  by  centrifuge,  and  cTdiibiled  a  hiemolytio
action  when  suspended  in  salt  solution.


THE  affiMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     271


TABLE  I.
Emulsion  of  Mouse  Intestinb  (10%).


1  CO.  5%
Ox  Blood.

1  CO.  5%  Guinea-
pis  Blood.

1  eo.  5%  Mouse
Blood.

1.0

0.76

0.6

0.35

0.25

0.2

0.15

complete

n

almost  complete

trace

0

0

0

complete

complete

it
tt

trAce
0
0

Emulsion  of  Beef  Pancreas  (10%).

1  cc.  5%
Rabbit  Blood.

1  ec.  5%  Guinea-
pig  Blood.

1  oc.  5%
Ox  Blood.

0.6
0.35
0.25
0.15

complete

11

strong
0(?)

complete
0
0
0

complete
0
0
0

These  experiments  show  that  the  susceptibility  of  the  body's  own
blood  may  be  very  great,  even  as  great  as  that  of  a  foreign  species
of  blood.  Whether  aU  these  extracts  dissolve  the  blood  of  the  own
individual  we  have  not  determined;  we  regard  it  as  probable,  however,
since  positive  results  were  obtained  in  all  experiments  which  we  made
in  this  direction,  especially  with  extracts  of  mouse  intestine  and  of
guinea-pig  stomach.

These  experiments  (especially  those  with  the  extract  of  guinea-
pig  spleen,  which  Shibayama  too  found  to  be  active  only  for  dog
blood)  show  that  we  are  not  here  dealing  vnth  hasmolytic  poisons  of  a
general  kind  (such  as  saponin,  the  gallic  acid  salts,  and  certain  alka-
loids, like  solanin,  which  dissolve  all  blood-cells  regardless  of  species),
but  that  these  hsemolytic  poisons  possess  a  certain  specificity  which
is  of  special  biologic  interest.

The  property  of  organ  extracts  to  dissolve  the  blood-cells  from  the
same  individual  is  of  great  significance  because  neither  when  normal
nor  after  immimizing  procedures  does  the  blood-serum  of  these  animals
ever  contain  substances  which  damage  the  blood-cells  of  the  animal
itself  (autohsemolysins).  Tarassevitsch  himself  noticed  the  great  dif-
ference existing,  on  the  one  hand,  between  the  absence  of  a  marked
haemolytic  action  of  guinea-pig  serum  on  foreign  species  of  blood
and  the  strong  hsemolytic  action  of  the  extracts  of  certain  guineorpig


272


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


organs,  on  the  other.  He  believes  to  explain  this  by  assuming  a
difference  in  tlie  macrocytaae  extracted  from  the  organs  and  that
present  in  the  senmi.  In  any  case  this  constitutes  a  serious  dilemma
for  Tarassevitsch;  for  either  there  are  several  "macrocytases"  as
opposed  to  the  unitarian  view  ot  Metchnilcoff  or  the  macrocytase  of
eenim  is  identical  with  llmt  of  the  organ  extracts.  In  liew  of  this
entirely  different  behavior,  however,  the  latter  does  not  appear
acceptable  to  Tarasse\it3ch.

Our  first  question  was  an  entirely  different  one,  for  In  all  the  cases
of  haemolysis  and  bacteriolysis  sufficiently  examined  we  had  never
met  with  a  simple  ale\in  in  the  sense  of  Buchner  and  Metchnikoff,  but
invariably  found  a  coaction  of  amboceptor  and  complement.  In  view
of  this  our  investigations  had,  above  all,  to  determine  whether  the
hfemolytic  organ  extracts  could  be  shown  to  be  characterized  by
complement  and  amboceptor.

These  first  doubts,  namely,  whether  these  substances  corresponded
to  what  we  concei^'C  as  the  comjilex  hemolysins  of  blood-serum,  led
us  to  study  the  hiemolytic  organs  in  respect  to  those  main  character-
istics which  we  have  come  to  know  in  our  study  of  the  complex  hie-
molysins.  These  are:  1.  The  behavior  toward  thermic  influences.
2.  The  behavior  when  bound  to  the  red  blood-cells  at  low  tempera-
tures.    3.  The  power  of  producing  antibodies  by  immunization.

We  shall  begin  by  describing  a  number  of  typical  experiments  which
show  the  behavior  of  the  organ  extracts  toward  higher  temperature.
Let  us  glance  first  at  the  cxiwrimcnta  dealing  with  the  effect  of  organ
extracts  on  goose  blood-cells,  for  this  is  the  blood  species  which  has
been  mainly  used  by  Metchnikoff  and  Tarassevitsch.     (See  Table  II.)

These  exj^riraents  clearly  show  that  in  most  of  the  cases  the
hiemolytic  action  of  organ  extracts  on  goose  blood-celts  is  not  at
all  or  but  slightly  affected  by  a  three-hour  heating,  to  62"  C.  and  that
heating  to  100°  C.  for  one  hour  and  even  for  three  hours  does  not
produce  any  further  damage.  Onlj'  the  hteraolytic  effect  of  extract
of  mouse  intestine  is  reduced  to  about  one-half  by  the  heating  to
62°  C;  heating  to  100°  C.  for  three  hours  causes  but  little  additional
damage.  But  that  this  cannot  be  a  true  destruction  of  part  of  the
htemolysin  will  be  discussed  lat«r.  We  wbh  next  to  pre.aent  additional
experiments  dealing  with  the  behavior  of  heated  organ  emulsions  on
guinea-pig  blood.     (See  Table  III.)

Nor  is  this  result  changed  if  stronger  agents,  such  ns  alkalies  or
acids,  are  employed  at  high  temperatures,     (See  Table  IV.)


THE  HiEMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     273


TABLE  II.

A.  Action  of  Heated  Organ  Extracts  on  Goose  Blood-cells  (1  cc.  5%).

I.  Extract  of  Dog  Spleen  (10%).


Not  Heated.

8  Hra.

(62«»).

0.2

0.15

0.1

complete  solution
it             <i

very  little

complete  solution

almost  complete

very  little  to  trace

II.  Extract  of  Dog  Stomach  (10%).

Not  Heated.

3  Hra.  (62«).

IHr.dOO*).

3  Hra.  (100»).

0.35
0.25
0.15
0.1

complete
very  little

complete
tt

tt
very  little

complete
((

It
very  little

complete
tt

It
very  little

in.  Extract  of  Dog  Pancreas  (10%).

Not  Heated.

3  Hre.  (62«).

1  Hr.  (100»).

3  Hra.  (lOO").

0.75

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

complete
n

strong

very  little

0

complete

0
0
0

complete
tt

0
0
0

complete

fairly  complete

0

0

0

]

[V.  Extract  of  Dog  Mesenteric  Lymph  Glands  (10?

D-

Not  Heated.

3  Hra.  (62«).

1  Hr.  (lOO").*

3  Hra.  (100*»).»

0.75

0.5

0.35

complete

complete
almost  complete

complete

strong
very  little

complete

strong
very  little

1  Enormous  coaffula.
V.  Extract  of  Mouse  Intestine  (5%).

Not  Heated.

8  Hra.  (62«).

1  Hr.  (lOO").

3  Hre.  (100»).

0.35

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

complete

ti

tt
tt

almost  complete

complete
tt

strong

moderate

little

complete

strong
little
trace

complete

moderate
tt

little
trace

274


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY,


TABLE  III.

Action  of  Hbatbd  Organ  Extracts  on  Gutnba-pig  Blood  (1  cc.  5%).

I.  Extract  of  Dog  Mesenteric  Glands  (5%).


Not  Heated.

1  Hr.  (64»).

aOHra.  (100«>).

0.25
0.15
0.1
0.075

complete

trace
0

complete

0
0

complete
it

faint  trace
0

II.  Extract  of  Ox  Pancreas  (10%).

Not  Heated.

1  Hr.  (62»).

0.35
0.25
0.15

complete
strong

complete
strong

III.  Extract  of  Ox  Pancreas  (20%).

Not  Heated.

1  Hr.  W).

U  Hrs.dOO*).

0.15
0.1
0.075
0.05

complete
<<

trace
0

complete

n

trace
faint  trace

•

complete

« i

trace
0

IV.  Extract  of  Guinea-pig  Stomach  (10%).

Not  Heated.

3  Hre.  (65«).

0.25

0.2

0.15

complete
strong

complete
strong

TABLE  IV.
Extract  op  Ox  Pancreas  (10%).


0.35
0.25
0.15
0.1


Not  Treated.


complete

tt

faint  trace
0


Containing  1/50  n.  HCl

Heated  to  60<>  for  30  Min.

and  Neutralised


complete

almost  complete

0

0


Containing  1  /50  n  NaOH

Heated  to  60''  for  30  Min.

and  Neutralised.

complete

almost  complete

0

0


THE  HiEMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     276

All  these  experiments  show  that  the  organ  extracts  will  bear
heating  to  62-68®  C.  for  hours,  and  even  100*^  for  several  hours,  with-
out suffering  any  change  in  their  hsemolytic  properties  worth  men-
tioning. In  these  experiments,  in  fact,  we  have  been  unable  thus
far  to  find  any  limit  for  the  thermostability  of  the  organ  extracts.
We  are  therefore  dealing  with  substances  which  withstand  boiling
(coctostabile),  and  this  fact  in  itself  is  suflScient  to  disprove  the  assump-
tion that  they  are  "cytases."

The  next  question,  of  course,  is  how  such  a  fundamental  divergence
between  our  results  and  those  from  Metchnikoff's  highly  esteemed
laboratory  can  be  explained.  We  think  we  have  discovered  the  cause
of  this  difference.     It  is  as  follows:

In  the  above  experiments  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  shake
the  fluid  previous  to  testing  its  haemolytic  property;  in  that  way  the
more  or  less  plentiful  precipitate  formed  on  heating  is  again  uniformly
distributed  throughout  the  fluid.  Only  the  coagulum  produced  by
heating  possesses  a  hsemolytic  action.  According  to  our  experience,
if  a  precipitate  has  been  produced  through  heating,  the  clear  fluid
which  is  separated  from  this  no  longer  possesses  any  luemolysin  what-
ever. If  the  precipitate  is  separated  by  centrifuge  the  clear  fluid  will
be  found  inert;  on  suspending  the  sediment  in  the  requisite  quantity
of  physiological  salt  solution  a  new  emulsion  is  obtained  which  has
preserved  the  hsemolytic  property.  This  is  shown  in  the  following
table.i

According  to  these  experiments  it  would  seem  very  probable  that
the  contradictory  results  obtained  by  us  on  the  one  hand  and  by
Metchnikoff  and  Tarassevitsch  on  the  other  are  due  to  insufficient
regard  being  paid  by  the  latter  to  the  precipitates  formed  in  the
organ  extracts  on  heating.

If  we  assume  that  the  hsemolytic,  coctostable  substance  is  present


^  The  coagula  formed  on  heating  may  be  so  plentiful  that  they  render  an
exact  observation  of  hsemolysis  exceedingly  difficult.  It  is  frequently  seen  that
haemolysis  by  means  of  heated  organ  extracts  which  are  filled  with  coagula
proceeds  very  slowly;  apparently  the  precipitates  offer  considerable  resistance
to  the  escape  of  the  hsemolytic  substance.  Naturally,  this  constitutes  a  source
of  error,  since  with  low  temperature  and  too  short  a  time  for  observation  the
hsemolytic  action  is  underrated.  This  may  also  explain  the  occasional  weaken-
ing of  heated  organ  extracts,  to  which  we  have  already  referred ;  in  that  case
the  weakening  would  not  be  due  to  a  partial  destruction  of  the  hsemolytic
substance.


276


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


TABLE  V.

I.  Extract  op  Doa  Lymph  Glands  (10%).
Guinea-pig  blood  (1  cc.  5%).


2.0

1.5

1.0

0.75

0.5

0.25

0.15


Fresh.


complete


tt
tt


strong


1  Hr.  (62»).
(No  Coagulum.)


complete


tt
tt


strong
very  little


1  Hr.  (lOO*).

Slight  Precipitate,

Oentrifuoea,  and

Suspended  in  Salt

Solution.


complete


tt
tt


complete


1  Hr.  (lOO**).

The  Clear  nuid

obtained  by

Gentrifug^ic.


0
0

0
0


II.  Extract  op  Doo  Pancreas  (20%).
Guinea-pig  blood  (1  cc.  5%).


Fresh.

1  Hour  (62«).
(No  0>agiilum.)

1  Hr.  (lOO").

Slight  Precipitate.

Centrifuged,  and

Suspended  in  Salt

Solution.

1  Hr.  (100»).

The  (3ear  Fluid

obtained  by

Cbntrifuging.

2.0
1.5    *

1.0  ,v
0.75    ^
0.5
0.25
0.15

complete

i  t
tt

little
.  tt

complete
tt

little
0
0

complete
tt

moderate

0
0
0
0
0

;t

III.  Extract  of  Dog  Intestine  (10%).


r


Gc^pse  blood  (1  cc.  5%).


1  Hr.  (100°).

Precipitate  again

Uniformly

Distributed,

1  Hr.  (100°).

Precipitate  after  Centri-

fuginff.  Suspended  in

Salt  Solution.

IHr.  (100«).

Ontrifuged  Fluid

still  somewhat

(3oudy.

1.5

1.0

0.75

0.5

0.35

0.25

complete.
tt       •j^

it        *'

It

almost  complete

complete
tt

tt

almost  complete
0

b'ttle
trace

0

0

0

0

0.2

—

—

0

0.15

^^^w

0

THE  HEMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     277

TABLE  V—Continwd.

IV.  EmtAcT  OF  Mouse  iKTEsriNii  (10%).

Goose  blood  (1  ec.5%).


3h™.  HOO").

3  H      (100°)

CleaiC^nTrif^  Fluid.

Pwipiutc  BKAln
Uniformly  Dialnbuled.

'"rai-aSs"

1,0

complete

_

0

0.75

cot,,plet«

0.5

0

0.35

strong

0

0.25

moderate

0.2

0  15

little

faint  trace

0  1

very  little

minimiU

~

in  the  organ  extracts  in  dissolved  form  we  find  it  difficult  to  under-
stand tfie  fact  that  it  is  abstracted  from  the  fluid  by  means  of  the
coagulum  formed  on  heating.  To  be  sure,  one  could  think  of  an
absorption  by  the  coagulum.  The  complete  abstraction  by  means
of  heating  is,  however,  readily  understood  if  the  hjemolytic  substance
is  present,  not  in  solution,  but  in  a  state  of  finest  suspension;  for  it  is
a  matter  of  common  experience  that  substances  finely  suspended  in
a  fluid  are  carried  down  with  a  precipitate  produced  in  the  fluid.
Tlie  technitjue  of  clearing  cloudy  fluids  rests  to  a  large  extent  on  such
precipitations.

We  have  not  yet  been  able  to  decide  definitely  whether  the  hae-
molytic  substance  is  present  in  the  fluid  in  dissolved  form  or  in  veiy
fine  suspension;  we  incline  strongly  to  the  latter  view.  We  base
this  (1)  on  numerous  experiences  which  show  that  by  filtering  tlie
organ  extracts  through  porous  filtering  candles  the  fluid  obtained
is  entirely  inert;  (2)  on  the  behavior  of  the  hsemolytic  substance
when  treated  with  alcohol.

One  part  of  a  1%  extract  of  ox  pancreas  is  mixed  with  ten  parts
96%  alcohol,  and  after  a  time  the  fluid  is  filtered  off  from  the  flaky
precipitate  which  has  formed.  The  entirely  clear  filtrate  is  distilled
in  vacuo  and  the  portion  left  behind  mixed  with  physiological  salt
solution.  A  coarsely  flocculent  suspension  is  thus  obtained  which
possesses  strong  hiemolytic  action,  about  one^half  to  one-third  of  the
original  strength.  If  this  mixture  is  now  filtered,  the  clear  filtrate  is
found  to  be  absolutely  inert,  whereas  the  flakes  washed  from  the
filter  exhibit  almost  the  full  hemolytic  effect.  The  following  experi-
ment will  serve  as  an  example.


278


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


TABLE  VI.

Guinea-pig  Blood  (1  cc.  5%),  Extract  of  Ox  Pancreas  (10%).  Portion
Left  from  the  Alcoholic  Distillate  Suspended  in  0.85%  Salt  Solu-
tion.


Total  Fluid.

Clear  Filtrate

Suspenaioii  of  the
Flakes.

1.0

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

0.1

complete

complete
moderate

0

0
0
0
0
0

complete

<<
l(
(<

strong
trace

We  are  therefore  evidently  dealing  with  a  substance  which  in  the
above  treatment  is  dissolved  in  the  alcoholic  fluid  but  which  is  soluble
to  only  a  very  slight  degree  in  salt  solution.

Naturally  a  certain  degree  of  solubility  is  always  one  of  the  con-
ditions of  the  hemolytic  action  observed,  but  this  need  only  be  a
minimal  one.  The  blood-cells  can  anchor  the  amount  of  hemolytic
substance  in  solution  at  any  given  time  and  so  render  the  fluid  capable
of  taking  up  small  amounts  of  the  substance  anew.  This  conception
of  a  relative  insolubility  of  the  substance  is  readily  reconciled  with
the  hsemolytic  action.  The  process  which  takes  place  reminds  one
of  that  occurring  with  certain  dyes,  which,  although  not  given  oflf  to
the  water  from  the  dyed  fibre,  are  nevertheless  able  by  means  of  the
water}'  medium  to  go  from  the  dyed  to  undyed  fibres.

The  coctostability  of  the  haemolytic  substances  of  organ  extracts,
their  adherence  to  solid  particles,  their  solubility  in  alcohol — ^all  these;
in  our  opinion,  show  that  these  substances  cannot  be  classed  as  iden-
tical either  with  the  "cytases^'  of  Metchnikoff  or  with  our  complex
haemolysins.  Nevertheless  we  have  still  further  examined  these
substances  for  properties  which  characterize  the  hemolysins.

In  one  case,  therefore,  we  studied  the  action  of  our  organ  emulsion
on  blood-cells  at  0°  C.  in  order  to  determine  the  possiblity  of  separating
a  possible  amboceptor  and  complement.

To  each  1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension  of  guinea-pig  blood  which  had
been  thoroughly  cooled  on  ice,  var\'ing  amounts  of  cooled  extract  of
ox  pancreas  were  added  and  the  mixture  kept  at  0°  for  two  hours
and  frequently  shaken.  In,  this  case  slight  solution  occurred  only
with  large  quantities  of  the  extract.  Then  the  mixtures  were  cen-
trifuged,  the  sediment  resuspended  in  vsalt  solution  (1.5  cc.),and  the


THE  HiEMOLYTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     279

decanted  fluid  mixed  with  0.05  cc.  of  guinea-pig  blood  freed  from
serum.     (See  Table  VII.)

TABLE  VII.
GuiNBA-PiQ  Blood  (1  cc.  5%).


Pancreas
Extract.

Solution  at  the
End  of  Two
Hours  at  0°.

Haemolysis  with

the  Decanted

Fluid.

Hemolysis  of
Sediment.

Control,  Absolute

Action  in

Warmth.

1.0

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

little

0
0
0
0

complete
0
0
0
0

complete
<«

almost  complete
strong

complete
it

tt
strong

We  see,  therefore,  that  at  0°  the  single  solvent  dose  has  been  com-
pletely anchored  by  the  blood-cells  and  that  after  centrifuging  this
leads  to  complete  solution  at  higher  temperatures;  double  the  solvent
dose  is  still  completely  anchored  by  the  blood-cells.  This  condition
of  affairs  does  not  at  all  correspond  to  the  behavior  of  the  complex
hsemolvsis  of  serum.

It  still  remained  to  study  another  fundamental  characteristic,
namely,  the  formation  of  antibodies.

We  made  peritoneal  injections  into  rabbits,  using  for  this  purpose
a  strongly  active  extract  of  ox  pancreas  that  had  been  sterilized  by
heating  to  60®  C.  for  one  hour.  The  precipitate  which  developed  being
regarded  as  the  true  active  constituent,  the  mixtures  were  thoroughly
shaken  and  the  whole  injected.  Two  rabbits  received  20  cc,  45  cc,
and  60  cc.  of  the  extract  at  suitable  intervals  and  were  bled  ten  days
after  the  last  injection.  The  antihsBmolytic  action  of  the  serum  against
the  extract  was  found  to  be  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  normal  rab-
bits.    (See  Table  VIII.)

As  can  be  seen  from  this  experiment  (the  result  of  which  is  con-
firmed by  a  number  of  similar  experiments  with  the  serum  of  other
rabbits  and  of  a  goat  treated  in  like  manner)  it  has  not  been  possible
to  produce  antibodies  by^injections  of  pancreas  extract.

The  experiment,  moreover,  shows  that  normal  rabbit  serum  already
possesses  a  marked  inhibiting  action  on  the  haemolysis  through  organ
extracts.^     We  have  been  able  to  demonstrate  this  on  all  the  species

..  ._      —  '

*  This  action  of  the  scrum  must  always  be  taken  into  account  in  the  ex-
periments, and  the  blood-cells  first  washed.


280


CX)LLECTED  STLXllIS  IN  IMMUNITY.


TABLE  Vlll.

1  cc.  GuiNBA-Pia  Blood +0.5  Extract  of  Ox  Pancreas -Twicb

THE  Solvent  Dose.


1   Of  Rabbits

+  Serum.

Immuniaed  with

2.  Of  Normal

Pancrean  Extract

Rabbits  iQaotive.

cc.

Inactive.

1

0.26

0

0

2

0.2

0

0

3

0.15

0

0

4

0.1

complete

almost  complete

5

0.075

1 1

complete

6

0.05

it

r$

7

0.015

t  <

i<

1.

of  sera  investigated  by  us;  it  is  especially  marked  in  ox  serum,
be  seen  by  the  following  examples.     (See  Table  IX.)


as  can


TABLE  IX.
1  cc.  5%  Guinea-pig  Blood +0.5  cc.  Extract  of  Ox  Pancreas.


cc.

+  Inactive
Rabbit  Serum.

+  Inactive  Go«t
Serum.

1.0

0.5

0.25

0.1

0.05

0.025

0

0

0

0

almost  complete

complete

<  (

0
0
0
0
strong

complete

<  t

Guinea-pig  Blood,  1  cc.  5%  + Extract  of  Ox
Pancreas,  1  cc.  ( »  4  times  the  solvent  dose)
+  Inactive  Ox  Serum  (J  hour  at  56''  C).

0.05
0.025
0.01
0

0

0

strong

complete

That  these  antihaemolytic  actions  of  normal  sera  are  not  due  to
antibodies  in  the  proper  sense  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  this  protective
action  withstands  the  action  of  high  temperature,  even  100®  C.  This
is  shown  by  the  following  table.


THE  H.fiMOLYnC  PROPERTIES  OF  ORGAN  EXTRACTS.     281


TABLE  X.


Extract  of

1  oe.  6%  Guinea-pis  Blood +0.2  oc.  (1  oo.

-i)  Goat  Serum.

Pancreas.

Goat  Serum  was  Heated  for  1  Hour

Without  Serum.

cc.

at  70*.

at  100».

1

1.0

complete

complete

complete

2

0.75

trace

faint  trace

3

0.5

0

0

<f

4

0.35

0

—

<f

5

0.25

0

—

*'

6

0.15

0

—

faint  trace

7

0.1

0

—

0

8

0

0

~^~

0

The  serum  was  diluted  five  times  with  tap-water  and  after  heating  the
corresponding  amount  of  salt  was  added.

This  experiment  shows  that  the  goat  serum,  which  in  amounts  of
0.2  cc.  almost  completely  neutralizes  three  times  the  solvent  dose  of
the  emulsion,  does  not  suffer  the  slightest  loss  of  action  even  when
heated  to  100°  C.  for  one  hour;  that  an  antibody  in  the  proper  sense
is,  therefore,  not  present.

Whether  the  codostable  substance  which  acts  here  is  a  simple
unit  which  acts  specifically  on  the  hsemolytic  substance  of  the  organ
extract,  or  whether  we  are  dealing  with  a  complex  of  bodies  having
an  "antireactive"  action,  can  only  be  determined  by  further  investi-
gations.^

The  hsemolytic  substances  foimd  in  organ  extracts  and  examined
by  us  are,  therefore,

1.  Coctostablc;

2.  Soluble  in  alcohol;

3.  Not  complex;

4.  Not  able  to  excite  the  production  of  antibodies.

This  shows  that  we  are  dealing  with  substances  which  are  entirely
distinct  from  the  haemolysins  of  serum  and  which  belong  into  a
peculiar  class  of  substances  acting  hsemolytically.


*  Analogous  actions  of  coctostable  substances  have  recently  been  observed
by  Korschim,  who  has  described  a  ''pseudo-antirennin"  of  normal  sera
(Zeitschr.  f.  physiol.  Chemie,  Vol.  36,  Nos.  2  and  3,  1902).  A  thermostable
substance  inhibiting  the  action  of  urease  has  also  been  recently  described  by
Moll  (Hofmeister's  Beitrage,  Vol.  11,  Nos.  7-9).


'282  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

These  substances  show  a  certain  analogy  to  the  bactericidal
bodies  obtained  by  Conradi  ^  in  the  autolysis  of  organs,  since  the
latter  are  also  coctostable  and  soluble  in  alcohol.  In  contrast  to
the  former,  however,  Conradi 's  substances  pass  through  porous  filters.

At  present  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  these  substances  are
already  preformed  in  the  living  cell  or  whether  they  originate  only  on
the  disintegration  of  the  living  protoplasm  either  through  destruction
of  the  cells  or  through  the  influence  of  the  extracting  agents.  The
presence  of  amboceptors  and  complements  in  the  living  cell  is  in  no
way  prejudiced  by  this  demonstration.  In  the  future,  however,  the
sources  of  error  pointed  out  by  us  must  be  taken  into  account  in
drawing  conclusions.

One  thing  must  be  regarded  as  certain,  that  these  experiments
disprove  the  identity  of  the  hsemolytic  substances  in  question  and
the  "cytases"  in  the  complements  of  serum.

*  Conradi,  BeitrSge  zur  chem.  Physiol,  in  Pathol.,  Vol.  1,  Nos.  5  and  6, 1901.


XXVI.  REVIEW  OF  BESREDKA'S  STUDY,  "LES  ANTI-

HEMOLYSINES  NATURELLES/' i

By  H.  T.  Marshall,  M.D.,  and  Dr.  J.  Morgenroth.'

The  chief  result  of  Besredka's  study  is  the  following  conclusion:
The  serum  of  sick  and  healthy  persons  contains  an  antihoBmolysiny  in
the  form  of  a  simple  antiamboceptor,  which  acts  exclusively  on  the
specific  ambocepter  fitting  human  blood.  The  amboceptor  used  in
this  author's  experiments,  and  conceived  as  strictly  unitarian,  was
derived  from  a  goat  treated  with  human  blood.  Antihaemolysins
which  protect  the  blood-cells  of  species  other  than  man  against  haemoly-
sins  are  not  present  in  human  serum,  and  the  rule  that  the  normal
antihaemolysin,  i.e.,  the  antiamboceptor  of  a  serum,  always  protects
only  its  own  blood-cells,  is  of  general  application.

It  was  easy  for  us  to  show  by  experiments  that  the  last  generaliza-
tion is  entirely  untenable.  The  most  varied  kinds  of  sera  (thus
especially  horse  serum)  protect  human  blood-cells  against  specific
haBmolysins,^  and  conversely,  according  to  our  experiments,  human
serum  protects  ox  blood-cells.

It  is  absolutely  necessary,  above  all,  to  get  the  two  false  premises
out  of  the  way  which  give  rise  to  all  of  Besredka's  mistakes.  This
is  a  simple  matter,  for  these  premises  were  possible  only  because  the
experiments  which  had  long  since  shown  them  to  be  untenable  were
ignored.    The  two.erroneous  premises  are:

1 .  All  the  amboceptors  obtained  by  injecting  any  species  whatsoever
with  a  particular  species  of  blood  are  entirely  identical.  Thus  Bes-
redka  assumes  that  if  different  species,  e.g.,  rabbits,  guinea-pigs,

»  Annal.  de  rinstitut  Pasteur.  Oct.  1901.

'  From  a  detailed  study,  "  Uber  Anticomplemente  und  Antiamboceptoren
normaier  Sera  und  pathologischer  Exsudate/'  appearing  in  Zeitschrift  fiir
klinische  Medicin,  where  the  experimental  part  is  to  be  found.

'  See  our  experiments  in  Zeitschr.  fiir  klin.  Medicin.  Table  III.

283


284


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


goats,  are  injected  with  blood-cella  of  a  different  species,  say  man,
the  amboceptors  developed  will  all  be  identical.

2.  HfEinolysis  of  foreign  species  of  blood  by  normal  sera  is  due
exclusively  to  the  presence  of  a  single,  simple  alexin,  and  not  to  a
complex  hffimolysin  consisting  of  amboceptor  and  complement.

The  thorough  studies  of  EhrUch  and  Morgeuroth  positively  prove
the  incorrectness  of  the  first  assumption.  Above  all,  these  investi-
gations showed  that  that  body  in  a  hamolytic  Immune  serum,  which
we  term  the  awhoctpor,  can,  in  one  and  the  same  animal,  be  shown
experimentally  to  be  made  up  of  a  host  of  diffvrt-ni  kinds  of  amboceptors.
Furthermore,  by  means  of  combining  experiments,  of  experiments
with  an  artificially  produced  antianiboceptor,  and  by  studies  on  the
eomplementibility  of  amboceptors  of  different  animal  species  it  was
shown  that  amboceptors  directed  against  the  same  species  of  blood,
which  are  obtained  from  different  animal  species,  differ  not  only  in
their  com  piemen  tophile  group  but  also  in  their  cytophile  group.

Besredka,  who  only  learned  of  this  study  after  the  completion  of
his  own,  regrets  that  "^tant  donn^  la  complexity  de  plug  en  plus
grande  de  la  question,  de  ne  pas  pouvoir  suivre  ici  les  auteurs  dans
leur  argumentations."  It  would  be  deplorable  if  the  principle  should
gain  ground  that  the  results  of  other  workers  can  simply  be  ignored
on  the  plea  that  the  veriiieation  of  the  experimental  evidence  is
rather  difficult  owing  to  its  complexity.  Finally,  the  diversity  of  the
amboceptors  has  already  been  established  by  the  studies  on  isolysins.^
In  this  it  was  shown  that  even  with  twelve  goats  treated  with  goat
blood,  twelve  different  isolysina  are  to  be  distinguished,  i.e.,  twelve
amboceptor  complexes  against  the  same  species  of  blood.

This  large  number  of  amboceptors  fitting  one  blood-cell  corre-
sponds to  a  like  condition  of  the  blood-cell's  receptors.  These  must
be  extraordinarily  manifold,  because,  besides  the  receptors  which
anchor  the  amboceptors,  there  are  present  the  most  \-aried  receptors
for  the  numerous  simple  hjpmolj'Bins  and  hajmagglutinins.  This  view,
enunciated  in  detail  by  Ehrlich,^  has  recently  been  confirmed  by
the  experiments  of  Landsteiner  and  Sturli.^  These  authors  showed
that  blood-cells   which   have  been   completely   saturated   with   the


'  Ehrlich  and  Morgeuroth.     (.See  page  SS.)

'  Ehrlich,  Nothnagels  Spec.  Pathol,  u.  Therapie.  Vol.  VIII,  Ifflll.
•  Land«einer  and  Sturli,  Uber  die  H^magglutiiiiDe  normaler  Sen
klin.  Wochensch.  1902,  No.  2.


REVIEW  OF  BESREDKA'S  STUDY.  286

agglutinin  of  one  normal  serum  can  still  take  up  in  succession  the
agglutinin  of  a  second,  third,  and  even  fifth  serum  in  any  order  one
chooses.  Thus  the  agglutinin  of  horse  serum  was  still  bound  by
pigeon  blood-cells  which  had  been  treated  with  goat  and  rabbit
serum  to  such  an  extent  that  the  cells  were  unable  to  abstract  any
more  agglutinin  from  these  sera.  These  results  are  only  comprehen-
sible if  one  assumes  a  large  number  of  different  receptors  for  the
agglutinins  of  different  sera,  and  it  is  therefore  surprising  to  find  that
just  these  experiments  which  harmonize  so  well  with  Ehrlich's  views
should  be  given  a  different  and  complicated  interpretation  by  Land-
steiner  and  Sturli.

Besredka's  second  premise  likewise  does  not  correspond  to  the
facts.  It  is  now  three  years  since  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  (see  page
11)  demonstrated  the  complex  nature  of  normal  hemolysins  in  a
number  of  cases;  later  they  brought  forward  evidence  in  favor  of  the
plurality  of  complements.  In  a  final  study  on  this  subject  Sachs  has
recently  (see  page  181)  shown  that  in  those  cases  in  which  other
investigators  did  not  succeed  in  demonstrating  the  complexity  of
normal  hsemolysins  only  technical  difficulties  and  experimental  errors
were  to  blame.

After  this  brief  analysis  of  the  principles  involved,  we  can  pro-
ceed to  study  Besredka's  experiments  and  discuss  his  conclusions
from  the  same.

The  case  especially  investigated  by  Besredka  deals  with  the  com-
bination human  blood + amboceptor  of  a  goat  immunized  with  human
blood  and  guinea-pig  serum  as  complement.  If  inactive  human  serum
is  added  to  this  combination,  solution  will  be  prevented,  as  we  were
able  to  verify.  From  this  behavior  of  the  human  serum  Besredka
concluded  that  this  must  contain  an  antiamboceptor,  giving  the  fol-
lowing as  his  reasons.

According  to  Besredka  the  serum  of  each  particular  animal  species
contains  a  single,  simple  "cytase"  specific  for  this  animal.  This
author  has  now  sought  to  determine  whether  human  serum  as  such
contains  an  "anticytase"  against  the  "cytase"  in  question;  in  other
words,  whether  in  this  case  the  inactive  human  serum  contains  an
anticytase  against  guinea-pig  serum.  The  solution  of  this  problem
was  extremely  easy  for  Besredka.  Guinea-pig  serum,  as  we  know,
dissolves  certain  species  of  blood,  and  does  so  only  by  means  of  its
"cytase."    This  action  is  not  inhibited  by  human  serum.    Hence


286  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMLTfllTY.

human  eenim  coDtains  no  anticyUtse  whatever,  and  when,  as  in  the
above  combination,  human  blood  +  specific  amboceptor 4- guinea-pig
serum,  this  serum  exerts  a  protective  action,  it  followa  by  exclusion
that  this  action  is  due  to  an  antiamboceptor.

The  fundamental  error  in  this  method  of  proof  lies,  as  already
mentioned,  in  the  assumption  of  a  simple  cytase,  which  cytase,  more-
over, is  able  by  itself  to  effect  hiEmolysis.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  how-
ever, solution  of  the  blood-cells  by  guinea-pig  serum  is  brought
about  only  by  this,  that  the  blood-cells  combine  with  a  normal  am-
boceptor present  in  the  blood  serum,  and  that  this  thereupon  anchors
the  complement  (cytase)  which  effects  solution.  If  the  complement
in  itself  is  conceived  as  a  single  substance,  one  could  conclude  from
the  fact  that  the  human  serum  does  not  prevent  this  normal  hemoly-
sis that  the  human  serum  contains  neither  an  antibody  against  the
normal  amboceptor  nor  against  "the  complement."  In  reality,
however,  "the  complement"  is  made  up  of  numerous  partial  com-
plements, one  or  another  of  which  is  dominant  for  the  completion
of  particular  amboceptors,  be  these  hemolytic  or  bacteriolytic.  This
theorj'  of  dominant  complementa  has  been  firmly  established  by
Ehrlich  and  Marshall.'

It  has  already  been  proven  for  anticomplementary  sera  that  such
a  scrum  neutralizes  only  part  of  the  complements  of  a  second  serum,
not  all.  Marshall  and  Morgenroth  *  have  shown  that  the  anticom-
plemcnt  of  a  human  ascitic  fluid  prevents  the  complementing  action
of  guinea-pig  serum  for  one  htemolytic  amboceptor  leaving  that  of
another  intact.

Now  Besredka  showed  that  human  serum  does  not  prevent  the
normal  hemolytic  action  of  a  certain  serum,  although  it  acts  anti-
hemolytically  when  this  is  used  as  complement  for  an  amboceptor
produced  by  immunization.  The  only  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from
this  is  that  the  human  serum  contains  no  an ti complement  which
acta  against  the  complement  dominant  in  the  case  of  the  normal
hemolysis.  This,  of  course,  does  not  prevent  the  same  serum  from
acting  on  other  partial  complements  which  are  dominant  in  other
cases.  We  see,  thereiore,  that  Besredka's  entire  method  of  proof
lacks  a  firm  basis.

It  is  further  to  be  remembered  that  such  questions  are  to  be  de-


'  See  page  226  ct  seq.


'  See  page  222.


REVIEW  OF  BESREDKA'S  STUDY.  287

cided  not  by  pure  speculation  but  by  experimental  means.  The
centrifugal  method  allows  us  to  demonstrate  antiamboceptor  and
anticomplement  directly,  as  such,  entirely  independent  of  all  theo-
retical speculations.  In  the  case  here  described,  we  have  shown
that  an  anticomplement  action  is  present  almost  exclusively,  com-
pared with  which  the  slight  antiamboceptor  action  is  of  no  account.^

As  a  result  of  our  own  results  we  must  maintain,  first,  that  the
major  part  of  the  anti  action  of  the  human  serum  described  by  Bes-
redka  is  due  to  the  anticomplement;  second,  that  Besredka's  ex-
perimental method  allows  no  conclusions  whatever  regarding  an
anti-immime  body;  and  third,  that  the  part  played  by  the  individual
factors  in  this  antihsemolytic  action  can  only  be  decided  by  the
method  employed  by  us.

After  having,  then,  as  a  result  of  the  experiments  with  himoan
blood,  erroneously  ascribed  the  antih»molytic  action  to  an  antiam-
boceptor, Besredka  continues  his  study  by  investigating  whether  this
supposed  antiamboceptor  is  specific,  i.e.,  only  for  human  blood  and
serum  dissolving  hiunan  blood.  In  this  sense  he  arrives  at  a  posi-
tive conclusion.  His  generalization  is  based  on  the  following  obser-
vation: He  finds  that  human  serum  does  not  protect  sheep  blood
against  the  hsemolytic  serum  of  a  goat  immunized  with  sheep  blood,
the  hemolytic  serum  being  reactivated  with  guinea-pig  serum.  We
have  made  the  same  observation  and  studied  just  this  behavior  by
means  of  a  human  ascitic  fluid.  The  case  in  question,  however^
constitutes  a  special  exception,  due  to  a  partial  anticomplement,
and  it  is,  therefore,  peculiarly  unsuited  as  the  basis  for  a  generaliza-
tion. Our  experiments  show  that  on  investigating  other  cases,
human  serum  is  found  to  exert  a  considerable  protection  against
normal  h»molysms  and  those  produced  by  immunization  which  dis-
solve other  species  of  blood — ox  blood  in  our  case.  Here  also,  how-
ever, this  protection  is  due  to  anticomplements  and  not  to  anti-
amboceptors,  at  least  so  far  as  can  be  determined  by  an  exact  analysis.

*  The  destruction  and  weakening  of  the  antihsemolysin  which  Besredka
shows  occurs  with  longer  heating  to  65-67^  C.  is,  of  course,  in  no  way  char-
acteristic for  the  nature  and  mode  of  action  of  the  antibody.  We  showed
that  this  temperature  injures  both  antiamboceptor  and  anticomplement.  Be-
sides, the  behavior  toward  narrowly  limited  thermal  influences  does  not  possess
the  significance  of  a  group  reaction.  This  is  well  shown  by  the  occurrence  of
a  thermostable  complement  (Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  page  11)  and  ther-
molabile  amboceptors  (Sachs,  see  page  181).


2S8  COLLECTED  STUDIES  LV  IMHLNITY.

Finally,  the  fatt  that  at  times  a  small  part  of  the  antihremolytic
action  (aa  in  our  experiments  with  a  human  exudate  and  ox  blood)
is  due  to  an  antiamboceptor,  removes  the  basis  tor  Bearedka's  gen-
eralization that  a  normally  present  antiamboceptor  always  protects
only  its  own  blood-cells.

From  all  this  it  follows  that  the  part  believed  to  be  played  by  the
an ti amboceptors  of  human  and  animal  body  fluids  in  the  prevention
of  hiemolysis  is  materially  decreasing  in  favor  of  the  part  taken  by
the  anticom])lement.  There  is  no  doubt  at  all  that  antiamboceptors
exist  in  normal  scrum;  this  was  first  proven  some  time  ago  by  Ehr-
lich  and  Morgenroth,'  and  also  by  P.  Miiller.^  These  antiambocep-
tors do  not,  however,  occur  regularly,  as  was  also  pointed  out  at
that  time.

Our  analysis  therefore  shows  that  since  the  fundamental  fact
does  not  apply,  the  extensive  theoretical  conclusions  drawn  by  Bes-
redka  from  the  exclusive  protection  of  the  homologous  blood-cells  by
the  serum  cannot  be  recognized.  ITiat  the  amboceptors  present  do
actually  primarily  protect  the  blood-cells  of  the  corresponding  species
is  probable  in  itself,  for  according  to  our  view,  aa  mentioned  elsewhere,'
they  represent  free  cell  receptora.  Besredka  assumes  that  the  reason
for  the  de\'elopment  of  his  supposed  antiamboceptors  is  this:  that
blood-cells,  which  are  constantly  dying  in  the  organism,  cause  the
production  of  hffimolyains.  These  would  endanger  life  if  the  organ-
ism did  not  paralyze  their  action  through  the  development  of  anti-
amboceptors. Such  a  regulating  contrivance  can  surely  not  be  verj-
common,  since  it  was  not  obseri-ed  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgcnroth  in  their
numerous  experiments  on  iaolyains,  in  which  it  would  most  readily
have  been  discovered.  But  if  such  a  contrivance  were  a  necessity,
it  would  have  to  be  constant.  This,  however,  is  not  at  all  the  case
as  we  have  already  established.*

The  simplest  and  most  natural  assumption  is  that  the  antiambo-
ceptors are  nothing  else  than  products  of  cell  disintegration,  free
receptors  which  are  capable  of  binding  amboceptors  and  so  exert  a
deflecting  influence.  The  assumption  that  these  free  receptors  are
products  of  retrogressive  metabolism  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  estab-

'See  page  88  et  wq.

'P.  Miiller,  Centrftlhlatt  t.  Bakt..  Vol.  29.  1901.

'  Morgenroth.     (Sec  page  241  et  seq.)

*  See  pages  23  and  71  et  seq.


REVIEW  OF  BESREDKA'S  STUDY.  289

lished  by  Schattenfroh  ^  that  they  are  excreted  through  the  urine
in  considerable  amounts.

One  reason  above  all  has  led  us  to  believe  that  Besredka's  views
required  to  be  controverted  in  detail,  namely,  the  fact  that  they
maintain  the  unitarian  conception  that  only  one  hemolysin  is  pos-
sible against  a  given  species  of  blood  and  one  bacteriolysin  against
a  given  species  of  bacterium.  This  conception  can  seriously  retard
the  development  of  the  doctrine  of  inmiunity  and  especially  of  the
practical  application  of  this  doctrine.

The  recent  investigations  which  have  demonstrated  the  exceeding
multiplicity  of  the  cell's  receptors  and  of  the  amboceptors  obtained
by  immunizing  with  these  receptors  show  that  this  study  can  be
successfully  pursued  along  two  directions.  One  of  these  consists  in
the  production  of  polyvalent  sera  by  immunizing  with  numerous
strains  of  the  same  bacterial  species.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the
varieties  of  a  bacterial  species  contain  the  various  receptors  in  very
varying  proportions,  and  this  is  confirmed  especially  by  Durham's
experiments  concerning  the  agglutinatibility  of  different  strains  of
coli  by  specific  sera.  A  sufficient  increase  of  all  the  amboceptor
types  in  question  is  therefore  possible  only  after  a  high  degree  of
immunization  has  been  effected  against  a  large  number  of  related
strains.  This  procedure  had  previously  been  chosen  by  Denys  and
van  de  Velde  in  the  production  of  their  polyvalent  streptococcus
serum,  and  has  recently  been  employed  by  Wassermann  and  Oster-
tag2  for  the  preparation  of  an  effective  serum  against  hog  cholera.
These  procedures  are  based  entirely  on  the  experiments  of  Ehrlich
and  Morgenroth,  just  mentioned.

The  other  method  of  obtaining  effective  bactericidal  sera  is  based
on  the  assumption  that  the  amboceptors,  according  as  they  are  de-
rived from  different  animal  species,  differ  from  one  another.  So  far
as  this  point  is  concerned,  we  may  refer  to  the  statements  of  Ehrlich
and  Morgenroth,3  which  are  summed  up  in  the  sentence,  "it  would
therefore  be  advisable  not  to  attempt  the  production  of  bactericidal
sera  from  a  single  animal  species  as  is  now  customary,  but  to  make


*  Schattenfroh,  Miinch.  med.  Wochensch.  1901,  No.  31.
'  Wassermann  and  Ostertag,  Monatsch.  f.  prakt.  Thierheilk,  Vol.  13,  foot-
notes.

*See  page  110.


290  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

a  preparation  containing  a  mixture  of  immune  sera  derived  from
animals  whose  receptor  apparatus  are  as  divergent  as  possible/'

Practical  results  along  these  lines  have  already  been  achieved
by  Schreiber,^  who  made  a  hog-cholera  serum  from  horses  and  oxen;
and  recently  Romer  ^  by  paying  attention  to  just  this  point,  has
obtained  an  effective  pneumococcus  serum  by  utilizing  several  differ-
ent species  of  animals.  In  view  of  these  attempts  to  apply  the
above  principles  practically,  it  would  be  regrettable  if  the  untenable
unitarian  view  maintained  by  Besredka  were  to  hinder  the  further
development  of  these  methods.

>  Schreiber,  Berlin  thier&rztl.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  19.

>  ROmer,  v.  Graefe's  Archiv  f .  Ophthalmologie,  Vol.  54, 1902.


XXVn.  THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.i

By  Preston  Kyes,  A.M.,  M.D.,  Associate  in  Anatomy,  University  of  Chicago,
Fellow  of  the  Rockefeller  Institute  for  Medical  Research.

I.  ConceminK  the  Amboceptors  of  Cobra  Poison.

The  most  important  contributions  in  recent  years  to  our  knowl-
edge of  the  action  of  animal  poisons  are  the  recently  published  in-
vestigations of  Flexner  and  Noguchi^  on  haemolysis  by  means  of
snake  venom.  These  authors  have  found  that  although  red  blood-
cells  whose  serum  has  been  completely  removed  by  washing  with
salt  solution  are  agglutinated  by  snake  venom,  they  are  not  dissolved.
If,  however,  serum  is  added  to  the  washed  blood-cells,  or  if  un-
washed blood  is  used,  haemolysis  ensues.  From  this  Flexner  and
Noguchi  conclude  that  the  hsemolytic  action  of  the  snake  venom
is  due  to  two  factors.  One  of  the  components  is  contained  in  the
snake  venom  itself,  and  is  said  to  bear  heating  to  about  90®  C.  very
well.  The  other  component  is  a  constituent  of  the  serum;  to  a
certain  extent  this  activates  the  poison  which  in  itself  has  no  action.

Flexner  and  Noguchi  therefore  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  snake
venom  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  substances^  acting  after  the  munner
of  amboceptors  J  which  are  activated  by  certain  complements  of  the  serum.

The  great  significance  of  this  interesting  fact  is  at  once  evident.
While  formerly  snake  venom  was  regarded  as  a  simple  poison  acting
after  the  manner  of  toxins,  this  shows  that  the  haemolytic  action
of  snake  venom  is  somewhat  more  complex,  being  identical  with
the  mechanism  of  the  haemolysins  of  blood  senmi,  as  this  has  been
conceived  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth.  For  this  reason  Flexner
and  Noguchi's  discovery  was  hailed  with  especial  delight  here  in
the  Frankfurt  Institute.


*  Reprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1902,  Nos.  38  and  39.
'  S.  Flexner  and  H.  Noguchi,  Snake  Venom  in  relation  to  Hsemolysis,  Bacteri-
olysis, and  Toxicity.    Joum.  of  Exper.  Medicine,  Vol.  VI,  No.  3,  1902.

291


COLtECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNm'.

In  view  of  the  exceeding  importance  of  these  questions  it  seenaed
advisable  to  proceed  from  these  new  facts  and  attempt  to  penetrate
more  deeply  into  the  mechanism  of  the  snake  venom's  action.  We
had  at  our  disposal  two  specimens  of  dried  cobra  poison  the  hemolytic
strength  of  which  had  proved  to  be  almost  identical  and  for  which
we  are  indebted  to  Dr.  Lamb  and  Prof.  Calmette.

A  one  per  cent  solution  of  the  dried  cobra  poison  in  0.85%  salt
solution  served  as  our  standard  poison.  This  solution  when  kept
on  ice  was  preserved  unchanged  for  several  days.

The  experiments  were  made  with  the  following  animal  species;
man,  ox,  horse,  goat,  sheep,  dog,  rabbit  and  guinea-pig.  Guided
by  Flexner  and  Noguchi's  observations,  we  at  first  used  only  blood-
cells  which  had  been  freed  from  serum.  This  was  accomplished
by  making  a  2i%  suspension  of  the  colls  in  0.85%  salt  solution,
centrifuging,  decanting  the  fluid,  and  then  adding  anew  the  same
amount  of  salt  solution.  This  was  always  done  twice  and  then  &
5%  suspension  was  made.

All  the  tubes  of  a  given  series  contained  1  cc.  of  a  5%  blood
suspension  and  they  were  all  made  up  to  the  same  volume  (2  to
2.5  cc.)  by  the  addition  of  salt  solution.  The  specimens  were  kept
in  the  incubator  at  37°  C.  for  two  hours,  and  then  placed  on  ice  at
6°  to  8°  C.  until  the  following  morning.

According  to  our  experience  there  are  two  kinds  of  blood-cells
so  far  as  their  behavior  toward  cobra  venom  is  concerned:

(1)  Those  that  in  themselves  are  dissolved  by  the  cobra  venom.

(2)  Those  that  are  affected  by  the  cobra  venom  only  after  the

addition  of  other  substances  (complements,  etc.).
The  following  table  will  show  the  behavior  of  washed  red  blood-
cells  of  various  species  toward  cobra  venom:
TABLE   I.


AiDHuni

pi«. '

Do,.

ICu>.

Rabbit.

Horn.

Ox.

Bbnap.

....

Ik

0  OOM

o.oooi

littin

0

aomt

moderate

Jm™"'om'lB>e

fain^™

'

0

j


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  293

From  this,  two  groups  of  blood-cells  can  at  once  be  recognized,
namely,  blood-cells  like  those  of  guinea-pig,  dog,  rabbit,  man,  and
horse,  which  are  dissolved  by  the  cobra  venom,  and  blood-cells  which
are  not  affected  under  these  circumstances  even  with  large  amounts
of  the  poison.  The  sensitive  blood-cells  do  not  all  possess  the  same
vulnerabiUty,  but  manifest  considerable  variations,  depending  on
the  species  to  which  they  belong.  This  is  the  case  with  all  hsemolytic
poisons.  Naturally  besides  this  there  are  certain  individual  fluctua-
tions in  vulnerablilty.  The  blood-cells  of  the  dog  and  the  guinea-
pig  are  the  most  sensitive  since  as  a  rule  0.25  cc.  of  a  1 :  10,000  dilu-
tion of  the  poison  still  produces  complete  solution.  The  blood-cells
of  the  horse  proved  least  sensitive,  for  here  it  required  1.0  cc.  of  a
1:1000  dilution  of  the  poison  to  produce  solution.  The  difference
in  vulnerability  is  therefore  one  of  forty  times.

In  view  of  Flexner  and  Noguchi's  experiments  by  which  the
amboceptor  character  of  the  hsemolytic  portion  of  snake  venoms
was  demonstrated,  it  seemed  advisable  to  undertake  activating
experiments  in  those  cases  in  which  the  cobra  venom  did  not  effect
spontaneous  solution.

It  was  actually  very  easy  to  produce  solution  by  the  addition  of
foreign  sera.  We  shall  shortly  show  that  when  the  observations  of
Calmette  ^  are  taken  into  accoimt  these  activities  are  not  all  due  to
complements.  According  to  our  conception  only  such  substances  are
complements  which  in  general  are  inactivated  at  a  temperature
between  52°  and  60®,  in  some  cases  even  somewhat  higher.  This
corresponds  to  the  greater  or  less  degree  of  lability  of  the  complements
thus  far  known.

In  our  experiments  such  pure  complementings  were  met  with
in  the  following  combinations:

Horse  blood ox  serum

Ox  blood guinea-pig  serum

Sheep  blood guinea-pig  serum

Rabbit  blood guinea-pig  serum

Table  II  shows  such  an  activation  of  the  cobra  venom.  It  also
shows  that  the  serum  employed  lost  its  complementing  property
by  half  an  hour's  heating  to  56®.

*  A.  Calmette,  Sur  Taction  h^molytique  du  venin  de  cobra.    Comptes  rend.
de  TAcad^mie  des  Sciences,  T.  134,  No.  24,  1902.


COLLECTED  STLTJIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

TABLE   II.


Ice.  5%8h«pBlood  +

Amount  of  the

uiMtpjg       rum

0,02  M.  1%  Cob™  Poison  +  Guilwa-pig  Sonun.

CO.

I.
Nomutl.

Hwted  H»1J  an  Hour

0.5

0,25

0.1

0,05

0,025

0-01

little

trace

0

I

tompleto

strong

little

trace

faint  trace

0

0
0
0
0

0
0

From  these  experiments  it  can  be  seen  that  in  the  cases  described
the  cobra  venom  haa  the  character  of  an  amboceptor  and  that  the
amboceptors  are  activated  by  serum  complements  which  possess
the  ordinary  degree  of  thermolability,

We  ha^'e  thought  it  necessary  to  determine  the  mode  of  action
of  both  substances  according  to  the  method  used  in  previous  studies
on  hemolysis.  Hence  we  next  studied  the  behavior  of  sheep  blood-
ceils  toward  the  isolated  cobra  venom  and  toward  the  complement.
So  far  as  the  behavior  toward  the  poison  alone  is  concerned  it  can  be
shown  tliat  this  poison  is  bound  by  the  sheep  blood-cells  although
these  are  not  by  themselves  dissolved  by  cobra  venom.  This  confirms
the  statement  of  Flexner  and  Noguchi.  According  to  our  experience,
however,  the  blood-cells  possess  relatively  feeble  binding  powers,
especially  in  dilute  solutions  of  the  poison.'  On  the  other  hand
the  complement  alone  is  not  at  all  bound  by  the  blood-cells.  This
is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  at  0°C.  sheep  blood-cells  are  not  dissolved
by  cobra  venom +guinea-pig  serum;  while  at  8°C.  only  a  trace  of
solution  occurs.  If  a  separation  experiment  is  made,  so  that  ambo-
ceptor and  complement  are   allowed  to  act  on  blood -cells  at  CC,


'  The  staleiiieata  of  Deeroly  and  Rousae  (Areliiv.  inlsmat,  de  pharma-
codyuainie  ct  do  th^rapic.  Vol.  VI,  1899)  are  in  entire  accord  with  the  slight
binding  powera  of  red  blood-cells  for  snake  poison.  They  find  that  in  the  animal
body  also  snake  poison  is  bound  very  much  more  slowly  than  diphtheria  or
totanua  poison.  Rabbits  which  had  been  intravenously  injected  with  a  fatal  dose
of  snake  venom  could  be  saved  even  after  ten  minutes  by  bleeding  and  trana-
fusing  fresh  blood,  whereas  with  diphtheria  or  tetanus  poison,  even  though  the
some  treatment  was  done  immediately,  the  fatal  ending  could  not  be  averted.


THE  MODE  OF  ACTIOX  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  295

after  which  the  blood  cells  and  fluid  are  separated  by  centrifuge,  it
will  be  found  that  the  blood-cells  have  taken  up  a  certain  portion
of  the  amboceptors,  but  none  of  the  complement.  These  experiments
would  seem  to  prove  the  amboceptor  character  of  the  cobra  poison,
at  least  for  the  above  cases,  entirely  according  to  the  ideas  of  Flexner
and  Noguchi.

n.  Concerning  Endocomplements/

We  shall  now  analyze  the  phenomena  which  we  observe  with
those  blood-cells  which,  like  guinea-pig  blood-cells,  are  directly  dis-
solved by  cobra  poison.  This  solution  could  be  explained  by  assuming
that  cobra  poison,  besides  the  amboceptors,  contains  true  toxins
which  are  analogous  to  the  diphtheria  toxin  and  exert  a  toxic  action,
i.e.,  effect  haemolysis,  without  the  inter\'ention  of  a  complement.
In  that  case,  however,  one  would  be  compelled  to  assiune  further
that  only  part  of  the  species  of  blood-cells  react  to  this  poison.  The
incorrectness  of  this  conception  is  readily  demonstrated.

The  observation  was  made  by  earlier  investigators  (Stephens  and
Myers  ^)  that  red  blood-cells  which  are  soluble  in  weak  solutions  of
poison  may  be  insoluble  in  stronger  solutions;  and  the  same  observ^a-
tion  was  made  by  us  on  rabbit  blood.  This  phenomenon  is  entirely
irreconcilable  with  the  assumption  of  a  preformed  poison,  for,  ceteris
jxiribus,  the  action  of  this  should  increase  with  the  dose.  This  inhibi-
tion in  consequence  of  large  doses  of  poison  cannot  be  harmonized
with  the  toxin  theory

On  the  contrary  it  indicates  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  phe-
nomenon whose  significance  was  first  point<Ki  out  by  M.  Ncissor  and
Wechsberg,^  which  consists  in  this,  that  the  bactericidal  action  of  an
immune  serum,  provided  the  amount  of  complement  remains  the
same,  is  inhibited  by  an  excess  of  amboceptor.

If  we  assimie  that  the  red  blood-cells  in  themselves  possess  a
complement  fitting  the  amboceptor  of  the  cobra  poison,  an  ^'ondo-
complement,"  we  see  at  once  that  small  amounts  of  amboceptor  efjvvt
solution,  whUe  with  large  doses  no  solution  occurs  owing  to  diversion  of
the  complement  by  the  amboceptors.  This  diversion  is  due  to  the  mass
action  of  the  amboceptors  present  in  the  fluid.  This  view  is  easily
supported  experimentally.    If  blood-cells  are  treated  with  a  solution


^  See  also  page  443.

>  Journal  of  Pathology  and  Bacteriology,  Vol.  V,  1898.

*  Munch*  med.  Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  18.    See  also  page  120.


296


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


of  very  strong  snake  poison,  they  will  not  be  dissolved.  The  mixture
is  1WW  centrijiiged  and  the  sediment  washed  vAth  salt  solution.  No
solution  takes  place;  as  soon  as  fitting  comfiemeni  is  added,  however,
solution  ensues  very  promptly.  This  shows  that  by  the  treatment  with
the  poison  the  complement  contained  in  the  red  blood-cells  has  been
abstracted.      The  following  diagram  will  make  this  clear.


I.  Blood-cetl  with  receptor  r  ond  endocomplement  e.
II.  Blood-cell  after  treatment  with  a  large  amount  of  cobra  poison.  Tb©
cobra  amboceptor  c  has  been  anchored  by  the  blood-cell  receptor.  The
endocomplemcnt  has  been  abstracted  from  the  cells  by  the  large  excess  of
free  amboceptor,
HI.  Blood-cell  of  stage  II  after  the  addition  of  complement  or  endocomplement«.
The  added  endocomplement  has  combined  with  the  cobra  amboceptor  e
and  can  now  effect  solution.


The  following  experiment  may  serve  as  an  illustration.      (See
Table  III.)


TABLE   m.

•  |p*.vsn.%"s'"'«Vu'^™f^'?:^r^"'"''^

"saa"

N.C?lk™.

b
O.IS  PC.  Guinea-

0,8  ce.  Guimm-
piK  Endoeom-

pi^  E^dDC^^B-

Solution  effected

0

complete

complete

0

The  correctness  of  this  view  can  readily  be  shown  in  anotlier
way  If  the  blood-cells  actually  do  contain  an  endocomplement,  it
must  be  possible  to  demonstrate  this  by  dissolving  the  blood-cells  in
water  and  finding  that  these  dissolved  celb  are  capable  of  acting  a8
complement  to  cobra  poison  for  such  blood-cells  as  are  incapable  of
being  dissoh'cd  by  cobra  poison  alone.


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.


297


As  a  matter  of  fact  we  have  succeeded  in  a  large  number  of  casea
in  causing  the  solution  of  such  cells  by  the  addition  of  laky  soliUions.
of  endocomplement.^  The  amoimt  of  endocomplement  contained  in
blood-cells  varies;  that  of  hiunan  and  guinea-pig  blood  appears
to  be  the  highest  and  also  fairly  constant.

The  following  table  shows  the  combinations  in  which,  according
to  our  experiments,  cobra  poison  causes  solution  (+)  of  blood-cells,
which  are  not  dissolved  by  cobra  poison  alone  (see  Table  IV).


Endooomplexnent  of


Rabbit. . .

Man

Dog

Guinea-pig

Goat

Ox

Sheep


TABLE

IV

•

SpeoioB  of  Blood.

Ox.

Goa

Sh«ep.

+

+

-f

+

+

-f

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

—

—

_  J

"

"

It  is  in  place  here  to  mention  another  fact.  The  deflection  of  the
endocomplement  by  large  quantities  of  poison  described  in  the  case
of  blood-cells  vulnerable  to  cobra  poison  succeeds  equally  well  if
the  experiment  is  made  with  blood-cells  insensitive  to  cobra  poison
alone  (ox  blood)  and  if  dissolved  endocomplements  (guinea-pig)  are
used  for  activation.  There  is  no  dovbt  therefore  thai  the  blood-cells:
themselves  contain  complement4ike  substances,  endocomplements.

So  far  as  the  behavior  of  these  endocomplements  toward  thermic
influences  is  concerned,  they  are  seen  to  be  somewhat  more  resistant
in  general  than  are  the  complements  contained  in  the  serum,  for  it
requires  half  an  hour's  heating  to  62®  C.  to  inactivate  them  (see  Table
V).  In  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge,  however,  we  probably
cannot  deny  the  complement  character  of  these  substances  merely

*  As  a  rule  these  endocomplement  solutions  were  prepared  by  twice  washing
and  centrif  uging  a  certain  quantity  of  f  uU  blood,  and  then  filling  the  sediment
up  to  a  certain  voliune.  Either  the  original  volume  or  a  greater  or  less  dilu-
tion was  made  up  depending  on  circumstances.  They  were  then  salted  to
contain  0.85%  NaCl.  We  have  designated  these  dilutions  as  },  J,  -Ar»  etc.,  endo-
complement.

'  Even  in  these  cases  we  noticed  an  activation  with  certain  specimens  of
blood.


298  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMtTNITl*.

because  of  this  thermostability,  especially  since  we  know  that
Ehrlich  and  Moi^cnroth  i  have  described  a  partial  complement
in  goat  Eerum  which  was  much  more  thermostable.  According  to
some  unpublished  studies  by  Shiga  such  thermostable  complements
seem  to  take  part  in  the  bacteriolysis  of  anthrax  bacilli  by  rabbit  serum.
The  active  group  of  coagulins  and  agglutinins,  which,  according  to
Ehrlich,  is  analogous  to  the  zymotoxic  group  of  complements,  is  still
more  thermostable,^  for  inactivation  takes  place  only  between  70  aod
75°  C.

From  all  this  it  follows  that  we  must  assume  the  blood-cells  which
are  sensitive  to  the  above  poison,  to  be  supphed  bolk  leilh  reixptors
and  comjAcmenls.  Through  the  inter\-ention  of  the  amboceptors
added,  the  discoplasma  enters  into  that  intimate  combination  with
the  complement  which  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  latter  may  act.

We  should  like  to  add  a  few  explanatory  remarks  to  these  state-
ments, and  shall  begin  with  the  conception  of  complements  as  endocom-
plemenis.  One  could,  for  example,  assume  that  the  endocoraple-
ments  are  derived  not  from  blood-cells  themselves  but  from  the  serum
Btill  adherent  to  these.  Howe\'cr,  we  Ijelieve  that  the  repeated  wash-
ing and  centrifuging  has  completely  freed  the  red  blood-cella  from
serum.  Guinea-pig  blood-cells  were  washed  and  centrifuged  eight
times,  yet  even  after  that  the  dissolved  blood-celb  manifested  tlie
complement  action.  This  excludes  the  possibility  of  the  action  being
due  to  adherent  senim.  Anotlier  thing  which  speaks  against  this  is
the  fact,  now  and  then  obser\'ed  by  us  (mostly,  to  be  sure,  merely
indicated)  that  the  last  decantations  activated  more  strongly  even
than  the  first.  If  the  washmg  removed  adherent  serum  constituents,
the  first  washing  should  contain  more  than  the  later  ones.  As
a  matter  of  fact  just  the  reverse  was  found  to  be  the  case;  which
indicates  that  we  are  dcalmg  with  an  extraction  phenomenon.

In  one  case  we  even  succeeded  in  entirely  rcmo\'ing  the  cndo-
complement  by  means  of  salt  solution.  Tliis  was  a  suspension
(5%  in  0.85%  salt  solution)  of  rabbit  blood,  which  is  dissolved
by  cobra  poison.  Tliis  susjiension  was  kept  in  a  refrigerator  for
twenty-four  hours  and  then  centrifuged,  when  it  was  found  that
the  scdimented  blood-cells  suspended  in  fresh  salt  solution  were  no


'  See  pages  11  et  seq.

'See  Bail.  Arrhiv  fiir  Hygiene,  Vol.  XLII,  1902;   hIho  Eisenberg  and  Volk,
Zeitachr.  t.  Hygieoe,  Vol.  XXXIV.  1902.


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.


299


TABLE  V.

In  all  Cases  0.02  cc.  1%  Cobra  Poison.

A.


Amount
of  the

1  00.  5%  Ox  Blood  +  Guinea-pic  Blood  Endooomplement  (1/20).

Endooom-
plement
(1/20).

00.

o
Normal.

6
Heated  to  62*"  for  i  Hour.

1.0

0.75

0.5

0.25

0.1

complete

trace
0

OOOOO

B.


1  CO.  5%  Goat  Blood  +  Guinea-pic  Blood  Endooomplement  (1/10).

Endooom-
plement

o
Normal.

^

Heated  Half  an  Hour  to

(1/10).

00.

b
66«C.

e
60«C.

d
62«C.

1.0
0.5
0.25
0.1

complete
moderate

little
faint  trace

strong

little

trace

0

trace

0
0

0
0
0
0

c.


1  00.  5%  Sheep  Blood  +  Guinea-pic  Endooomplement  (1/10).

Endooom-
plement

o
Normal.

Heated  Half  Hour  to

(1/10).

00.

6
66«»C.

c
60*  C.

d
62'»C.

1.0
0.5
0.25
0.1

almost  complete

little

trace

0

moderate
trace

0

trace
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

longer  dissolved  by  the  cobra  poison,  or  were  only  very  slightly
dissolved.  If  our  view  was  correct,  the  endocomplements  would  now
be  foimd  in  the  decanted  fluid.  This  proved  to  be  the  case,  for  the
addition  of  suitable  amounts  of  this  fluid  sufliced  to  cause  solution
of  the  blood-cells  which  were  insoluble  in  cobra  poison  alone.    We


300  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITV.

were  unable  to  obtain  a  like  result  in  two  similar  cases.  Evidently
slight  variations  in  the  experiment  and  jjossibly  also  minute  changes,
and  impurities  leading  perhaps  to  certain  ion  actions,  play  a  role  which
it  is  difficult  to  control.  We  were  not  interested  enough  to  follow
up  tliese  relations;  but  we  believe  that  had  we  done  so  we  could  have
made  the  conditions  more  favorable  for  washing  out  the  endocomple-
ments.  We  merely  mention  this  because  I'lexner  and  Noguchi  state
that  in  their  experiments  after  repeated  washings  of  the  blood-cells
all  of  these  were  found  insoluble  in  cobra  poison  alone,

These  authors  did  most  of  their  work  with  snake  poisons  differ-
ent from  ours  {Crolalus  adamanleus,  Ancistrodon  conlortn'^,  etc.).
How  far  this  fact  is  responsible  for  the  divergence  cannot  here  be
decided,  nor  whether  the  escape  of  the  endocomplenienta  was  favor«d
by  other  conditions  in  the  experiments.'

That  the  endocomplements  cannot  be  derived  from  the  serum
is  also  shown  by  the  obser\-ation  frequently  made  by  us  that  the  senan
of  several  species  of  blood,  whose  blood-cells  exhibit  a  plentiful  supply
of  endocomplement,  does  not  possess  the  slightest  activating  power,
but  that,  on  the  contrary  (as  in  the  case  of  rabbit  eerum) ,  it  sometimes
hinders  hicmolysis  of  the  homologous  blood-cells  by  snake  poison.

.So  far  as  tlie  condition  is  concerned  in  which  the  endocomple-
ments exist,  we  must  assume,  in  those  cases  in  which  the  blood-
cells  are  directly  soluble,  that  the  endocomplement  is  contained
free  in  the  blood-cells.  In  those  blood-cells,  which  are  primarily
infloluble,  it  will  cither  be  absent  or  be  present  in  a  latent  form.
We  believe  the  endocomplements  are  absent  in  the  goat,  for  in  no
ease  were  the  dissolved  goat  blood-cells  able  to  activate  cobra  venom
for  goat  blood.  Ou  the  other  hand,  ox  blood  is  sensitized  for  cobra
venom  by  dissolved  ox  blood-ccUa,  so  that  we  shall  have  to  assume
that  ox  blood  does  not  contain  endocomplements  in  available  form
and  that  these  endocomplements  are  changed  into  an  active  form
when  the  cells  are  dissolved.

We  shall  reserve  for  subsequent  study  the  question  as  to  whether
the  endocomplements  are  of  simple  constitution  or  complex.

Attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that  the  existence  of  endocom-
plements  furnishes   another  objection   to   Bordet's   view   that   the

iliall   merely  say  that  Daboia  poiaon,  wliich  through  Lamb's  pretty
'-  has  been  shown  to  differ  from  cobra  poison,  does  not  dissolve  rabbit


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  301

amboceptor  is  only  a  key  which  makes  possible  the  entrance  of  the
complement  into  cell.  For  in  these  cases  the  complements  which
are  able  to  destroy  the  blood-cell  are  already  present  within  the
same  before  the  amboceptor  is  anchored,  and  yet  the  blood-cell  is
in  no  way  injured.  The  injury  takes  place  only  when  a  particular
organic  relation  has  been  effected  between  complement  and  protoplasm
by  means  of  the  amboceptor.

Finally,  the  demonstration  that  the  red  blood-cells  contain  com-
plementing substances  is  exceedingly  important  in  other  directions.
The  French  school  in  particular  was  inclined  to  refer  the  source  of
the  complements  exclusively  to  the  leucocytes.  We  now  see  that
the  red  blood-cells,  heretofore  considered  merely  as  concerned  with
the  oxygen  exchange,  are  also  carriers  of  special  complement-like
substances.  This  confirms  the  view  expressed  by  Ehrlich  ^  in  his
"Schlussbetrachtungen,"  namely,  that  "the  jed  blood-discs  also
exercise  other  functions  hitherto  overlooked."  "The  red  blood-cells
serve  as  storage  centres  in  the  sense  that  they  temporarily  take  up
into  themselves  substances  characterized  by  the  presence  of  hapto-
phore  groups  and  derived  from  the  internal  metabolism  or  from  the
food."

in.  Cobra  Venom  and  Lecithin.

Having  demonstrated  that  the  amboceptor  of  snake  poison  can
be  complemented  by  easily  destructible  complements  which  may  be
present  either  in  the  serum  or  in  the  red  blood-cells,  we  go  on  to  a
series  of  other  phenomena  in  which  activation  is  effected  by  more
stable  substances  which  are  in  no  way  related  to  the  complements.
Calmette,^  in  following  up  the  work  of  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  found
that  certain  normal  sera  when  heated  to  62®  C.  became  much  better
able,  in  conjunction  with  cobra  poison,  to  cause  haemolysis  of  the
washed  blood-ceUs.  In  fact  it  was  found  that  fresh  sera,  added  in
large  excess,  can  retard  or  even  inhibit  haemolysis,  while  these  same
sera  when  heated  cause  immediate  solution  of  the  blood-cells  in  the
presence  of  cobra  poison.  From  this  Calmette  concludes  that  such  a
blood  serum  must  contain  a  natural  antihaemolysin  which  can  pro-
tect the  red  blood-cells  up  to  a  certain  point  against  solution  by  the

'  In  NothnagePs  Specielle  Pathologie  iind  Therapie,  Vol.  8.    Vienna,  1901.
M.C.


302  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY'.

snake  venom.  This  antihsemolyain  is  thermolabile,  being  destroyed
by  temperatures  over  56°  C.  The  other  (the  activating)  constituent
of  the  serum  on  the  contrary  is  thermostable,  since  it  does  not  lose
its  activity  even  by  heating  to  80°  C,  Calmette  therefore  assumes
that  the  alexin  (our  complement)  takes  no  pari  in  the  acHvaium,  but
that  a  particularly  thermostable  "substance  sens^rUatrice "  is  con-
tained in  the  serutn  besides  the  thermolabile  antihtBtnotysin.  By  the
term  "substance  sensibilatrice, "  as  used  in  French  terminologj',  la
meant  the  lx)dy  which  we  term  "amboeeptor."  The  amboceptor
capable  of  being  anchored  is  supposed  to  render  the  red  blood-cells
sensitive  to  the  attack  of  the  alexin  (complement).  It  is  hard  to
see  just  how  Caimette  conceives  this  entire  process.  As  we  already
know  from  the  researches  of  Flexner  and  Noguchi  snake  \-enom  is
capable  of  being  anchored,  and  from  all  of  its  properties  is  therefore
surely  a  substance  sensibtlatrice  (amboceptor).  If  then  the  substance
supposed  by  Calmette  were  also  a  sensitizer,  we  should  have  before
us  something  absolutely  unique,  namely,  the  combined  action  of  two
sensitizers.  Unfortunately  Calmette  has  undertaken  no  combining
experiments  and  therefore  has  furnished  no  proof  for  his  view.  Our
own  experiments,  however,  speak  against  this  assumption.

In  our  opinion  the  main  reasons  which  led  Calmette  to  conclude
that  complements  play  no  role  in  the  hEemolysis  by  means  of  cobra
venom  are :

1.  That  he  overlooked  the  endocoraplements.

2.  That  he  employed  too  schematic  a  manner  of  activation,  namely,
usually  only  at  62"  C.

We  have  convinced  ourselves  that  in  suitable  cases  (see  Table
VII,  case  IV)  a  blood  serum,  e.g.  ox  serum,  when  fresh,  dissolves
the  red  blood-cella.  If  this  is  inactivated  by  heating  to  56°  C,  the
action  will  be  found  to  be  completely  inhiljited,  or  almost  so.  This
same  serum,  however,  when  heated  to  65°  C.  or  higher  is  again  able
to  effect  hiemolysis.  The  serum  heated  in  this  manner  possesses  a
stronger  soh-ent  power  than  the  fresh  serum,  for  even  fractional
parts  of  the  complete  solvent  dose  of  fresh  serum  suffice  to  cause
full  solution  (see  Table  VI).

This  experiment  was  repeated  many  times  and  pro\'ee  that  in
this  case  two  entirely  differeni  kinds  of  actimtions  occur,  namely,

1,  Activation  by  means  of  complements.

2.  Activation  by  means  of  substances  which  become  riuiniffst  only
through  heating.


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.

TABLE  VT.
1  cc.  5%  Horse  Blood + Ox  Serum.


303


I.
Ox  Serum  Alone.

II.
0.02  oc.  1%  Cobra  Poiaoo  +  Ox  Serum,  1/10  Dilution.

Amount

of  the

Ox  Serum

(1/10).

o
Normal.

Heated  for  One  Half-bour  to

oc.

b
66«»C.

e
66*»C.

0.5

0.35

0.15

0.15

0.1

faint  trace
0
0
0
0

complete

almost  complete

strong

little

trace

faint  trace

0
0
0

complete

little
trace

It  seemed  to  us  that  it  was  of  the  highest  importance  to  gain
a  further  insight  into  these  thermostable  activating  substances.  To
begin,  we  found  that  the  substance  is  far  more  stable  than  Calmette
assumed,  for  activation  is  effected  even  by  sera  which  have  been
cooked  for  hours.  Thereupon  we  investigated  a  number  of  sera  in
respect  to  their  activating  power  and  obtained  results  that  were
little  less  than  confusing.  We  foimd  sera  which  activated  not  only
in  the  fresh  state  but  also  after  heating  to  56®  C.  and  100®  C.  (No.  I
of  Table  VII).  Other  sera  did  not  activate  either  when  fresh  or
after  heating  to  56®  C;  they  did  activate,  however,  when  they  were
heated  to  65®  and  100®  C.  (No.  II  of  Table  VII).  As  a  rule  in  these
cases  the  serum  heated  to  100®  C.  proved  more  powerful  than  that
heated  to  65®  C.  A  third  class  of  sera  was  found  which  did  not  activate
when  fresh,  but  activated  when  heated  to  56®  C.  or  higher  (No.  Ill  of
Table  VII).  Finally,  there  is  the  type  already  mentioned,  namely,  a
serum  which  activates  when  fresh,  is  made  inactive  by  heating  to
56®  C.  and  again  made  active  by  heating  to  65®  (No.  IV  of  Table  VII).
We  have  also  observed  sera  which  activate  ordy  when  fresh  and  do  not
again  acquire  this  property  when  heated  to  a  greater  or  less  degree
(No.  V  of  Table  VIII).  We  see  therefore  that  we  are  dealing  with
five  different  combinations,^  as  is  shown  in  Table  VII.

'  Naturally  in  the  case  of  such  bloods  as  rabbit  blood,  which  are  dissolved
by  cobra  poison  alone,  only  such  amounts  of  poison  have  been  used  which  by
themselves  are  not  active,  but  which  cause  haemolysis  when  they  are  combined
with  suitable  reinforcing  agents  (complements,  etc.).


COLLECTED  STLTIIES  IN  IMMUNITT.'.
TABLE  VIL


Activ.t

ns  Powr  if  the

Senim.

CambiniiliDns.

•

HmUidto

S«nun.

Blood-eaU.

NormiLl.

Sfl-C.

6B°  or  lOO-  C.

horse

03C

horee

+

+

+

horeo
rabbbit

horse
goal*

n

0

0

+

a  Keep
rabbit

sheep.

ni

0

+

+

sheep
Buinea-pig

«

+

0

+

guiriea-pig

-1-

gumea-pig

*  Only  slight  nolution.

Tliese  contradictory  results  are  not  to  be  harmonized  with  Cal-
metto's  conception  of  a  definite  antibody  which  is  destroyed  at  56°  C.
One  would  have  to  assume  that  this  normal  antihaBmolysin  were
lacking  in  horse  serum,  for  as  a  rule  this  does  not  become  more  strongly
hffimolytic  by  heating  to  56°  C.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  case  of  a
serum  like  No,  II,  which  has  no  activating  properties  even  when
heated  to  56°  C,  it  would  be  necessary  to  believe  that  the  activator
is  entirely  absent.  The  conditions  are  still  more  complicated  by
the  fact  that  one  and  the  same  serum  can  behave  differently  toward
various  species  of  blood.  Thus  a  horse  scrum  heated  to  100°  will
activate  cobra  venom  for  ox  blood  in  high  dilutions  (0.02  complete),
whereas  even  in  large  amoimta  it  dissolves  goat  blood  only  in  com-
paratively slight  degree  (0.35  cc.  moderate  solution).  In  this  case,
then,  the  activator  present  is  in  the  main  one  for  ox  blood,  not  for
goat  blood.

Believing  that  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  this  maze  of  facts
could  be  gained  only  by  a  thorough  chemical  analysis,  we  sought  to
isolate  the  thermostable  activating  substance.  First  we  succeeded
in  proving  that  when  serum  is  precipitated  with  8  to  10  volumes  of
alcohol,  the  activating  substance  passes  into  the  alcohol,  while  the
inhibiting   substance   is   contained   in   the   precipititte.     For   if   the


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  305

alcoholic  extract  is  evaporated  in  vacuo  and  the  residue  dissolved  in
an  amount  of  0.85%  salt  solution  equal  to  the  original  amount  of
serum,  a  strong  activating  fluid  is  obtained.  An  alcoholic  extract  of
horse  serum,  when  treated  in  this  way,  in  contrast  to  the  native
horse  senun  heated  to  100*^  C,  dissolves  goat  blood  to  a  high  degree
(0.1  cc.  dissolves  completely).  The  alcohol  precipitate  must  there-
fore have  contained  a  substance  which  inhibits  the  action  of  the
activator,  and  we  were  actually  able  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of
this  inhibiting  substance.  If  the  precipitate  is  dissolved  in  salt  water,
a  fluid  is  obtained  which  inhibits  the  haemolysis  of  goat  blood  by
cobra  venom  and  the  activator  derived  from  the  alcoholic  extract  of
horse  serum.  In  larger,  though  unequal,  doses  it  protects  ox  blood
against  solution  by  cobra  venom  and  the  activator.  Before  studying
the  nature  of  the  inhibition  effected  by  the  albuminous  precipitate
we  shall  try  to  discover  the  nature  of  the  activator.  As  already  said,
the  residue  obtained  on  evaporating  the  alcoholic  extract  was  dissolved
in  salt  water.  On  shaking  this  solution  with  ether,  we  found  that
the  ether  had  taken  up  all  of  the  activating  substance.  This  proved
that  the  activator  is  a  substance  soluble  both  in  alcohol  and  ether,
and  one  which  has  a  wide  distribution  in  the  sera  of  animals.  Constit-
uents of  the  blood  serum  which  are  soluble  in  ether  have  long  been
known  to  us.  Those  mainly  to  be  considered  are  cholesterin,  lecithin,
fats  and  fatty  acids.  After  several  negative  trials  with  cholesterin
we  found  that  lecithin  possesses  the  properties  of  the  activator,  since
all  blood-cells  are  rapidly  dissolved  when  cobra  venom  and  lecithin
are  allowed  to  act  on  them  simultaneously.  Not  only  blood-cells  which
are  insoluble  in  cobra  venom  alone,  such  as  goat  blood-cells,  but  also
those  which  are  deprived  of  endocomplements  when  treated  with
strong  solutions  of  poison  (see  §  II,  Endocomplements)  are  promptly
dissolved  by  the  lecithin.     Our  solution  of  lecithin  ^  was  made  in  the

*  The  lecithin  employed  by  us  was  derived  from  yolk  of  egg  and  obtained
from  E.  Merck,  Darmstadt.  It  was  a  neutral  mass  of  salve-like  consistency,
which  was  entirely  precipitated  from  its  ethereal  solution  by  aceton  (Altmann-
Henriquez).  Even  when  thus  purified  it  manifested  the  activating  power
unchanged.  We  reserve  for  further  study  our  experiments  with  the  pure  lecithin
prepared  after  the  method  of  P.  Bergell  (Ber.  der  deutsch.  chem.  Gesellschaft,
Jahrg.  33,  1900,  page  2584)  and  with  the  homologues  of  this  body.  A  specimen
of  lecithin  obtained  from  J.  D.  Riedel,  Berlin,  corresponded  exactly  in  its  activity
to  Merck's  lecithin.  Cerebrin  and  Protagon,  obtained  through  the  courtesy  of
Prof.  Kossel  of  Heidelberg,  possess  no  activating  power.


306  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

purest  methyl  alcohol,  for,  as  we  know  trora  special  experiments,  this
does  not  injure  the  red  blood-cells  even  in  concentration  up  to  9  or
10%.  A  1%  stock  solution  was  diluted  with  0.85%  salt  solution,  and
it  was  found  that  0,0025  cc.  to  0.0035  cc.  of  the  1%  solution  (i.e.
0.000025  g.  lecithin)  were  sufficient  to  completely  dissolve  1  t-c.  5%
ox  or  goat  blood  on  the  addition  of  suitable  amounts  of  cobra  poison,
(See  Table  VIII).

TABLE   VIII.


i^tL^

0.002  PC.  1%  Cobts  PoiKiD.

Oi  Blood.

Go.t  Blood.

0.005
0.0036
0.0025
0.0015
0.001
0.00075

comple..

almoat  complete

little

0

moderate

trace

0

0

In  what  way  now  are  we  to  picture  the  action  of  this  lecithin?
We  know  that  lecithin  is  able  to  combine  with  albimiinous  bodies,
sugars  (Henriquez  and  Bing),  etc.  A  threefold  question  had  to  be
decided.  First,  whether  cobra  venom  unites  with  lecithin  after  the
fashion  of  an  amboceptor;  second,  whether  perhaps  the  snake  venom
had  made  the  blood-cells  sensitive  to  lecithin;  or  third,  whether
the  reverse  holds  true.

A  preliminary  test  was  made  to  see  whether  lecithin  and  snake
poison  coml.iine  with  one  another.  The  method  of  making  this
t^eriment  is  relatively  simple.  Lecithin  can  easily  he  shaken  out
of  its  solution  in  salt  water  by  means  of  ether.  As  the  following
experiment  will  show,  lecithin  passes  into  the  ether  in  great  abundance,
but  not  completely.  This  behavior  corresponds  to  a  general  phe-
nomenon which  is  the  expression  of  the  "loi  de  partage."  If,  how-
ever, to  the  same  amount  of  lecithin  a  suitable  quantity  of  snake
venom  is  added,  it  is  found  that  but  very  little  passes  into  the  ether
on  shaking  the  ether  with  the  mixture.  Two  portions  each  of  10  cc,
were  thus  shaken  out  with  ether:  A.  containing  2  cc.  of  a  certain
lecithin  solution:  B,  containing  besides  this  1  cc.  of  a  1%  solution
of  cobra  venom.  Previous  to  this  both  solutions  were  kept  at  37°  C.
for  half  an  hour.  The  ethereal  extract  was  evaporated  and  the
residue  taken  up  in  10  cc.  0.85%  salt  solution      The  action,  on  ox


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.


307


blood -f  cobra  venom,  of  the  ethereal  extract  residues  on  the  one  hand,
and  of  the  solutions  which  had  been  shaken  out  on  the  other,  is
shown  in  Table  IX.


TABLE  IX.

Complete  solvent  dose  of  lecithin  (stock  solution)  with  0.1  cc.  of  0.1%  cobra
venom » 0.005  cc.  (corresponding  to  0.p25  cc.  of  the  shaken-out  solution).


1  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood +0.1  cc.  0  1%  Cobra  Poison.

Amount

of  A  or

of  B.

A.  Lecithin  Only.

B.  Lecithin  +  Cobra  Poison.

cc.

I.
Ether  Extract.

II.
Aqueous  Portion.

I.
Ether  Extract.

II.
Aqueous  Portion.

1.0

0.5      •

0.25

0.1

0.05

0.025

0.015

complete  solution

( <           ( (

ft          i  (
it          t  i

trace
0

complete  solution
i  (          <  <

K                  it

0

complete  solution

moderate

0

complete  solution
0

It  can  be  seen  from  the  table  that  on  the  addition  of  snake
poison  to  the  same  lecithin  solution  only  -^  part  of  that  amount
of  lecithin  passed  into  the  ether  which  passes  into  ether  when  a
pure  lecithin  solution  is  shaken  out.  The  cobra  venom  had  there-
fore bound  the  lecithin.

The  next  question  to  determine  was  how  the  red  blood-cells
behaved  toward  cobra  venom  and  lecithin  alone  and  toward  mixtures
of  these  substances.  In  order  to  retard  the  course  of  the  reactions  as
much  as  possible  and  to  secure  a  better  view  of  the  processes  we
sought  to  create  such  retarding  conditions  by  making  the  test
with  dilute  solutions  and  at  0°  C.  This  necessitated  a  preliminary
quantitative  determination  of  the  effect  of  each  factor  separately.
Corresponding  to  the  slight  affinity  of  the  cobra  amboceptor  for  the
red  blood-cells,  it  was  found  that  with  suitable  conditions  (2  hours  at
0°  in  dilute  solutions  of  the  poison)  the  amboceptor  is  not  anchored;
neither  is  lecithin  by  itself  bound  by  the  blood-cells.  On  the  other
hand  blood-cells  to  which  cobra  venom -f  lecithin  were  added  in
suitable  quantities  were  rapidly  dissolved  even  at  0^  C.  Both  com-
ponents must  therefore  have  been  bound.  The  following  table
(Tabb  X)  illustrates  this  behavior.


308


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


TABLE  X.

Complete  solvent  dose  of  cobra  venom  (0.1%)  in  the  presence  of  0.01  cc.  lecithin
« 0.005  cc.  Complete  solvent  dose  of  lecithin  in  the  presence  of  0.1  cobra
venom  (0.1%)  -0.005  cc.


A


Amount  of
Gobra  Venom

1  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood  +  Decreasing  Amounts  of  0>bra  Venom  Kept  Two  Hours
at  0^,  then  Centrifused  and  Washed.     Thereupon  0.01  Lecithin  Solution
Added  to

Added

(0.1%).

cc.

I.
The  Sediments.

II.

To  the  Decanted  Fluid  which  had  been
Added  to  Native  Ox  Blood.

0.01

0.05

0.025

0.01

0.005

0.0025

faint  trace  solution
0
0
0
0
0

complete  solution

tt             tt

It             tt
tt             tt

almost  complete
0

B.


Amoimt  of
the  Lecithin

1  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood  +  Decreasting  Amounts  of  Lecithin  Kept  at  0^  C.  for  Two
Hours,  then  Ontrifuged  and  Washed.     Thereupon  0.1  cc.  Cobra  Venom
(0.01%)  Added  to

Solution

Added.

cc.

I.
The  Sediments.

II.

To  the  Decanted  Fluid  which  had  been
Added  to  Native  Ox  Blood.

0.075

0.05

0.025

0.01

0.0075

0.005

trace  solution

complete  solution

tt             tt

tt             tt
tt             tt
tt             tt

0

c.


1  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood +  0.025  Lecithin  Solution  +  Decreasing  Amounts  of  Cobra

Venom,  Two  Hours  at  0**  C.

Amount  of

Ck>bra  Venom

Added

(0.1%).

cc.

I.

Degree  of  Solution
Effected.

II.

Specimens  not  Dissolved  are  Centrifuged,  the
Sediments  Washed.

a

Sediments  Suspended  in

Salt  Solution.
(+0.01  cc.  Lecithin).

6

Decanted  Fluids  Poured
over  Native  Ox  Blood.

0.1

0.05

0.025

0.01

0.005

0.0025

0.001

0

complete

tt

tt
tt

faint  trace
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

complete
moderate

0

0

THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  309

These  results  can  be  explained  only  by  assuming  that  lecithin
and  cobra  amboceptor  have  combined  to  form  what  may  be  termed
the  "lecithin"  of  cobra  poison,  and  that  the  ajBSnity  of  the  cobra
amboceptors  cytophile  group  is  thereby  increased.  According  to  this
the  union  with  the  lecithin  causes  the  cobra  poison  to  Le  more
rapidly  anchored  than  the  cobra  amboceptor  alone.  The  increase  of
the  cytophile  groups  affinity  through  the  occupation  of  another
group  is  perfectly  conceivable  chemically.  An  analogy  frequently
met  with  is  the  fact  that  the  anchoring  of  the  haemolytic  serum
amboceptors  by  the  blood-cells  usuaUy  causes  an  increase  in  the
affinity  of  the  complementophile  group.  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  ^  have
shown  that  the  occupation  of  the  complementophile  group  of  serum
amboceptors  can  cause  an  increase  of  the  cytophile  group's  afiinity,
such  as  is  presented  in  this  case.

We  therefore  assume  that  the  lecithin  acts  as  a  kind  of  comple-
ment since  it  is  anchored  by  certain  definite  groupings  of  the  poison
molecule.  In  this  way  a  poisonous  double  combination  is  formed
of  which  perhaps  the  cholin  residue  constitutes  the  toxophore  group.

There  is  another  fact  which  supports  the  view  here  presented,
namely,  that  the  lecithin  amboceptors  effect  solution  of  the  red  blood-
cells  even  at  0°  C,  whereas  the  thermolabile  complements  of  blood
serum  are  anchored  only  at  higher  temperatures.  Corresponding  to  the
views  formulated  by  Ehrlich  and  Marshall  ^  for  the  amboceptors
(polyceptors)  of  blood  serum,  we  must  therefore  assume  that  the
snake  venom  amboceptor  in  addition  to  its  cytophile  group  possesses
at  least  two  haptophore  groups,  of  which  one  as  usual  is  able  to  bind
complements,  the  other  to  bind  lecithin.  Each  of  these  combina-
tions by  itself  is  dominant^  i.e.,  sufficient  to  effect  solution  of  the  blood-
cells.  It  is  very  probable  that  occupation  of  both  groups  increases
the  solvent  effect.

The  following  experiment  furnishes  additional  proof  that  the
phenomena  observed  cannot  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  sensi-
tization. The  amount  of  lecithin  required  for  complete  haemoly-
sis is  determined  in  two  parallel  series,  one  on  the  addition  of
small  amounts  of  cobra  venom,  the  other  with  large  amounts.  It  is
found  that  far  more  lecithin  is  required  for  complete  solution  when
there  is  a  large  excess  of  cobra  venom.     (See  Table  XI.)

*  See  pages  209  et  seq.  >  See  pages  226  et  seq.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.
TABLE  XI.


Lwiihi^Solu-

lee.  6%0xBlood+                         ]

0.4  ce,  6%  Cobr.

O.loc  p,l%D.br«

0,05
0.035
0.025
0,015

O.OI
0-0075
0,005
0.0035

coinplel«  solution
moderate

tittle
faint  trace
0
0
0
0

complete  solution

raoderalB
0

Now  if  the  cobra  ^■enom  sensitized  the  biood-cells  for  the  lecithin,
leas  lecithin  would  be  required  for  solution  the  more  cobra  venom
were  added.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  reverse  is  the  case.  When  we
used  a  large  excess  of  poison,  five  times  as  much  lecithin  was  re-
quired for  complete  solution  as  when  smaller  doaea  were  used.  This
ia  readily  explained  by  assuming  that  a  large  excess  of  amboceptor
causes  a  deflection  of  the  lecithin,  a  phenomenon  which  we  have
already  met  with  in  the  endocomplements.

The  phenomena  observed  by  us  also  serve  to  explain  most  easily
the  inhibiting  action  exert«i  by  certain  sera.  As  is  well  known,
lecithin  is  able  to  combine  with  albuminous  bodies,  sugars,  etc.  If
this  union  is  so  firm  that  it  is  not  disrupted  by  the  affinity  of  the
cobra  amboceptor,  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  lecithin  to  come  into
action.  This  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  ox  serum,  which  when
fresh  does  not  exert  a  trace  of  activation  on  goat  blood,  and  yet
the  OS  serum  contains  sufficient  lecithin,  as  we  know  by  examining
\\s  alcoholic  extract.

Ox  serum  is  even  able  to  prevent  hjemolysis  on  the  addition  of
free  lecithin,  the  reason  being  evidently  because  it  contains  an  excess
of  inhibiting  substances.  On  heating  the  serum  these  substances
lose  their  action  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  so  that  the  serum  is  able
when  mixed  with  cobra  venom  to  effect  htemolysis.  As  already
mentioned,  however,  the  hiemolytic  action  is  usually  considerably
stronger  when  the  sera  are  heated  to  100°  C.  instead  of  only  to  65°  C.
Perhaps  this  is  due  to  substances  possessing  different  degrees  of
thermolability.

In  other  cases  only  a  very  slight  difference  ia  to  be  observed


THE  MODE  OF  ACTION  OF  COBRA  VENOM.  311

between  the  activating  power  of  fresh  and  of  heated  serum.  In
this  case  evidently  the  fresh  serum  ahready  contains  free,  i.e.  active,
lecithin,  and  the  inhibiting  substance  is  affected  but  to  a  slight
degree  by  the  heating.  In  view  of  all  this  it  is  certainly  incorrect
to  speak,  as  Calmette^  does,  of  a  definite  thermolabile  antibody
which  is  destroyed  at  56®  C.

It  is  natural  to  attempt  a  quantitative  estimation  of  the  cobra
amboceptor  by  means  of  the  binding  of  lecithin;  also  to  think  of
the  possibility  of  isolating  the  cobra  amboceptors  as  lecithids.  Ex-
periments in  this  direction  are  now  under  way.

The  results  of  the  experiments  here  given  furnish  a  further  in-
sight into  the  nature  and  mode  of  action  of  the  amboceptors.  The
demonstration  of  endocomplementSj  as  well  as  the  significant  fact  that
a  definite  chemical  and  crystalline  substance,  lecithin,  can  in  a  certain
sense  play  the  rdle  of  complement,  would  appear  to  be  especially  im-
portant for  the  development  of  our  knowledge  concerning  poisons.

^  One  might  assume  that  the  hemolysis  by  cobra  venom  alone,  ascribed  in
§  II  to  the  action  of  the  endocomplements,  was  caused  by  the  lecithin  contained
in  the  red  blood-cells.  This  assumption,  however,  is  at  once  excluded  by  the
fact  that  the  endocomplement  solutions  are  inactivated  by  heating  to  62^  C,
showing  that  their  action  has  nothing  to  do  with  that  of  the  lecithin.


K\ail.  FURTHER   STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY
BACILLUS.!

By  Dr.  K.  Shioa.

When  I  discovered  the  dysentery  bacillus  in  1897  I  found  that
althougii  this  organism  apparently  remains  localized  in  the  intestine
and  does  not  pass  into  the  circulation,  it  nevertheless  gives  rise  to
the  development  of  specific  antibodies  in  the  serum.  This  fact,
made  use  of  after  the  manner  of  the  Gruber-Widal  reaction,  furnished
me  with  an  important  aid  in  the  diagnosis  of  the  dysentery  bacillus-

In  the  course  of  the  following  years  the  facts  which  I  obsen-ed
in  connection  with  epidemic  dysentery  have  been  confirmed  in  ^'a^iou3
parts  of  the  world,^  especially  since  Kruse  succeeded  so  well  in  his
studies  on  this  disease  in  Germany.  To-day  Uiere  is  no  longer  any
doubt  concerning  the  identity  of  the  bacillus  isolated  by  Kruse
with  mine,  even  though  there  is  atill  a  slight  divergence  concerning
certain  morphological  details.  All  of  the  important  character-
istics of  the  bacilli  discovered  by  me,  as  well  as  their  agglutinat
tion  by  serum  of  the  patients,  have  been  confirmed  by  Kruse.  Iha-
certain  slight  differences  in  growth  may  occur  is  not  at  all  uncommon
in  other  bacteria,  even  in  cholera.  The  question  as  to  the  presence
of  motility  is  especially  hard  to  answer.  At  first  I  stated  that  my
bacilli  were  motile;  Kruse  found  them  immotile.  It  is  well  known
that  it  is  not  always  e^sy  to  decide  whether  a  bacillus  is  motile  or
not,  and  Kruse  himself  says  concerning  motility  as  a  characteristic
of  the  roli  group  (Flugge,  Vol.  II,  page  361)  that  "one  must  be  very
careful  In  deciding  this  point,  for  the  rao\-ement8  often  last  but  a  short
time  and  are  not  present  under  all  conditions  of  life  (nutrient  medium,

'  Reprint  from  the  Zeitsch.  f.  Hyg.  und  IntectionB-Krankheiten,  Vo\.  41 .  1902.
'  Compare   also  the   siiidy  published   since  this,  entitled  "Unterauchungen
uberdie  Ruhr,"  Berlin.  1902.


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.      313

temperature,  etc.)."  In  this  connection  I  would  call  to  mind  the
bacillus  of  erysipelas  of  swine,  whose  inmiotility  is  still  questioned
by  many  observers.  I  have  always  described  the  motility  of  my
cultures  as  feeble,  though  I  found  it  strange  that  I  was  unable  at
first  to  demonstrate  flagella  by  staining  methods.  Later  on,  how-
ever, I  succeeded  in  finding  two  terminal  flagella  in  one  preparation,
and  thought  that  this  question  might  now  be  regarded  as  closed.
To  what  extent  this  was  an  error  I  should  not  yet  like  to  say,  and
for  the  present  I  should  also  not  like  to  regard  the  observations  of
Vedder  and  Duval,^  who  found  peritrichal  flagella,  as  a  confirma-
tion of  my  findings.

In  1898  I  immunized  horses  with  dysentery  bacilli  and  obtained
a  high-grade  serum  with  which  in  1898-1900  almost  three  hundred
people  have  been  treated.  It  therefore  seemed  advisable  to  study
this  dysentery  serum  from  the  standpoint  of  the  modem  theory
of  inmiunity.  At  the  same  time  I  was  anxious  by  means  of  serum
diagnosis  to  again  prove  the  identity  of  Kruse's  bacillus  with  mine.

The  cultures  employed  were  the  following:  One  of  my  original
cultures,  one  from  Prof.  Flexner,  one  culture  of  the  Kruse  bacillus
from  the  Frankfurt  Institute,  and  a  Kruse  bacillus  from  Dr.  Conradi,
Berlin.  I  may  at  once  say  that  in  all  the  various  bactericidal  experi-
ments these  cultures  behaved  exactly  alike,  and  I  shaU  therefore  in
the  following  speak  of  the  dysentery  bacillus  as  such.  When  I  come
to  speak  of  the  agglutination  I  shall  make  mention  of  certain  variations
of  Flexner's  bacillus  from  mine  and  Kruse's.

To  begin,  the  bactericidal  action  of  normal  active  sera  was  tested
on  the  dysentery  bacillus.  The  method  employed  corresponded
exactly  to  that  described  by  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,  to  whose
paper  I  shall  therefore  refer .^

The  amoimt  of  culture  planted  was  always  1/500  mg.  of  a  one-
day  agar  culture,  and  in  the  dilution  employed  this  was  contained
in  1.0  cc.  salt  solution.  The  total  amount  in  each  tube  was  always
2.0  cc,  to  which  quantity  three  drops  of  bouillon  were  then  added.
The  serum  was  allowed  to  act  for  three  hours  at  37®  C,  after  which
time  six  drops  were  made  into  agar  plates.  In  judging  the  plates  we
did  not  make  use  of  accurate  counting,  but  always  employed  the


*  The  Etiology  of  Acute  Dysentery  in  the  United  States.    Journal  of  Experi-
mental Medicine,  1902,  Vol.  VI.,  No.  2.
'  See  pages  120  et  seq.


314  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

method  of  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,  namely,  approximate  estimation,
because  only  large  results  were  regarded  as  conclusive.  Frequently
after  the  six  drops  had  been  taken  from  tlie  tube,  the  residue  was
again  placed  into  the  incubator.  In  this  way  one  often  obtains
valuable  confirmation  of  the  agar  plates  by  noting  whether  or  not
there  is  a  growth  in  the  tubes.

The  strongest  bactericidal  power  is  possessed  by  goat  and  sheep
.sera,  but  this  is  but  slight  in  comparison  to  their  action  on  many
other  species  of  bacteria,  0.3  cc.  of  these  sera  almost  completely
killed  the  bacteria  under  the  conditions  mentioned.  Other  sera  are
weaker,  such  as  ox,  horse,  human,  dog,  guinea-pig,  and  rabbit  serum,
A  reactivation  of  normal  inactive  sera  succeeded  only  in  the  follow-
ing combination;  normal  inactive  goat  serum  could  be  completely
reacti\'ated  by  normal  active  horse  serum  in  an  amount  which  by
itself  did  not  kill  the  bacteria.  These  experiments  showed  that  only
a  few  sera  could  be  used  for  reactivation  (e.g.  horse  serum)  apparently
because  the  other  sera  did  not  contain  any  considerable  excess  of
free  dominant  complement,  or  contained  none  at  all.  Tliis  was
entirely  confirmed  by  the  complementing  experiments  which  were
made  with  a  high-grade  immune  serum.  The  immune  serum  used
was  obtained  from  a  horse  which  I  myself  had  begun  to  immunize
and  which  had  been  further  immunized  in  the  meantime.  The  serum
was  sent  to  me  from  Japan  with  the  addition  of  0,5%  carbolic.  In
the  small  amounts  in  which  the  serum  was  used,  this  addition  in  no
way  disturbed  the  bactericidal  experiments,  as  was  shown  by  control
.tests.  The  first  experiments  undertaken  with  the  completion  by
means  of  active  horse  serum  resulted  negatively  in  so  far  as  any
destructive  action  was  concerned.  ITiis  was  soon  found  to  be  due
to  the  phenomenon  of  complement  deflection  described  by  Neisser
and  Wechsberg;  for  when  smaller  and  still  smaller  doses  of  the  immune
serum  were  employed  the  destructive  action  became  more  and  more
marked.  Table  I,  in  which  column  A  gives  the  result  of  the  plate
tests,  and  B  that  of  the  test-tube  experiment  made  at  the  same  time,
shows  the  destructive  action  as  well  as  the  phenomenon  of  comple-
ment deflection.

From  this  it  is  seen  that  even  0.0025  and  0.0005  cc.  still  have  a
-distinct  bactericidal  action.  This  result  was  obtained  a  great  many
times,  with  various  strains,  in  almost  the  same  manner.

Besides  the  horse  serum  only  one  other  serum  could  be  used


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.       315


for  complementing  the  immune  serum,  namely,  active  human  serum.
Table  II  shows  an  experiment  with  this  serum.


TABLE  I,


Inactive

Active

A.

B.

Dysentery

Horse  Serum.

Dysentery  Culture.

No.  of  Colonies

Growth  in  the

Serum,     co.

cc.

on  the  Plate.

Tubes.

0.01

0.3

1.0  CC.  (1/500  mg.)

00

+

0.0075

0.3

00

+

0.005

0.3

00

+

0.0025

0.3

almost  0

0.001

0.3

0

—

0.00075

0.3

almost  0

.i~

0.0005

0.3

about     50

—

0.00025

0.3

"       100

+

0.0001

0.3

"     1000

+

0.000075

0.3

several  thous.

+

0.00005

0.3

00

-f-

f


—  0.3


Control     Qi


0.3


1.0  cc.  (1/500  mg.)  several  thous.

**  00

—  0

—  0

TABLE  II.


4-


Inactive  Dysen-
tery Serum,
cc


0.01

0.003

0.001

0.0003

0.0001

0.00003

0.00001


Active  Human  Serum,
cc.


0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3


Dysentery  Culture.


1.0  CC.  (1/500  mg.)


No.  of  Colonies  on  the
Plate.


00
X
X

few
0
about     100
1000


n


Control


0.1


0.3


0.3


1.0  CC.  (1/500  mg.)


tt


00
00

0
0


Up  to  the  present  time  I  have  tested  the  serum  of  six  individuals
and  found  it  active  in  five  cases  (four  times  in  placental  serum  and
once  adult  serum) ;  only  once,  in  the  case  of  a  nephritis  patient,  was
the  fresh  serum  ineffective  for  complementing.  It  may  be  mentioned
that  one  of  these  sera  was  my  own,  and  this  was  considerably  stronger
than  the  rest.  Whether  this  property  has  any  connection  with  an
active  immunization  which  I  underwent  some  four  years  previously
1  shall  leave  undecided.


316


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


I  believe  this  demonstrates  that  the  horse  immune  serum  em-
ployed by  me  for  therapeutic  purposes,  meets  the  requirements  which
are  nowadays  to  be  demanded  of  a  bactericidal  immune  scrum,
namely,  (1)  that  it  be  high  grade,  and  (2)  that  it  find  a  fitting  com-
plement in  normal  human  serum.  This  is  the  first  serum  employed
in  human  therapy  which  fulfils  the  conditions  laid  down  by  Ehrlich
in  hisCroonian  Lecture,  1900.  The  excellent  curative  results  obtained
by  me  in  Japan  ^  furnish  abundant  confirmation  of  the  correctness  of
Ehrlich 's  views.

As  already  mentioned,  the  phenomenon  of  deflection  of  comple-
ment could  be  demonstrated  very  prettily  with  the  complement  of
this  active  horse  serum.  Since  this  deflection  is  primarily  dependent
on  the  amount  of  immune  botly  present,  it  may  perhaps  be  possible  to
employ  the  degree  of  deflection  as  a  measure  of  the  titer  of  a  serum.
Some  experiments  in  this  direction  which  I  have  undertaken  at  the
suggestion  of  Prof.  M.  Neisser  have  not  yet  been  concluded.

I  have  already  stated  that  the  other  active  sera  {e.g.  goat  serum,
etc.)  could  not  be  used  for  complementing  the  dysenterj'  immune
serum,  altJiough  in  themselves  they  were  bactericidal.  But  for  this
immune  scrum  the  phenomenon  of  complement  deflection  can  be
demonstrated  very  nicely  with  these  sera  also.     (See  Table  III.)


TABLE  III.

Dys^tary  Immune

Active  GoU  Serum.

Dv«,..C^,_.

pu™!"

on.

0-1

0.3

1/500  mg.

:^

0-03

0-3

O-Ol

0-3

0-003

0  3

0

0-001

0-3

0

1—0-3  —  0

Perhaps  also  this  method  of  testing  ia  available  for  determining
the  grade  of  bactericidal  sera.

Furthermore  by  means  of  an  absorption  teat  analogous  to  tlie
experiments  of  A.  Lipslein*  I  have  convinced  myself  that  the  deflec-


'  DeutBcho  mcU.  Woi;lienapiirifl,  1901.  Nob,  43—15-
•See  pagea  132  et  acq.


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.      317

tion  of  complement  described  is  actually  due  to  an  excess  of  im-
mune body  and  not,  for  example,  to  the  presence  of  an  anticomple-
ment.

Prof.  Neisser  and  I  thought  that  this  phenomenon  of  comple-
ment deflection  cduld  be  utilized  in  another  direction.  Ehrlich  and
his  pupils,  it  will  be  remembered,  have  demonstrated  the  existence
of  a  plurality  of  complements.  In  view  of  this  it  was  conceivable
that,  following  a  large  addition  of  inactive  immune  serum  to  a  normal
serum  bactericidal  per  se,  only  that  complement  would  be  deflected
which  is  able  to  complement  the  inunime  serum,  while  the  remaining
complements  were  left  unafifected.  From  this  it  would  follow  that
the  normal  active  serum  in  question  would  in  the  main  have  lost
only  this  one  bactericidal  action,  while  it  still  retained  almost  all  the
others.  One  would  thus  have  a  serum  which  had  lost  a  bactericidal
action  chiefly  for  that  bacterium  whose  immune  body  has  been  added
in  excess;  that  is  to  say,  a  truly  specific  nutrient  medium.  Proceeding
from  these  considerations  we  first  infected  a  normal  stool  with  a
small  quantity  of  dysentery  bacilli.  To  small  amounts  of  this  infected
stool  2.0  cc.  normal  active  goat  serum  and  0.2  cc.  inactive  immune
serum  were  added  and  the  mixture  kept  in  the  thermostat.  At  the
end  of  three  hours  six  drops  of  this  mixture  were  added  to  a  second
tube  containing  2.0  cc.  normal  active  goat  serum  and  0.2  inactive
inmiune  serum.  Agar  plates  were  made  (1)  from  the  original  infected
stool;  (2)  from  the  first  tube;  (3)  and  from  the  second  tube  after  it
also  had  been  kept  at  37®  C.  for  three  hours.  A  great  many  tests
showed  that  a  specific  enriching  in  dysentery  hacUli  takes  place,  so
that  when  the  first  plate  shows  only  a  few  scattered  colonies  of  dysen-
tery bacilli,  Plates  II  and  III  show  numerous  colonies.  In  one  case
we  even  succeeded  in  finding  dysentery  bacilli  in  Plates  II  and  III,
although  none  had  been  found  on  Plate  I.  It  may  be  mentioned
that  we  used  the  agar  medium  recommended  by  v.  Drigalski  and
Conradi  ^  for  the  diagnosis  of  typhoid  bacilli,  and  found  it  of  great
advantage.  The  method  just  described  for  enriching  cultures  may
perhaps  be  extended  and  perfected.

»  Zeitschrift  fur  Hygiene,  Vol.  XXXIX.


31S  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.  ^H

Proaggiulinoid.

As  a  result  of  the  brilliant  investigations  of  Bail '  on  the  oae  hand
and  of  Eisenberg  and  \'olk^  on  the  other,  two  new  phenomena  have
been  described  as  occurring  in  the  agglutination  reaction,  phenomena
which  are  of  great  imiiortance  in  the  study  of  agglutinins.  Bail
first  showed  that  typhoid  bacilli  which  had  been  added  to  an  inac-
tivated (by  heat)  agglutinin  and  then  centrifuged  could  not  longer
be  agglutinated  by  the  addition  of  active  agglutinin.  The  study  of
Eisenberg  and  Volk  described  an  irregularity  occurring  in  a  series  of
agglutinations  which  manifested  itself  in  this,  that  the  tubes  con-
taining the  largest  amount  of  agglutinin  showed  only  feeble  agglutina-
tion or  none  at  all,  while  the  tubes  containing  less  agglutinin  showed
strong  agglutination.^  Bail  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  phenomenon
observed  by  him  was  due  to  the  interaction  of  two  components  (cor-
responding to  aralwceptor  and  complement),  and  he  supi>orted  this
with  several  reactivating  experiments.  Eisenberg  and  Volk  explained
the  irregular  course  of  the  agglutination  by  the  presence  of  agglutlnoids,
a  view  in  which  I  fully  agree.

Following  Ehrlich's  nomenclature  I  should,  however,  like  to  term
these  agglutlnoids*  proaggluiinouls,  for  we  are  dealing  with  the  action
of  substances  which  arise  from  the  agglutinins  as  a  result  of  external
influences.  Furthermore  the  proagglutinoids  possess  a  higher  affinity
for  the  bacilli  than  the  unchanged  agglutinin,  and  they  have  lost  that
group  which  is  the  real  carrier  of  the  agglutinating  action,  while  the
other  group,  which  effects  the  combination  with  the  bacteria,  is  left
intact.

'Archiv.  f.  Hygiene,  1902,  Vol.  XLIII.

'  ZeitBchr.  f.  Hygiene,  1902.  Vol.  XL.

'  This  paradoxical  phenomenon  is  mentioned  by  Aaakawa  in  a  report  from
the  Inatitute  for  Infectious  Diseases,  Tokio  (Sept.,  1901).  and  is  lertned  by
him  a  "rBverseiy  behaving  phenomenon"  ("ein  umgekehrt  sich  verhaltendes
Phanoraen").

'  Since  the  conclusion  of  these  experiments  two  new  studies  have  appeared
on  precipitoida.  R.  Kraus  (Centralhlatt  ffir  Bakt«riologie  1902.  Vol.  XXXII.
No.  1),  V.  Pirquet  and  Eisenberg  (Extnul  d.  Bull.  d.  I'Acad^ie  des  sciences
de  Cracovie,  also  Centralblatt  f.  Bakteriologie.  1902.  Vol.  XXXI,  No.  15);
also  Wiener  (Klin.  Wochenschr.  1901,  trber  Precipitoide).  The  BUlhors
arrive  at  the  same  resultB  as  have  been  described  for  agglutination .  Their
experiments  for  demonetrating  these  precipitoida  are  similar  to  mine  for  the
proaggh  it  i  no  ids .


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.      31»

From  the  large  number  of  experiments  which  I  have  made  with
dysentery  and  typhoid  bacilli  I  have  selected  only  those  which  may
serve  to  demonstrate  my  point.  Using  the  dysentery  immune  serum
described  above  I  found  it  easy  to  demonstrate  the  Eisenberg-Volk
phenomenon  both  with  my  original  dysentery  culture  and  with  a
Kruse  culture.  The  method  was  as  follows:  An  agar  culture  was
suspended  in  10  cc.  of  an  0.85%  salt  solution.  At  first  this  was  used
in  the  living  state;  later  on,  after  it  had  been  found  that  there  is  no
difference  in  the  action  of  living  and  dead  culture,  the  culture  was
used  with  the  addition  of  0.02  cc  formalin  (40%).  One  cubic  centi-
meter of  this  suspension  was  put  into  each  tube,  and  decreasing
amounts  of  the  immune  serum  (^/lo,  2/20,  V4o>  etc.,  usually  up  to
V6120)  added,  the  total  volume  in  each  of  the  tubes  being  2  cc.  The
tubes  were  then  kept  in  the  thermostat  at  37°  C.  and  inspected  at
the  end  of  2,  5,  and  24  hours,  both  with  the  naked  eye  and  with  a
magnify ing-glass.     The  results  were  noted  as  follows:

—  no  agglutination;

±  trace  agglutination;

+  microscopically  distinct  but  feeble;

+  +  very  distinct;

+  +  +  entirely  clear  fluid  with  an  agglutinated  sediment.


TABLE  IV.


1

Dilution  of  the

Dysentery

Serum.

Two  Hours.

Five  Hours.

Twenty-four
Hours.

1:10

—

—

d;

1:20

—

±

+  +

1:40

±

+

+  +  -f-

1:80

+

+  +

+  -f--f-

1:160

±

+

+  -f-  +

1:320

—

+

+  +  +

1:640

—

±

+  +

1:1280

—

—

±

1:2560

—

—

1 : 5120

~"

^>M

"-"

The  objection  was  made  that  the  agglutination  was  hindered
in  the  low  dilutions  by  the  large  amount  of  serum  present  in  the
tubes.  This  was  met  by  a  corresponding  addition  of  normal  serum,
and  of  other  fluids  (gelatine,  mucilage,  etc.)  to  the  other  dilutions.
In  the  old  dysentery  serum  the  question  as  to  the  development  of  the


320  COLLECTED   STUDIES   IN   IMMUNI-n'.

proagglutinoid  from  the  agglutinin  could  only  be  answered  by  showing
that  the  amount  of  proagglutinoid  already  present  in  this  serum  could
be  increased  by  heating,  by  continued  exposure  to  light,  or  by  the
addition  of  chloroform.     See  Table  V.

TABLE  V.


nunHB

DilutloD  of  the

Light  for  17  Daya.

2Hr,.

ah™.

24  H™

2H™.

SHm.

2*  HfN.

2Hra.

SHn.

2*H™.

1:10

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

1:20

1:40

+

1:80

±

+  +

+  +

±

+

+

+  +  +

±

+  +  +

+

1:320

+

+

J.  +.  4

+

±

1:640

±

±

+  +

±

±

1:1280

1:2560

1:5120

-

-

~

-

~

-

-

-

-

The  development  of  the  proagglutinoid  from  the  agglutinin  was
still  more  distinct  in  a  fresh  typhoid  immune  serum  (goat).  This
serum,  which  had  shown  no  zone  of  proagglutinoid,  showed  a  dis-
tinct zone  after  being  heated  twice  to  60°  for  four  hours.

Bj'  tliis  experiment  the  higher  affinity  of  the  proagglutinoid  is
already  demonstrated.  It  can,  however,  l)e  confirmed  by  other
experiments.  By  shakmg  the  dysenterj'  serum  with  chloroform,  it
was  possible  to  effect  almost  a  complete  transformation  of  agglutinin
into  proagglutinoid  so  that  the  serum  hardly  agglutinated  in  any
dilution.  When  to  a  dose  of  the  unchanged  dysonterj'  sermn,  suffi-
cient by  itself  to  effect  agglutination,  I  added  decreasing  amounts
of  the  serum  treatod  with  (chloroform,  no  agglutination  was  obtained
in  the  dilutions  up  to  1:160.  {Control  tests  with  chloroformed
normal  serum  were  invariably  made.)  The  same  result  could  be
obtained  with  dysentery  serum  that  had  been  heated.  Dysentery
serum  heated  for  3  hours  to  65°  C.  was  able  b  dilutions  of  I ;  10  to
1:320  to  prevent  agglutination  by  such  a  dose  of  the  unchanged
dysentery  serum  which  by  itself  would  have  sufficed  fo  agglutinate
l":160.    '(See  Tabic  \1.)

Finally  it  remained  to  prove  that  the  proagglutinoid  had  really
been  anchored  by  the  bacteria,  i.e.,  that  the  agglutincbic  group  of
the  bacilli  had  been  blocked.     This  was  readily  accomplished  by


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.       321


centrifuging,  washing  the  bacilli  from  those  tubes  in  which  no  agglu-
tination had  occurred,  and  adding  to  them  a  dose  of  agglutinin  which
by  itself  would  suffice  for  agglutination.  The  result  was  that  these
bacilli  always  showed  themselves  to  be  no  longer  agglutinable.
see  (Table  VII.)

TABLE  VI.


Dysentery

Dsrsentery  Serum

Suspension

Serum  Diluted,

Heated  to  65<*  C.  for

of  Dysentery

2  Hours.

5  Hours.

1:8.

Three  Hours.

Cultures.

0.1  cc.

1:10      (1.0  CC.)

1.00  CC.

__

^

20

—

—

40

—

—

:80

—

—

:160

»

—

;320

—

—

:640

—

±

:1280

—

-f-

:2560       "

—

-f-f-

:5120       "

—

+  +

Control  0.1  cc.

Salt  solution  1.0  CC.

1.0  CC.

+

-f-  +

One  other  point  may  T^e  mentioned.  In  the  experiments  thuijk^
far  described  the  quantity  of  bacteria  was  the  same  in  all  the  tubes.
(See  above.)  However,  if  the  amount  was  greatly  increased,  other
phenomena  were  observed.  Table  VIII  shows  that  the  zone  of
proagglutinoid  disappears  entirely  if  a  sufficiently  large  quantity  of
bacteria  are  employed.

The  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  is  not  difficult  if  we  bear
in  mind  the  experiments  of  M.  Neisser  and  Lubowsky  i  on  the  one
hand  and  those  of  Eisenberg  and  Volk  on  the  other.  The  experiments
of  the  latter  show  without  doubt  that  typhoid  bacilli,  for  example,
are  able  to  anchor  a  far  greater  quantity  of  agglutinin  than  is  required
for  their  agglutination.  One  may  therefore  assume  that  the  dysentery
bacillus  also  possesses  a  large  nimiber  of  receptors  which  are  able  to
unite  with,  i.e.  anchor,  the  proagglutinoid.  The  occupation  of  only  a
few  of  these  many  receptors  by  the  active  agglutinin  is  apparently
sufficient,  however,  to  agglutinate  the  dysentery  bacillus.  Hence  if
we  add  comparatively  few  dysentery  bacilli  to  a  serum  which  contains
much  proagglutinoid  and  little  agglutinin,  a  large  number  of  receptors
of  the  bacilli  will  be  occupied  by  proagglutinoid.    If,  on  the  contrary.


'  See  pages  146  et  seq.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  LN  IMMUNITY.
TABLE  VII.


Dilution

2*Bn.

To  tbe  llenidue

aHn.

5Hts.

Hem&rkit.

1;10

1:20

1:40

1:80

1:180

1:320

1:840

1:1280

1:2560

+
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +

+  +
+

1
s
1

2.0_0C.

Control  2.0  cc.

-f-dyBentery

blciUi

+  +
+

+  +  +
+  +  +

Not  tested  the  second
time  because  of  the
primary   agglutina-
tion

SHouit.

24Houn.

The  Dyeeniery  Senira

aHoutm.

SHourm.

_

_

1

a.oco.

_

_

1:20

1:40

=5

1:80

1:160

+  +

±

+  +  +

1:640

+

+  +  +

+

+  +  +

Control  2.0  cc.
+ dysentery
bacilli

-(-  +

+

+  +  +
+  +  +

aHouni.

5  Hour..

MHoun.

2Hour«.

6Houn.

34Boura.

1:10

_

_

±

_

+  +

+  +  +

1:20

±

+

+

+  +

1:40

±

+

+  +

+

+  +

+  +  +

1:80

±

+

+  +  +

+

+  +

+  +  +

1:160

+

+  +  +

+

+  +

1:320

±

+

+  +  +

+

+  +

1:640

±

+

±

+

1:1260

1:2560

1:5120

~

"

"

~

~

~

FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.      323

we  add  a  large  quantity  of  bacteria  to  the  same  amount  of  serum,  the
proagglutinoid  will  not  suflBce  to  occupy  all  the  receptors  and  some
agglutinin  will  be  enabled  to  combine  with  the  bacteria.  This,  how-
ever, results  in  agglutination.

As  ah-eady  mentioned,  my  original  culture  proved  entirely  identical
with  the  Knise  culture  so  far  as  the  zone  of  proagglutinoid  was  con-
cerned. The  Flexner  culture,  on  the  contrary,  behaved  differently,
for,  although  it  was  agglutinated  in  the  same  degree  by  the  immune
serum,  the  zone  of  proagglutinoid  was  entirely  absent.  This  is  well
shown  in  the  following  table.

TABLE  IX.


Dilution  of  the

Dyaentery
Serum.

2  Hours.

5  Hours.

24  Hours.

1:10

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

1:20

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

1:40

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

1:80

+

+  +  +

+  +  +

1:160

±

+  +

+  +

1:320

—

+

+

1:640

—

+

+

1:1280

—

±

+

1:2560

—

—

^

1:5120

^

^"

^

Absorption  tests,  which  were  then  made,  showed  that  the  Eruse
bacillus  when  added  to  my  immune  serum  completely  abstracted  the
agglutinin  and  proagglutinoid  for  this  strain,  while  the  agglutinin  for
the  Flexner  strain  was  abstracted  to  only  a  slight  degree.  Conversely,
when  the  Flexner  bacillus  was  added  to  my  immune  serum  and  the
mixture  centrifuged  it  was  found  that  the  agglutinin  for  Flexner's
bacilli  had  been  completely  absorbed,  but  only  a  small  part  of  the
agglutinin  and  proagglutinoid  for  the  Kruse  strain.

We  shall  therefore  have  to  assume  that  my  original  strain  corre-
sponds completely  to  the  Kruse  strain  so  far  as  the  receptor  apparatus
is  concerned,  while  both  these  strains  possess  certain  receptors  identical
with  those  of  Flexner's  strain,  and  others  which  differ  from  them.
We  may  furthermore  assume  that  the  serum  with  which  these  experi-
ments were  made  was  obtained  by  immimizing  not  only  with  my
original  strain,  but  that  in  the  course  of  years  various  other  strains
had  been  used  for  immunization.  In  this  way  agglutinins  of  various
kinds  were  developed,  and  these,  of  course,  also  fitted  strains  with


324  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

a  somewhat  different  receptor  apparatus.  It  may  be  remarked  that
the  receptor  apparatus  of  the  bacteria  need  not  i>crmanently  remam
the  same  qualitatively  and  quantitatively^  as  is  well  shown  by  Bome
experiments  of  mine  in  whieh  I  succeeded  in  producing  a  change  in
these  properties  by  means  of  cultivation.  Thus  after  having  grown
Kruse's  bacilli  on  sterile  milk'  ten  consecutive  times  (always  trans-
planting on  the  second  day),  and  finally  transplanted  it  to  agar,
it  was  found  that  this  milk  strain  no  longer  showed  the  zone  of  the
proagglutinoid  reaction.

On  making  mutual  absorption  tests  it  was  seen  that  the  organism
was  no  longer  like  the  original  Kruae  strain  but  entirely  hke  that  of
Flexner.  That  is  to  say,  this  cultivation  on  milk  had  effected  a
gradual  change  in  the  Knise  strain  which  manifested  itself  in  the
changed  proagglutinoid  zone  of  the  absorption  power.     (See  Table  X.)

It  remains  for  further  experiments  in  this  direction  to  see  whether
I  shall  succeed  in  cultivating  the  Milk-Kruse  strain  back  to  the  original
Kruse  strain,  or  in  changing  the  Flexner  strain  into  the  Kruse  strain.
Thus  far  the  Flexner  strain,  as  well  aa  the  Flexner  strain  altered
by  cultivation,  have  preser\'ed  their  properties  for  months.

1.  In  the  bactericidal  tests,  as  well  as  in  agglutination  reactions,
my  original  dysentery  strain  from  Japan  proved  entirely  identical  with
the  t^vo  Kruse  cultures.  Since  these  are  the  most  refined  methods
at  present  at  our  disposal,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity
of  my  original  cultures  of  1897  with  Kruse's  bacillus  of  1900.

2.  The  dysentery  immime  serum  derived  from  a  horse  and  employed
by  me  for  therapeutic  puqioses  in  1S98-1900  is  of  \-etT  high  grade  and


'This  rnetliod  nf  cultivation  waa  really  made  hecauso  of  the  b
Celli  ("Zur  .\etiiilogie  der  Dysenterie,  v.  Leydena  FcBtschrift")  that  my  barillua
would  also  coagulate  milk  like  the  bacillus  found  by  bim,  if  it  was  transpluited
8-10  times  on  aikaJiue  milk.  The  result  of  my  experiment  was  absolutely
different,  tor  neither  my  original  strain,  nor  the  strain  of  Kruse,  nor  that  of
D'lexner  coagululed  milk  when  the  cultures  were  grown  on  milk  ten  roosecutive
times,  provided  care  was  lakcn  to  protect  the  milk  from  contamination.  1  liad
already  tested  Cclli's  bacillus  in  Japan  and  found  that  it  produced  a  considerabla
amoimt  of  gas  and  coagulated  milk,  whereas  my  bacillus  docs  not  do  this.  In
view  ct  this  and  of  the  further  fact  that  Celli's  bacillus  does  not  aggliiiinal«
with  the  immune  serum  produced  by  means  of  my  bacillus,  I  conclude  tliat  these
two  organisms  are  entirely  distinct  from  one  another — a  view  whicli  I  have
already  expressed  in  a  previo


FURTHER  STUDIES  ON  THE  DYSENTERY  BACILLUS.        326

is  the  first  of  such  sera  whose  complementibility  by  human  serum  has
been  proved.

TABLE  X.


Dilution  of
the  Agglu-
tinating

Normal  Culture.

First  Generation  of
Milk  Culture.

Fourth  Generation  of
Milk  C^ture.

Serum.

2Hr8.

5Hra.

24Hr8.

2Hr8.

5Hr8.

24Hra.

2Hr8.

SHrs.

24Hr8.

1:10

1:20

1:40

1:80

1:160

1:320

1:640

1:1280

1:2560

1:5120

±
±

±

+

+  +

+
+
±

±

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +

±

±
+
+
±
±

±

+

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +

+

±

+  +  +  +  +
1    1  ff +  +  +  +  +  +  +
+  +  +  +  +

±
±
+
+
+
db
±

+

+

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +

+

±

+
+  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +

Dilution  of

the  A^lu-

tinatmg

Sixth  Generation  of
Milk  Culture.

Eighth  Generation  of
Milk  Culture.

Tenth  Generation  of
Milk  Culture.

Serum.

2Hr8.

5Hr8.

24Hr8.

2HrB.

5Hr8.

24Hr8.

2Hr8.

SHrs.

24Hr8.

1:10

1:20

1:40

1:80

1:160

1:320

1:640

1:1280

1:2560

1:5120

+

+
+  +
+  +

+

+

±

+  +

+  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +  +

+  +

+

db

+  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +

+  +

+  +

+  +

+  +

+

+
±

+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +

+

±

++++++
1    1    1  +  +  +  +  +  +  +

++++++

+  +
+  +
+  +
+  +

+
db

+  +  +  +  +
1    1    1  H-  +  +  +  +  +  +

+  +  +  +  +

+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +  +
+  +
+

3.  The  deflection  of  complement  of  Neisser-Wechsberg  could  very
readily  be  demonstrated  with  this  serum  and  pointed  the  way  for  a
new  method  of  specifically  enriching  bacterial  cultures  in  mixtures.

4.  The  change  of  the  agglutinin  into  a  proagglutinoid  succeeded
both  in  dysentery  serum  and  typhoid  serum.

5.  Various  strains  may  possess  a  somewhat  different  receptor
apparatus.  By  means  of  continued  culture  on  milk  a  certain  change
in  the  behavior  of  the  receptor  apparatus  of  dysentery  bacilli  could
be  effected.

In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  Prof.  Ehrlich  and
Prof.  M.  Neisser  for  aiding  me  in  this  study.


XXIX.  METHODS  OF  STUDYING   HEMOLYSINS.


By  Dr.  J.  Moi


I,  Member  of  Ibe  Institute.


The  object  of  the  following  article  is  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  the
principles  governing  the  technique  of  htemolytic  experiments.  It  may
be  taken  for  granted  that  the  methods  employed  in  the  experiments
already  described  will  be  applicable  to  many  problems  of  hjemolysis
Btill  to  be  studied  and  to  many  questions  concerning  bacteriolyeins
and  cytotoxins.  In  view  of  this  a  systematic  treatise  on  methods
will  prove  of  considerable  value,  especially  to  one  who  uses  these
methods  only  occasionally.  In  those  cases  where  a  particular
technique  has  been  sufficiently  described  in  the  prevouia  papers.
I  have  contented  myself  with  merely  giving  the  reference  to  this  paper,

Aside,  however,  from  this  practical  object,  a  general  survey  of  the
subject  is  to  be  given  which  will  show  how  a  sj'stem  of  technique,
intelligently  built  up  on  a  comprehensive  theory,  Iiag  made  it  possible
to  push  our  analylieal  inquiries  into  a  department  of  science  which
formerly  constituted  a  sealed  book  to  the  ordinary  methods  of  chem-
istry. Disregard  of  these  newer  methods  has  invariably  led  to  obscu-
rity and  error,  as  we  iiave  been  able  to  show  on  several  occasions*;
and  in  the  future,  even  if  refined  chanical  methods  can  successfully  be
introduced  into  this  domain,  the  general  method  of  analysis  here
outlined  will  always  form  the  basis  of  this  study.  According  to  our
experience  the  study  of  hsemolysins  will  be  much  simplified  by  atten-
tion to  a  number  of  technical  details  which  are  described  in  this
article.

I.  Collecting  and  Pre§erTlng  the  Blood  and  Blood  Serum.

We  shall  begin  with  some  remarks  on  the  collection  and  preserva-
tion of  the  blood  and  serum  required  for  these  experiments.

Aa  a  general  rule  for  hjpmolytic  experiments  it  is  not  necessary


tuple,  paffas  181  et  scq.;  2-tl  e


it  seij.,  etc.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HEMOLYSINS.  327

to  observe  aseptic  precautions;  usually  all  that  is  required  is  to
collect  the  blood  in  dry  sterile  vessels,  avoiding  contamination  with
dirt,  etc.    Hence  the  troublesome  method  of  collecting  blood  from
the  carotid  of  the  animals  will  only  then  be  undertaken  if  for  some
reason  asepsis  is  necessary  or  a  large  yield  of  blood  is  required.
In  the  latter  case  the  yield  of  blood  can  be  considerably  increased
toward  the  end  of  exsanguination  by  rythmic  compression  of  the
cardiac  region.    With  goats,  sheep,  etc.,  the  blood  can  easily  be
obtained  without  any  previous  dissection  by  means  of  a  suitable
canula  thrust  through  the  skin  directly  into  the  jugular  vein  which
has  been  distended  by  compression  on  the  cardiac  side.    This  is  the
method  commonly  employed  in  obtaining  the  therapeutic  sera  from
horses.     In  this  way  small  amounts  of  blood  can  be  drawn  from  the
animals  a  great  many  times.    Smaller  animals,  such  as  dogs,  rabbits,
guinea-pigs,  and  rats,  are  most  readily  bled  by  ansesthetizing  them,  dis-
secting off  the  skin  of  the  thigh  and  then  with  one  stroke  cutting  both
the  femoral  artery  and  vein.     From  rabbits  small  amounts  of  blood
are  easily  obtained  by  incising  the  ear  with  a  scissors  or  by  means
of  a  hypodermic  needle  introduced  into  the  marginal  ear  vein.     Small
amounts  of  blood  can  be  obtained  from  birds  from  the  large  wing
vein;  in  the  case  of  geese  and  ducks  the  web  of  the  foot  can  be  incised.
For  purposes  of  obtaining  serum  the  blood  is  collected  in  cyhndrical
vessels  and  allowed  to  coagulate  spontaneously.    It  is  kept  in  the
refrigerator  until   the   serum   has   separated.    Several   hours   after
collecting  the  blood,  it  is  well  to  loosen  the  clot  from  the  sides  of  the
tube  by  means  of  a  glass  rod  or  spatula,  for  if  this  is  not  done  the
serum  may  not  separate.    Small  amoimts  of  blood  are  best  allowed
to  clot  in  cylindrical  glasses  or  tubes  placed  slantingly.    After  clotting
has  occurred  the  vessel  is  placed  upright.    The  serum  which  separates
will  then  flow  to  the  bottom  and  can  be  poured  off  the  next  day.
If  the  serum  is  clouded  with  blood-cells,  these  are  to  be  removed  as
soon  as  possible.^

When  the  serum  is  poured  off  the  first  time  the  vessel  containing


*  An  excellent  centrifuge  with  a  capacity  up  to  200  cc.,  but  which  can  also
be  had  for  larger  quantities,  is  that  made  by  Runne,  the  mechanic  in  Heidelberg
University.  This  machine  is  made  either  for  water  or  electric  power,  and  runs
exceedingly  smoothly.  For  centrifuging  smaller  quantities  of  fluid,  and  espe-
cially for  sedimenting  blood-ceUs  from  diliUe  blood  suspensions,  the  hand  cen-
trifuge designed  by  Steenbeck-Litten,  and  made  by  F.  and  M.  Lautenschlager
in  Berlin,  is  excellent.


32S


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


the  clot  can  be  kept  on  ice  for  24  hours  longer.  In  that  way  a  further
yield  la  obtained.

In  order  to  obtain  serum  immediately  the  blood  is  defibrinated
by  whipping  it  with  a  stick  of  wood  or  by  shaking  it  in  a  bottle
containing  some  glass  beads,  or  still  better  a  little  mara  of  dry-
sterilized  iron  turnings.  After  the  blood  is  defibrinated  it  is  centri-
fuged  and  the  serum  carefully  separated  by  means  of  a  pipette.  It
is  well  to  fasten  a  long  rubber  tube  to  the  upper  end  of  the  pipette
and  have  an  assistant  suck  while  one  watches  the  point  of  the  pipette.

So  far  as  concerns  preservation  of  the  serum  it  may  be  said  that  our
present  experiences  are  not  yet  sufficient  to  permit  us  to  formulate
safe  rules  having  general  applicability.  It  is  not  only  necessary  to
prevent  putrefaction,  but  also  to  presen-e  intact  a  large  number  of
most  unstable  substances,  the  conditions  necessarj'  for  whose  existence
are,  in  part,  evidently  very  narrowly  limited.  Hence  for  the  present
it  may  be  put  down  as  a  rule  that  in  all  important  primary  determina-
tions only  very  fresh  scrum  should  be  emijjoyed.  This  applies  above
all  to  the  study  of  the  complements.  Negative  results  with  sera
which  have  been  kept  several  days  and  which  have  been  exjxised  to
any  kind  of  thermic  or  chemic  influence,  are  particularly  unreliable.
Hence  it  is  necessary  that  those  properties  of  a  serum  which  one
purposes  to  study  should  be  examined  before  the  serum  is  presented,
so  that  secondary  changes  can  then  be  controlled  at  any  time.

The  easiest  substances  to  presen-e  are  the  antitoxins,  anticomple-
ments,  antiamboceptors  and  the  majority  of  artificially-produced
amboceptors.  By  the  addition  of  carbonic  acid,  Pfeiffer '  has  succeeded
in  keeping  a  cholera  immune  serum  deri\'ed  from  a  goat  for  five  years
without  decrease  in  strength.  We  have  preserved  hemolytic  ambo-
ceptors for  a  long  time  without  any  addition,  by  keeping  the  sera  in
an  ice-chest  at  8°  C.  The  development  of  bacteria  is  usually  prevented
by  heating  the  serum  in  the  test-tubes  stoppered  with  cotton  plugs
to  67"  for  half  an  hour.  In  this  way  the  serum  is  both  inactivated
and  sterilized,  t^o  far  as  our  experience  goes  the  anticomplementB
and  antiamboceptors  can  be  preserved  in  the  refrigerator  like  the
amboceptors.  Drying  the  serum  over  sulphuric  acid  or  over  anhy-
drous phosphoric  acid  in  vacuum  can  also  be  used  for  these  substances.

Of  all  the  substances  here  concerned  the  complements  are  by  far
the  most  labile;    whenever  possible,  therefore,  fresh  serum  is  used

'  See  Mertens,  Deutsche  nied,  Woe)ienBph.  1901,  No.  24.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  H.EMOLYSINS.  329

for  activation.  Mo8t  of  the  compIemeDta  will  keep  unchanged  for
a  number  of  days  provided  the  serum  ia  kept  on  ice.  But  this  does
not  preclude  unpleasant  aurpriees,  diminutions  in  the  complementing
power  often  occurring  to  a  high  degree  without  any  assignable  cause.
According  to  our  exjierience  the  complements  of  guinea-pig  serum
and  goat  serum  are  relatively  stable.  Tlie  least  reliable  in  this  respect
is  horse  serum,  whose  complementing  powers  are  often  partially  or
completely  destroyed  within  twenty-four  hours.  The  complements
also  suffer  when  the  serum  is  dried :  at  least  that  has  been  the  case  in  our
rather  limited  experience.

The  best  method  of  preserving  the  complements  for  a  long  time,
and  the  one  almost  always  reliable  in  all  cases,  consists  in  freezing
the  serum  at  —10°  to  —  15°C.  This  method  has  been  employed  in
the  Institute  for  a  long  time.  The  serum  is  bottled  in  little  vials,
which  are  then  kept  in  a  freezing  apparatus  or  in  a  well-insulated
freezing  mixture  of  ice  and  salt,  each  vial  being  thawed  out  as  needed.
This  procedure  is  at  present  the  only  one  which  is  of  general  appli-
cability and  which  presBn-es  the  various  constituents  of  the  serum  for
a  long  time.

The  blood  used  for  the  hiemolytic  tests  is  defibrinated  by  one  of
the  methods  above  mentioned.  In  special  cases,  instead  of  defibrina-
ting,  one  can  prevent  coagulation  by  precipitating  the  lime  salts.
This  is  done  by  allowing  the  blood  to  flow  into  salt  solution  to  which
citrate  of  soda  has  been  added,  as  was  recommended  by  Ehrlich.'
For  the  majority  of  experiments  the  blood  ia  diluted  with  physiological
salt  solution.  If  for  any  reason  one  wishes  to  remove  the  serum,  the
blood  is  separated  by  centrifuge  and  the  suspending  fluid  renewed
several  times.  As  a  rule  blood  which  has  been  kept  on  ice  for  two
days  can  still  be  used.

It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  a  suitable  salt  solution  should
be  employed  for  each  species  of  blood.  For  the  blood-cells  of  most
mammals  a  feebly  hypertonic  solution  of  NaCl  0.85%  is  best  adapted.
In  0.85%  salt  solution  dog  and  horse  blood  frequently  shows  a  slight
amount  of  spontaneous  haemolysis  which  can  often  be  prevented  by
using  a  somewhat  higher  concentration  (0.95%)  of  the  salt.  As
a  rule  strongly  hypertonic  solutions  of  salt  are  to  be  avoided  because
the  increased  contents  of  salt  markedly  inhibits  htemolysis.^

'  Ehrtioh,  FortschriltB  der  Hedi^in,  1897,  No.  2.
■  S.  Markl,  Zeitsch.  f.  Uygieoe,  Vol,  39.


II.  The  Method  of  Making  Hsemolytlc  Experiments.
General  Considerations.

With  a  little  practice  the  quantitative  estimation  of  hsemolysis
proves  very  simple.  The  two  fundamental  point*),  entire  bffimolysis
(conaplete),  and  no  hemolysis  whatever  (0),  are  usually  very  readily
recognized.  By  "trace"  we  mean  the  occurrence  of  a  faint  zone
of  solution  observed  just  above  the  cells  by  gently  agitating  the
teat-tube.  The  estimation  of  complete  hsmolygis  only  then  offers
difficulties  if  considerable  agglutination  has  occurred,  so  that  the
fluid  when  shaken  is  clouded  by  the  clumped  stromata.  Such  cases  in
themaeU'es  are  poorly  adapted  for  quantitative  studies  because  at
times  the  rapid  agglutination  may  purely  mechanically  prevent  the
escape  of  the  hiemoglobin  and  so  simulate  an  absence  of  hemolysis.

In  this  respect  according  to  our  experiences  the  greatest  diffi-
culties are  presented  by  dog  blood-cells  and  the  specific  immune
sera  (derived  from  goats)  against  these.  This  is  still  more  the  case  in
sueh  sera  derived  from  rabbits.  It  often  happens,  before  even  a  trace
of  hemolysis  has  occurred,  that  the  dog  blood-cells  are  agglutinated
and  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  test-tube,  Goose  blood  and  specific
immune  serum  behave  similarly.  In  these  cases  it  is  necessary  by
means  of  frequent  shaking  to  separate  the  agglutinated  blood-cells  so
that  the  bajmoglobin  is  given  chance  to  escape.

In  those  cases  in  which  the  usual  method  of  describing  the  degree
of  solution  does  not  suffice,  and  accurate  quantitative  determinations
of  the  amount  of  biood-cells  dissolved  are  desired,  one  makes  use  of
a  colorimetric  procedure  devised  by  Madsen  in  which  a  color  comparison
is  always  .made  by  dissolving  blood-cells  in  water .^

Agglutination  is  usually  easily  recognized  on  shaking  up  the  sedi-
mented  blood-cells.  It  becomes  very  evident  when  the  specimens
of  blood  are  shaken  and  one  then  compares  the  rapidity  with  which
the  blood-cells  settle  to  the  bottom.  This  is  always  greater  with
agglutinated  blood-cells.

In  general  a  5%  suspension  of  the  blood-cells  in  0.85%  salt  solu-
tion has  proven  best  adapted  for  hiemolytic  experiments.  1  to  2  cc,
of  such  a  mixture  in  each  test-tube  is  sufficient  for  most  tests.  When
material  is  scanty  one  can  use  amounts  very  much  smaller,  though
usually  this  will  be  at  the  expense  of  accuracy.     In  this  case,  of


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HEMOLYSINS.  331

course,  the  test  is  made  in  very  narrow  test-tubes.^  The  serum
to  be  tested  is  added  to  the  various  tubes  in  decreasing  amounts.
The  volume  of  fluid  should  be  made  the  same  in  all  the  tubes  by
the  addition  of  salt  solution,  for  the  total  amount  of  fluid  present
may  influence  the  course  of  haemolysis.  We  usually  keep  the  tubes
in  a  thermostat  at  37®  C.  for  two  hours,  frequently  shaking  them  if
necessary.  They  are  then  kept  in  the  refrigerator  at  8°  C.  overnight,
which  allows  the  intact  blood-cells  to  settle.  In  the  cases  thus  far
examined  by  us  this  method  has  always  sufficed  to  produce  the
maximum  amount  of  haemolysis,  though,  of  course,  in  a  given  case
it  may  have  to  be  modified  to  suit  the  circumstances.

It  should  be  mentioned  that  in  testing  any  substances  for  haemoly tic
action,  the  blood-cells  must  always  be  freed  from  serum  by  repeated
washing,  for  the  serum  may  in  some  instances  (e.g.  with  solanin)
give  rise  to  a  marked  inhibitory  action  and  so  lead  to  errors.

ni.  The  Technique  of  Immunization.

So  far  as  the  production  of  hcemolytic  amboceptors  by  means  of
immunization  is  concerned,  only  a  few  very  general  rules  can  be
given,  for  thus  far  sufficient  systematic  investigations  have  not  been
made  to  determine  the  optimal  conditions  in  any  one  direction.  In
immunization  one  always  selects  such  animals  whose  serum  by  itself
is  not  at  all  or  but  slightly  haemolytic  for  the  blood  employed,  for
then  the  development  of  a  haemolysin  is  most  readily  determined
and  the  normal  serum  of  this  species  always  furnishes  an  ideal  com-
plement. If  animals  are  immunized  whose  serum  by  itself  already
acts  haemolytically  on  the  blood  used,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an
exact  preliminary  determination  of  the  haemolytic  power  of  the
normal  serum,  and  also  to  make  a  simultaneous  control  with  normal
serum,  when  making  the  haemolytic  experiments.

In  some  instances  it  may  be  necessary  to  subject  the  blood  to  a
preparatory  treatment,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  serum  more
or  less  completely.  This  is  done  by  means  of  the  centrifuge  and
is  required  especially  in  those  cases  in  which  intravenous  injections
are  made,  or  if  large  amounts  of  a  blood  are  employed  whose  serum

*  In  certain  cases  the  employment  of  very  high  columns  of  blood  is  indicated,
for  in  that  case  the  development  of  zones  (colorless — feebly  red — strongly  red)
permits  of  a  very  accurate  estimation  of  the  period  of  incubation  of  the  poison,
or  of  the  different  vulnerability  of  the  blood-cells.     See  also  Madsen,  I.e.


COLLECTED  8TUOIE8  IN  IMMTJNITy.

is  liiglily  toxic  for  the  animal  injected.  If,  for  example,  a  rabbit  is
injected  intravenously  with  10  cc.  of  dog  blood  whose  serum  has
not  previously  been  renio\'ed,  the  animal  will  die  acutely.  By  pre-
viously heating  the  serum  one  also  obviates  the  reactive  production
of  serum  coagulins  and  anticomplementa,  both  of  which  can  at  times
hinder  the  estimation  of  hjemolysis.  A  general  rule  as  to  which
mode  of  injection  is  to  be  chosen  for  immunization  cannot  be  laid
down.  Larger  laboratorj'  animals  are  usually  injected  subcutaneously  ;
goats  usually  bear  intraperitoneal  injections  very  well.  This  mode
of  injection,  ming  blood-cells  which  have  previously  been  dissolved
with  water,  is  used  especially  when  a  particularly  marked  "  ictus
jmmunisatorius  "  is  desired,  as,  for  example,  in  the  production  of
isolysins.  Hirds  are  injected  into  the  large  pectoral  muscles  or
intraperitoneaUy.  For  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  the  intraperitoneal
injections  are  well  adapted,  since,  if  the  malarial  is  not  positively
sterile,  secondarj'  injections  (which  in  subcutaneous  inoculations
often  lead  to  troublesome  abscesses,  especially  in  the  rabbit)  are
most  readily  avoided.  Injuries  to  the  intestine  are  best  avoided  by
holding  the  animals  almost  vertically,  head  down,  and  thrusting
the  needle  into  the  abdomen  in  the  median  line  a  little  above  the
bladder.  The  needle  should  not  be  too  sharp,  nor  thrust  in  very
deeply.  (Personal  communication  of  Dr.  R.  Krause.)  The  repetition
of  inlrarerums  injections  offer  esjiecial  difficulties,  for  after  hEemolysin
formation  has  once  occurred  the  blood-cells  introduced  are  rapidly
dissolved,  leading  to  the  death  of  the  animal  from  embolism.
(Rehns.')

Another  thing  which  may  lead  to  death  from  embolism  is  the
formation  of  coagulins  in  consequence  of  a  previous  injection  of
blood  which  has  not  been  freed  from  serum.  These  coagulins  cause
a  rapid  formation  of  precipitates  within  the  blood  circulation.^

'ITie  amount  of  blood  used  depends  upon  the  size  of  the  animal
to  be  injected  and  upon  the  special  conditions  of  the  experiment.
Up  to  a  liter  of  blood,  freed  from  must  of  its  serum,  can  be  injected

'  Rehn.'i.  Conip.  rend,  de  In  Soc,  de  Biol,  1901,  No.  13;  see  alno  similar
observntionB  made  on  man  by  Bier.  Miinch.  med.  WochenscL.  1901,  No.  IS.

'  Very  likely  the  inejiplicable  rei^iiUs  obtained  by  Magendie  ("Vor-
leRiin^ii  iiitcr  das  Blut,"  German  translation  by  Kriipp.  Leipzig.  1S39)  were  due
to  the  formation  of  coagulins.  Magendie  found  that  rabbits  which  had  tolerated
two  intravenous  injection!i  of  egg  albumin  without  any  injury  whatever  inunedi*
Bt«ly  iuccumbed  to  a  further  injection  made  after  a  number  of  days.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  BLEMOLYSINS.  333

into  goats  without  injury.  In  rabbits  of  2  kilos  it  will  hardly  be
possible  to  go  beyond  100  cc;  and  guinea-pigs,  corresponding  to
their  weight,  proportionately  less.  According  to  our  experience  a
single  injection  of  20-30  cc.  sheep,  goat,  ox,  or  dog  blood  leads  to  a
strong  formation  of  hsemolysin,  which  can  be  still  further  increased
by  a  subsequent  injection  of  40-60  cc.  six  to  ten  days  later.  We
have  found  that  further  injections  of  the  same  or  larger  amoimts
(80-100  cc.)  have  no  advantage.  We  have  occasionally  observed
that  these  were  associated  with  a  decrease  in  the  amoimt  of  haemolysin.
As  a  rule,  the  serum  attains  its  maximimi  power  between  the  sixth
and  tenth  day,^  but  this  is  subject  to  individual  variations,  as  is  shown
by  the  case  described  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  of  a  goat  in  which
an  isolysin  developed  critically  on  the  fifteenth  day  (see  page  29).

The  injections  of  serum  lead  principally  to  the  production  of
antiamboceptors  and  anticomplements,  in  some  instances  also  to  that
of  hsemolytic  amboceptors  in  consequence  of  the  receptors  present
in  solution  in  the  senmi.^  The  production  of  antiamboceptors
necessitates  a  special  selection  of  the  animal  species.  Our  own
positive  results  are  limited  to  the  injection  of  goats  either  with  the
serum  of  a  rabbit  which  had  been  immimized  with  ox  blood,  or  with
an  isolytic  serum.  Since  in  these  cases  the  inmiune  serum  is  toxic
for  the  goat,  or,  more  particularly,  acts  destructively  on  the  blood,
it  is  necessary  to  commence  with  the  injection  of  small  amounts
(10-20  cc.)  and  gradually,  as  the  reaction  subsides,  go  on  to  larger
doses.  As  in  the  case  of  all  inunimizations  with  toxic  substances  it  is
particularly  necessary  to  keep  a  careful  control  of  the  weight  of  the
animals;  the  rule  always  to  be  observed  is  that  inmiunization  can
only  then  be  proceeded  with  when  the  animal  has  again  attained  the
weight  it  originally  possessed.

In  order  to  produce  anticomplemenis  larger  animals,  such  as  sheep
and  goats,  are  injected  with  increasing  amounts  of  normal  serum,
beginning  usually  with  fairly  large  amounts — 100  to  500  cc.  As  a
rule,  when  rabbits  have  been  injected  two  or  three  times  with  guinea-
pig,  horse,  goat  or  ox  serum  (commencing  with  5  to  10  cc.  and  increas-
ing to  20  to  50  cc),  a  plentiful  supply  of  anticomplement  will  have
developed  in  the  serum.    In  many  cases  the  injection  of  an  inactive

^  See  also  Bulloch,  Centralblatt  f.  Bact.,  Vol.  29,  1901.
'See  Morgenroth  (page  241,  this  volume)  and  P.  Miiller,  Miinch.  med.
Wochensch.  1902,  No.  32.


COLLECTED  STUDlIiS  IN  IMMUNITY.

serum,  which  had  thus  been  deprived  of  much  of  its  toxic  property,
woutd  appear  to  be  preferable,  for,  owing  to  the  complementoids
which  it  contains,  this  would  cause  the  production  of  anticomplementa
just  as  well  as  fresh  serum.     (See  pages  79  et  seq.)

If  it  is  desired  by  the  injection  of  a  certain  serum  to  produce
anticomplemeiits  which  are  also  directed  against  various  other  sera,^
it  is  necessary  to  repeat  the  injections  several  times  in  increasing
amounts.  While  treating  a  goat  with  rabbit  serum,  Ehrlich  and
Morgenroth  observed  the  development  first  of  anticomplementa
directed  exclusively  against  the  complement  of  rabbit  serum  (iso-
genic anticomplementa) ;  in  course  of  time  anticomplementa  directed
against  the  complements  of  guinea-pig  serum  (alloiogenic  anticom-
plements)  also  appeared.  Here  evidently  we  are  dealing  with  partial
complements,  present  in  rabbit  serum  in  small  amounts,  which  require
several  repetitions  of  the  injections  in  increasing  amounts  in  order
to  excite  the  production  of  anticomplementa.

In  the  production  of  serum  eoagulina  [precipitins]  one  proceeds  as
for  anticomplcments.  These  serum  coagulins  have  been  shown  to
possess  considerable  value  for  the  forensic  determination  of  various
species  of  blood,  especially  human  blood,  as  has  been  shown  by  the
researches  of  Wasscrmann  and  Schiitze,  Uhlenhuth,  and  many  others.
In  the  preduction  of  milk  coagulins  one  or  two  injections  of  20  to
40  cc.  of  milk  into  a  rabbit  are  usually  sufficient.  The  milk  can  be
heated  to  60°  previous  to  injection  in  order  to  reduce  the  number  of
germs  present.  In  connection  with  the  production  of  serum  coagu-
lins Uhlenhuth  makes  some  interesting  statementa  (Deutsch.  raed.
Wochenschr.  1002,  No.  37).  Among  other  things  he  describes
something  we  had  also  noticed,  namely,  the  occasional  failure  of  the
reaction  and  the  development  of  "alloiogenic "  coagulins  as  the
titer  of  the  senmi  increased,  a  fact  which  corresponds  to  what  we
have  above  described  for  the  formation  anticomplcments,"

IV.  Determining  the  Hscmolytle  Action.

The  fact  that  certain  poisons  of  vegetable  or  animal  origin,  as
well  as  nonna!  sera  and  other  body  fluids,  possess  a  hiemolytic  action
can  be  determined  so  readily  that  it  will  be  superfluous  to  enter  further

'  See  pages  1 1 1  et  seq.

'  Coaeemiag  isogenic  and  alloiogenia  antiooinpleiiieiitfl,  see  Uorgenrotli
and  Sachs,  pages  258  et  eeq.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HEMOLYSINS.  335

into  the  subject.  In  passing,  however,  it  may  be  mentioned  that
for  an  investigation  in  this  direction  to  be  at  all  complete  it  is  necessary
to  make  use  of  as  many  different  species  of  blood-cells  as  possible.
The  susceptibility  of  the  cells  can  be  extraordinarily  diverse,  so  that
certain  poisons  exert  a  marked  haemolytic  effect  on  some  species  of
blood,  while  they  fail  to  have  any  action  whatever  on  other  species.
Thus  the  poison  of  the  garden  spider,  studied  by  Sachs,^  is  inert  for
guinea-pig  or  dog  blood-cells,  while  it  has  strong  haemoly  tic  powers  for
rabbit  blood-cells.  Crotin  which  dissolves  certain  blood-cells  (e.g.
rabbit  blood)  and  agglutinates  others  (e.g.  hog  blood)  behaves  in
similar  fashion.^

In  the  case  of  the  specific  haemolysins  produced  by  inununization
the  choice  of  blood,  of  course,  is  already  indicated.  But  even  here,
extending  the  investigations  to  numerous  other  species  of  blood
may  lead  to  valuable  information  concerning  a  community  of  recep-
tors such  as  exists  between  sheep,  goat,  and  ox  ^  and  as  has  recently
been  shown  by  Marshall  to  exist  between  man  and  certain  species  of
monkeys.  In  testing  a  serum  for  the  presences  of  isolysins  it  ia
necessary  to  use  the  blood  of  numerous  individuals,  for  according  ta
our  experience  the  sensitiveness  of  the  blood,  in  the  case  of  goats,
is  subject  to  the  widest  individual  fluctuations.  In  this  way  one
can  easily  be  misled  to  assume  that  the  experiment  results  nega-
tively. It  is  advisable,  when  testing  a  fluid  for  hamolytic  propertiea
for  the  first  time,  to  remove  the  serum  by  washing  the  blood-cells  at
least  once.  Under  certain  circumstances  a  slight  degree  of  haemolytic
action  can  be  masked  by  an  antihsemolytic  action  of  the  normal  serum.
This  is  seen  to  a  high  degree  in  the  case  of  the  haemolytic  poisona
of  the  organ  extracts.*  So  far  as  the  dosage  is  concerned  one
should  select  wide  limits,  especially  in  the  first  experiments.  If
one  has  once  determined  the  presence  of  a  haemolytic  action,  the
quantitative  estimation  follows  by  means  of  a  more  or  less  finely
graded  series  of  experiments.  Types  of  these  experiments  are  found
on  pages  168,  270,  276,  etc.

In  testing  a  haemolysin  which  has  not  yet  been  examined,  it  is

*  See  pages  167  et  seq.

'Elfstrand,  tiber  giftige  Eiweissstoffe  welche  BlutkOrperchen  verkleben*
Upsala,  1891.

'  See  pages  93  et  seq.

*  See  Korschim  and  Moigenroth,  pp.  267  et  seq.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  I.N   IMMUNITY-

important  to  determine  whether  the  hemolytic  agent  is  a  haptin
in  the  true  sense.  80  far  as  the  alkaloids,  glycosides,  etc.,  which
act  htemolyticaliy  are  concerned,  they  are  generally  readily  identi-
fied by  means  of  the  chemical  methods  devised  for  their  separation,
methods  based  on  precipitations  and  shaking  out  with  solvents.
This  is  not  true  for  the  haptins;  tlicy  cannot  be  prepared  by  these
methods.  At  the  most,  it  is  possible  to  precipitate  them  in  con-
junction with  the  albuminous  bodies.  Another  distinction  consists
in  this,  that  the  substances  wiiich  are  chemically  defined  are  usu-
ally thermostable,  while  the  haptins  in  the  great  majority  of  caeea
are  destroyed  by  heat,  especially  by  boiling  temperature.  One
distinction  above  all,  however,  is  the  fact  that  only  the  liaptina  are
capable  of  causing  the  production  of  antibodies  by  immunization,
and  this  makes  a  classification  possible  even  in  difficult  ca-ws.  Fre-
quently the  facts  which  we  have  already  learned  about  a  substance
allow  us  to  make  definite  conjectures.  For  example,  if  a  vegetable
extract  possesses  hemolytic  properties  which  are  not  destroyed  by
boiling,  and  if  it  is  foimd  that  the  ha^molytic  substance  is  soluble
in  ether,  we  can  at  once  exclude  this  from  the  class  of  haptins.  On
the  other  hand,  If  one  finds  that  the  hEemolytic  action  of  an  animal
body  fluid  is  destroyed  by  heating  to  56°  C,  this  fact  already  argues
in  favor  of  a  haptin.  Other  methods,  including  perhaps  the  immu-
nizing reaction,  would  then  be  required  to  determine  this  positively.


V.  The  Study  of  Complex  Hsemolyslns.

We  now  take  up  a  question  of  paramount  importance  which
arises  in  the  study  of  every  hsemolytic  poison,  namely,  whether  in
any  given  instance  we  are  dealing  with  a  simple  ha^molyain,  or  with  a
complex  one  consisting  of  amboceptor  and  complement.

In  determining  the  complex  nature  of  a  ha^molysin  we  now  have
the  following  methods  at  our  disposal:

1.  Separation  of  amlioccptor  and  complement  by  allowing  the
former  to  be  tied  by  red  blood-cells  at  low  temperatures.

2.  Removal  of  the  complement  or  changing  the  same  into  the
inert  complementoid.

(a)  Alisorbing  the  complement  by  means  of  certain  cells  (e.g.,
yeast-cells,  bacterial  cells,  cells  of  animal  organs),  or  by  means  of
porous  filters.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HiEMOLYSlNS.  337

(6)  Thermic  and  chemic  influences,  such  as  heating  to  50-60°  C,
the  action  of  alkalies  and  acids,  digestion  with  papayotin.

The  separation  of  amboceptor  and  complement  at  low  tempera-
tures is  of  the  utmost  importance  and  has  been  used  for  the  analysis
of  complex  hsemolysins  with  considerable  success.  The  conditions
necessary  for  the  successful  operation  of  this  method  have  been
discussed  in  detail  in  a  previous  paper.  A  separation  is  only  then
possible  when  at  low  temperatures  the  affinity  between  the  cyto-
phile  group  of  the  amboceptor  and  the  receptor  is  greater  than  that
between  the  complementophile  group  of  the  amboceptor  and  the
corresponding  group  of  the  complement.  The  degree  of  difference
in  the  affinities  would,  of  course,  determine  the  degree  of  complete-
ness of  the  separation.  In  some  instances  most  peculiar  relations
are  found,  as  is  shown,  for  example,  by  the  behavior  of  eel  serum
to  rabbit  blood.  Attempts  to  effect  separation  at  low  temperatures
fail  in  this  case,  first,  because  haemolysis  ensues  even  at  0°  C,  and
second,  because  the  employment  of  higher  concentrations  of  salt
(up  to  5%),  which  in  other  cases  has  afforded  a  means  of  loosening
the  combination  of  amboceptor  and  complement,  does  not  suffice
to  prevent  haemolysis.  Naturally  from  this  behavior  we  must  not
conclude  that  eel  serum  does  not  contain  a  complex  haemolysin,  but
merely  that  in  this  case  peculiar  conditions  are  present  which,  owing
to  the  insufficiency  of  the  methods  thus  far  employed,  are  still  obscure
to  us.  In  those  cases  in  which  separation  at  low  temperatures  fails,
a  second  method  may  be  considered.  This  depends  on  the  fact
that  a  high  degree  of  salt  concentration,  somewhat  after  the  manner
of  low  temperatures,  can  prevent  haemolysis;  concentrations  which
still  permit  the  union  of  receptor  and  amboceptor  preventing  that
of  amboceptor  and  complement.  The  prevention  of  haemolysis  by
means  of  salts,  first  described  by  Markl  ^  and  erroneously  ascribed
by  him  to  conditions  of  diffusion,  is  also  due  to  this.  Markl  entirely
overlooked  the  fact  that  in  certain  cases  the  combination  of  toxin
and  antitoxin  (e.g.  Tetanus  toxin -f  Antitoxin)  is  also  prevented  by
salt.  (Knorr.)  For  the  application  of  this  method  see  Ehrlich  and
Sachs,  page  214.

It  is  perfectly  obvious  that  the  cold  method  will  fail  absolutely
in  cases  like  the  one  described  by  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  (page  217)  in
which  the  union  of  amboceptor  and  complement  is  the  prerequisite


»  Markl,  Zeitschr  fiir  Hygiene,  Vol.  39,  1902.


33S


COLLECTED  STUDIES  LV  IBIMUNITY.


for  the  union  with  the  blood-cells.  Such  a  possibility  must  always
be  borne  in  mind.

The  technique  of  this  separation  at  low  temperatures  is  very
simple.  The  tubes  containing  the  blood  and  the  serum  respectively
are  cooled  to  0°  by  being  placed  in  iced  water  or  by  packing  in  ice.
Thereupon  the  serum,  in  amounts  which  are  not  far  either  way  from
the  single  solvent  dose,  is  added  to  the  blood.  After  being  kept
at  0°  for  two  hours  the  mixture  is  rapidly  centrifuged  and  the  super-
natant fluid  quickly  removed.  If  desired,  the  sedimented  blood-
cells  can  be  washed  with  salt  solution  and  then  suitably  suspended.
The  decanted  fluid  is  again  mixed  with  blood-cells.  For  this  pur-
pose, in  order  not  to  increase  the  total  volume,  one  takes  the  blood-
cell  sediment-  centrifuged  from  the  required  amount  of  the  5%  sua-
pension.  If  a  complete  separation  of  amboceptor  and  complement
ha^i  been  efltected,  it  will  be  found  that  neither  are  the  sedimented
blood-cells  dissolved  nor  is  the  decanted  fluid  able  to  dissolve  the
blood-cells  added  anew.  It  is  then  necessary  to  determine  the  pres-
ence of  complement  in  the  decanted  fluid,  which  is  done  by  adding
suitable  amounts  of  serum  inactivated  by  heating.  Similarly  the
amboceptor  anchored  by  the  blood-cells  at  low  temperatures  is  demon-
strated by  adding  to  the  sediment  the  complement  present  in  the
decanted  fluid.

The  second  and  simpler  method  is  that  of  inactivating  the  hemo-
lytic serum  by  means  of  heat  and  then  activating  the  amboceptor
by  the  addition  of  complement.  In  this  the  chief  diSicuIty  often
consists  in  the  fact  that  a  certain  complement  required  in  a  par-
ticular instance  is  not  contained  in  all  sera,  and  further  that  the  sera
which  contain  this  particular  complement  often  in  themselves  dis-
solve the  blood-cells  by  means  of  a  normal  amboceptor.

There  are  several  ways  of  overcoming  these  difficulties.  The
neatest  method  and  one  which  is  applicable  in  many  cases  consists
in  selecting  as  the  complementing  agent  the  serum  of  that  anitn&l
species  whose  blood  is  being  tested,  as,  for  example,  using  guinea-pig
serum  as  complement  for  amboceptors  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood.
In  such  cases  a  solution  of  the  blood-cella  by  means  of  the  animal's
own  serum  is,  of  course,  precluded.

In  all  other  cases  one  must  make  use  of  complementing  sera
which  are  imrelated  to  the  species  of  blood  in  question.  One  fre-
quently discovers  sera  for  this  purpose  which  do  not  in  themselves
dissolve  the  blood-cells  to  be  tested,  aa,  for  example,  in  reactivating


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HiEMOLYSINS.  339

the   amboceptors   for  sheep   blood  or  ox  blood   by  means  of  goat
serum.

But  it  is  often  possible  to  complement  an  amboceptor  with  a
serum  which  in  itself  dissolves  the  blood-cells,  but  which,  in  the
amounts  in  which  it  is  able  to  effect  completion,  has  little  or  no
hemolytic  action.  It  is  obvious  that  in  such  cases  the  solvent  power
of  the  serum  by  itself  must  be  accurately  determined  by  means  of
controls.  While  this  method  is  often  successful,  the  relation  in  these
sera  between  the  normal  amboceptor  and  the  complement  is  fre-
quently so  unfavorable  that  it  is  impossible  to  complement  the
foreign  amboceptor.  In  such  cases  one  can  get  rid  of  the  normal
amboceptor  by  anchoring  it  to  blood-cells  at  low  temperatures,  as
Flexner  and  Noguchi  ^  have  recently  done  in  order  to  obtain  com-
plements for  the  haemolytic  amboceptors  of  snake  venoms.  Or  one
can  attempt  artificially  to  increase  the  amount  of  complement  con-
tained in  complementing  serum,  after  the  method  of  P.  Miiller.^
This  author  succeeded  in  effecting  a  considerable  increase  in  the
complements  of  chicken  serum,  by  injecting  the  animals  with  solu-
tions of  peptone.

So  far  as  the  choice  of  the  complementing  sera  is  concerned  it  is
obvious  that,  in  amboceptors  produced  by  immunization,  whenever
possible  the  preference  will  be  given  to  those  sera  which  are  derived
from  the  same  species  which  jrielded  the  amboceptor.  For  the
remaining  cases  the  principle  may  be  formulated  that  that  serum
is  most  useful  which  is  derived  from  a  species  closely  related  to  that
furnishing  the  amboceptor,  because  often  in  distantly  related  species
partial  amboceptors  present  only  in  very  slight  amounts  are  com-
plemented.^

Another  point  of  considerable  importance  in  the  completion  of
amboceptors  is  the  manner  in  which  the  sera  are  inactivated.  As
a  rule  inactivation  is  effected  by  heating  the  serum  for  half  an  hour
in  a  water-bath.  According  to  recent  investigations  special  atten-
tion must  be  paid  to  the  degree  and  duration  of  this  action.'*


*  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  Journal  of  Exp,  Medicine,  Vol.  VI,  1902.
'  Miiller,  Centralblatt  f.  Bacteriologie,  Orig.  Vol.  29,  1901.

*  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  see  pages  110  et  seq.

*  In  order  accurately  to  observe  the  temperature  constantly  maintained
it  is  well  to  use  thermometers  with  particularly  wide  divisions  on  the  scale
(1**  C.-l  cm.).  These  thermometers  need  only  embrace  a  moderate  range  of
degrees  (about  40*^-80*'  or  46'*-86*').  They  can  be  obtained  from  A.  Haak
in  Jena.


340  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IS  IMMUNITY.

For  many  years,  o\>'ing  to  the  valuable  researches  of  Buchner,
an  inacCivation  by  means  of  temperature  of  55-56°  was  regarded
as  practically  a  specific  criterion  for  the  alexins.  We  now  know,
however,  that  no  general  rule  can  be  [ormulated  in  this  respect.  On
the  one  hand  there  are  complementd  which  are  not  at  all  influenced  by
the  customary  half-hour'a  heating  to  55°  C.  (thermostable  comple-
ments), and  on  the  other  there  are  amboceptors  which  are  com-
pletely destroyed  by  such  heating.  A  complement  belonging  to  the
first  cat^ory  was  first  described  by  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth  •  &a
occurring  in  considerable  amount  in  normal  goat  serum  and  in  the
eenim  of  a  buck  which  had  been  immunized  with  sheep  serum;  and
thermolabile  amboceptors,  especially  in  normal  sera,  are  not  at  all
rare.  Thus  the  amboceptor  above  mentioned  regularly  present  in
horse  serum  and  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood,  as  well  as  one  studied
by  Sachs  ^  present  in  dog  serum  and  also  acting  on  guinea-pig  blood,
is  completely  destroyed  by  half  an  hour's  heating  to  55°  C.  Hence
the  first  rule  in  the  demonstration  of  the  complex  character  of  hiemo-
lytie  poisons  by  thermogenic  inactivation  is  always  to  employ  the
lowest  temj-ierature  at  which  inactivation  takes  place  within  a  short
time  (20-60  minutes).^

VI.   The   Quantitative    Estimation   of  AmboceptorSt  Complementa
and  Receptors,

In  special  cases,  e.g.  during  the  course  of  an  immunization,
it  is  of  considerable  value  to  accurately  determine  the  amounts  of
amboceptor  and  complement  present  in  the  serum.  While  referring
to  the  studies  of  v.  Dungem  (p.  36),  Bulloch  (I.e.),  Morgenroth  and
Sachs  (pp.  226  and  250),  we  should  like  to  emphasize  that,  in  general,
in  determining  the  amount  of  complement  it  is  necessary  to  make

'  See  page  13.

'  See  page  181  et  seq.

» According  to  the  reaearches  of  Korscbun  and  Morgenroth  (see  pp.  267
et  seq.)  the  hs>molytic  subelunces  of  organ  extracts  are  "coctostable."  i.e.,
they  arc  not  destroyed  even  by  several  hours'  boiling.  Hence  we  designate  a
substance  as

Thcrmolatrile,  if  it  is  rendered  inert  by  heating  to  SS'-SG"  C;

Ttumnontabk,  if  it  wilhstanda  beating  to  56°  or  over  but  is  destroyed  by
boiling;

Coiiostabk,  if  it  resiste  boiling  at  100°  C,

In  special  caaes  in  order  to  still  more  closely  characterize  their  behavior
one  can  add  temperature  and  duratiou  of  heat  as  an  index.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  H*:M0LYSINS.  341

two  determinations,  namely,  one  carried  out  with  the  single-solvent
dose  of  amboceptor,  the  other  with  a  high  multiple  of  the  same.
The  reasons  for  this  procedure  can  be  found  in  tiie  study  on  the
quantitative  estimation  of  amboceptor,  complement,  and  anticom-
plement  (page  250).

So  far  as  the  estimation  of  the  amount  of  amboceptor  is  concerned,
this  is  effected  according  to  similar  principles,  and  lisually  in  such  a
way  that  one  works  with  an  excess  of  complement.  A  certain  difE-
culty  is  encountered  in  the  fact  that  the  amount  of  complement
contained  in  the  serum,  e.g.,  rabbit  serum,  is  variable.  It  is  there-
fore always  necessary,  in  order  to  exclude  tliis  disturbing  factor,  to
first  determine  the  activating  value  of  the  complementing  serum
using  a  specimen  of  the  immune  serum  in  question  as  a  standard
serum.  Directly  after  this  test  by  which  the  amount  of  complement
is  strictly  defined,  the  quantitative  estimation  of  amboceptor  in
the  new  serum  must  be  undertaken.

It  is  also  important  to  estimate  the  amount  of  receptor  present
in  the  red  blood-cells:  the  measure  of  this  is  the  binding  of  ambo-
ceptor.

Erhlich  and  Morgenroth  (see  pages  72  et  seq.)  have  demon-
Btrated  that  the  binding  capacity  of  red  blood-cells  varies  to  an
extraordinary  degree.  While  in  many  combinations  the  blood-cells
combine  with  just  that  amount  of  amboceptor,  which  on  the  addi-
tion of  suitable  complement  leads  to  their  complete  solution  {amho-
ceploT  unit),  it  was  found  that  in  numerous  other  cases  the  blood-
cells  are  able  to  take  up  as  high  as  100  single-solvent  doses  of  ambo-
ceptor. Corresponding  to  the  ambocejitor  unit,  the  receptor  unU,
is  that  amount  of  receptor  which  combines  with  one  amboceptor
unit  (see  page  254).  The  combining  power  of  the  erythrocytes  is
determined  by  adding  varying  multiples  of  the  amboceptor  imit
to  the  blood-cells,  centrifuging  at  the  end  of  about  an  hour  and  then
allowing  the  various  decanted  fluids  to  act  on  fresh  blood-cells  in
the  presence  of  sufficient  complement.  The  degree  of  haemolysis
which  occurs  readily  shows  just  how  much  amboceptor  was  still
completely  bound,  (See  page  75  and  the  protocols  on  pages  98
and  99.)»

'  Concerning  llie  extraordinarily  lai^e  binding  capacity  of  bacteria  for  ajtstlu-
lininB  and  for  amboceptora,  aee  the  interesting  communication  of  Tisenberg
and  Volk  (Zeitscli.  f.  Hygiene,  Vol.  80)  and  of  Pfeifter  and  Priedberger  (Berl.
klin.  Wftchensch.  1902,  No.  26.)


■  klin.  W


342  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Finally,  in  studying  the  complements  of  a  serum  it  is  often  of
considerable  importance  to  determine  their  plurality.  The  methods
leading  to  a  differentiation  of  the  separate  complements  have  been
described  in  detail  in  a  number  of  [iluces,  so  that  we  can  here  con-
tent ourselves  by  referring  to  the  studies  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth
(pages  11-56,  IIO),  of  Ehrlich  and  Sachs  (page  195),  and  of  Marshall
and  Morgenroth  (page  222),


VII.  The  Study  ot  Antlhaemolytlc  Actions.

The  subject  of  antihtemolytic  functions,  which  has  only  recently-
been  carefully  worked  up,  has  attained  considerable  importance
for  the  comprehension  of  the  mechanism  of  hEemolysins.  Although
at  the  present  time  the  study  of  the  influences  inhibiting  hiemolysis
is  not  at  alt  complete,  it  is  possible  at  least  to  indicate  certain  gen-
eral principles.

We  shall  begin  with  the  simple  hiemotoxins,  which  are  character-
ized by  a  cytophile  haptophore  group  and  a  zy  mo  toxic  group.
(Analogous  to  these  are  the  hiemagglutinins,  also  characterized  by
a  cytophile  haptophore  group  and  an  agghitinating  group.)  If  we
analyze  the  action  of  these  hamotoxins,  we  see  that  this  can  be  inhib.
ited  in  two  ways:

(1)  By  means  of  an  antibody  which  fits  into  the  haptophore
group  and  so  deflects  this  from  the  receptor  of  the  cell.

(2)  By  means  of  substances  which  are  capable  of  occupying
tlie  receptor  of  the  blood-cell  and  so  block  this  lor  the  entrance  of
the  htemo toxin.

So  far  as  the  first  group  is  concerned,  such  antibodies  are  well
known  for  a  large  number  of  blood  poisons.  We  need  only  call  to
mind  the  antlhamolysins,  such  as  anticrotin,  antitetanolysin,  anti-
staphylolysin,  antibodies  against  the  hiemolytic  venoms  of  snakes,
spiders,  and  toads.  Besides  these  there  are  the  antiagglutinins,  such
as  antiricin,  antiabrin,  anticrotin.  These  substances  can  be  produced
as  antitoxins  by  means  of  immunization,  but  they  also  occur  in
normal  serum,  as,  for  example,  antitetanolysin  m  horse  serum  (Ehrlich),
aritiataphylolysin  in  serum  from  goats,  man,  and  horse  (M.  Neisser
and  Wechsberg) ,

The  second  method  of  inhibition  is  effected  by  substances  which
occupy  the  receptors  of  the  cells.  Hence  these  must  be  substances
which  possess  the  same  haptophore  group  as  the  htentotoxins  them-


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  ELEMOLYSINS.  343

selves.  This,  however,  at  once  leads  to  the  idea  that  transformation
products  of  the  hsemolysin  itself  could  exert  this  action.  Ehrlich's
researches  on  the  constitution  of  diphtheria  poison  have  shown  that
in  toxins  and  related  bodies  the  zymotoxic  group  is  far  less  stable
than  the  haptophore  group.  The  bodies  so  derived,  toxoids,  still
possess  the  property  of  combining  with  the  cell  receptors,  they  are
still  able  to  neutralize  antitoxin,  and  to  excite  the  reactive  formation
of  antibodies,  but  they  more  or  less  completely  lack  any  toxicity.
This  formation  of  toxoid,  first  described  by  Ehrlich,  has  since  been
demonstrated  for  a  number  of  substances,  hamotoxins  (tetanolysin,
snake  venom,  staphylolysin),  as  well  as  agglutinins  and  coagulins.^
Ehrlich  in  his  first  study  already  pointed  out  that  an  increase  in
the  haptophore 's  aflSnity,  developing  in  the  course  of  toxoid  for-
mation, was  conceivable.  The  toxoid  which  was  thus  produced
would  then  be  able,  owing  to  the  increased  alBSnity,  to  imite  with
the  receptor  of  the  cell  even  in  competition  with  the  imchanged
toxin.  In  this  way  the  toxoid  would  protect  the  cell  against  the
entrance  of  the  real  poison,  and  of  course,  against  the  poison's  injurious
influence.  For  these  toxoids  Ehrlich  has  proposed  the  term  fro-
toxoids.  Of  course  such  a  protective  effect  can  also  be  produced
in  conformity  with  the  laws  of  mass  action  by  toxoids  having  the
same  affinity  (syntoxoid)  to  the  cell  receptor  as  the  toxin,  whereas
the  protection  will  be  slight  or  minimal  if ,  as  a  result  of  toxoid  for-
mation, there  is  a  decrease  in  the  haptophore  group's  aflSnity  (ept-
toxoid).  Recent  investigations  on  the  agglutinins  of  bacteria  ^  and
on  coagulins  have  shown  that  by  heating  these  substances,  agglu-
tinoids,  which  possess  a  higher  affinity  than  the  agglutinins  them-
selves, are  developed  in  considerable  quantities.  These  are,  there-
fore, termed  proaggluiinoids.

It  is  an  easy  matter  in  any  given  instance  to  determine  experi-
mentally which  of  these  two  inhibitory  processes  is  present.  If
one  is  dealing  with  a  certain  particular  serum  which  inhibits  the
action  of  the  hsemotoxin,  it  may  be  regarded  a  priori  as  probable
that  the  substance  in  question  is  an  antibody  in  the  ordinary  sense.
This  becomes  almost  certainjtf <the  serum  was  derived  from  an  animal
specifically   immimized.     Experimentally   it   is  easy   to   show   that


^  Eisenberg  and  Volk,  Zeitsch.  f.  Hygiene,  Vol.  40,  1902;    Bail,    Archiv
f.  Hygiene,  Vol.  42,  1902;  Shiga,  page  312.
'  Ibid.


344  COLLECTED  STLTJIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

the  antibody  belongs  to  this  group  aa  follows:  The  red  blood-cella
are  treated  with  a  juat  neutral  mbcture  of  hiemotoxin  and  antibody
and  then  centrifuged.  If  there  was  a  true  deflection  of  the  poison,
these  cells  must  now  behave  exactly  like  fresh  blood-cells;  above
all  they  must  still  possess  exactly  the  original  binding  capacity  for
the  hffimo toxin.

In  contrast  to  this  behavior,  the  disturbance  caused  by  trans-
formation products  of  the  hiemolysin  itself  manifests  itself  even
in  experiments  made  only  with  blood-cells  and  the  toxic  substance.
The  experimental  series  has  an  irregular  course  analogous  to  Shiga's
experiments  with  agglutinins.  For  example,  if  increasing  amounts
of  agglutinating  serum  which  has  preinously  been  heated  are  added
to  dysentery  bacilli,  one  can  observe  that  the  test-tubes  containing
the  largest  amount  of  agglutinins  show  no  agglutination;  and  that
agglutination  shows  itself  only  in  the  tubes  containing  smaller  amounts
and  disappears  again  with  still  smaller  quantities.

In  order  to  sliow  that  in  this  case  there  is  no  real  occupation
of  the  receptors  by  the  proagglutJnoid,  one  tests  the  behavior  of  the
centrifuged  bacteria.  These  are  suspended  in  salt  solution,  and
again  mixed  with  what  is  otherwise  an  effective  dose  of  agglutinin.
They  are  no  longer  agglutinated  because  the  agglutinin  cannot  com-
bine with  the  blocked  receptors.  We  do  not  doubt  at  all  that  this
phenomenon  will  also  be  found  in  hemagglutinins.

The  conditions  are  far  more  complicated  with  the  complex  hte-
molysins,  the  possibilities  for  the  inhibitory  mechanism  being  more
numerous.  It  may,  therefore,  be  well  to  aid  oiir  analysis  by  means
of  a  diagram  (see  opposite).

The  diagram  refers  to  experiments  made  with  mixtures  which
do  not  by  thenaselves  dissolve  blood-cells,  and  whose  composition
must  first  be  accurately  determined  quantitatively.  One  next  devisea
a  hemolytic  combination  in  which  amboceptor  and  complement  are
present  in  exact  equivalence  and  determines  the  amount  of  the  anti-
body in  question  which  will  just  inhibit  the  action  of  this  combina-
tion. By  means  of  this  exactly  balanced  mixture  experiments  by
the  centrifuge  method  are  made  both  with  the  sediments  and
with  the  decanted  portions  as  shown  in  the  diagram.'

'  This  method  refers  to  cases  I,  III.  and  IV  of  the  scheme,  while  case  II
refers  Ui  an  experiment  made  with  ordiimty  complementoid  serum  obtained  by
heating.


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HEMOLYSINS.  345


'-11      "


18

|l3


I  , J  Bioeking  of  t  he  corr
f-"'  plementophfl
'/  group  of  the  air
Boreplor  (a)  by
I  meana  of  ocmple-

\]        mentoid  vd.


cytophilic    protoam-

boceptoid  (ro).

.   receptor  of  the  red

blood-cell,  r.


346  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

In  studying  the  sediments  the  question  is  always  whetlier  these
have  taken  up  amboceptor  or  not.  Tliis  is  most  easily  deicrniined
by  the  addition  of  complement.  This  procedure,  however,  should
be  supplemented  by  the  more  difficult  and  troublesome  investigation
of  the  binding  power  of  the  blood-cells  for  newly  added  amlx)ceptor.
In  this  case,  of  course,  a  parallel  test  with  untreated  blood-cells  fur-
nishes the  basis  for  comparison.  As  a  rule  experiments  at  moderate
temperatures  suffice;  only  in  case  II  is  a  variation  of  temperature
required.

In  case  I  the  complement  is  deflected  by  means  of  an  anticomple-
ment.  One  must  take  into  consideration  botji  natural  anticom-
plements  and  those  artificially  produced  by  immunization;  further-
more, attention  must  be  paid  to  similarly  acting  derivatives  of  the
amboceptors,  the  amboceptors,  whose  complementophile  group  has
been  preserved.^  The  beha^^or  of  the  amboceptoids,  especially  in
those  cases  in  wluch  the  affinity  of  the  complementophile  group  of
these  amboceptoids  has  become  increased,  will  in  no  way  differ  from
that  of  the  anticomplcments.  Finally  we  must  remember  that  the
amboceptors  can  act  in  a  way  like  anticomplements  as  a  result  of
the  deflection  of  complements  by  excess  of  amboceptor,  a  phenomenon
first  described  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  (see  page  120),  In  that
■case,  of  course,  the  decanted  fluid  contains  the  excess  of  amboceptors
and  the  complement  bound  to  the  same.

II.  In  case  II  the  com[)lementophile  group  of  the  amboceptor  is
blocked.  Here  we  must  first  consider  the  action  of  compjementoids
(see  Ehrlich  and  Saclis,  page  209),  although,  according  to  our  present
■experiences,  these  only  seldom  come  into  play  because,  in  the  forma-
tion of  complementoid,  there  is  usually  a  decretisc  of  affinity.

III.  The  third  possibility  is  the  action  of  antiamboceptors  which
fit  into  the  cytophile  group  of  the  amboceptors.  They  may  be
present  normally  or  produced  artificially  by  immunization.  From
a  theoretical  standpoint  these  antiamboceptors  are  to  be  identified
with  the  receptors  of  the  cells  into  wliich  the  amboceptors  fit.  Hence
thrust-off  receptors  present  in  solution  will  act  as  antiamboceplors.^
According  to  recent  investigations  the  serum  against  snake  venom


'Morgenroth,  page  241;    also  P.  Miiller,  Miinch.  med.  Woclienschr.  1902,


METHODS  OF  STUDYING  HiEMOLYSINS.  347

also  contains  antiamboceptors  against  the  amboceptors  of  cobra  venom.

IV.  The  fourth  possibility  consists  in  the  occupation  of  the  recep-
tor by  cytophile  proamboceptoids,  conditions  which  correspond  to
those  discussed  imder  the  simple  haemo toxins  (page  342).  Since  the
study  of  amboceptoids  is  still  in  its  infancy,  such  cases  have  not  yet
been  described.  Their  occurrence,  however,  is  extremely  probable
and  the  near  futiu'e  will  probably  furnish  experiences  in  this  direction.

So  far  as  the  details  of  the  experiments  are  concerned,  the  previous
papers  furnish  detailed  descriptions  which  may  be  consulted.  The
reader  is  referred  to  the  following:  Case  I,  pages  224-259;  II,  page
209;  III,  pages  103,  104,  248.

In  any  particular  instance  it  is  necessary  to  determine  which
of  these  cases  obtains.  Above  all  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that
the  inhibition  need  not  always  be  due  to  a  specific  binding,  but  that
it  may  be  caused  by  disturbing  factors,  which  we  have  classed  to-
gether under  the  term  antireactive  actions.

For  example,  if  the  imion  of  amboceptor  and  complement  does
not  take  place  at  low  temperatures,  or  if  owing  to  the  action  of  salt
the  union  of  complement  with  the  anchored  amboceptor,  or  of  ambo-
ceptor to  the  cell  receptor,  is  hindered,  these  are  the  result  of  anti-
reactive  influences  and  not  of  specific  inhibitions.  As  a  rule  it  is  easy  in
any  given  case  to  decide  which  kind  of  inhibition  is  present.  In  most
cases  the  origin  and  mode  of  derivation  of  the  substances  in  question
give  valuable  clues  in  this  direction.  If  antireactive  influences  can  be
excluded,  it  is  not  difficult  by  a  logical  application  of  the  centrifugal
method  to  classify  the  case  under  one  of  the  heads  given  in  the  table.

Naturally  these  cases  may  also  be  combined.  Thus,  for  example,
a  fluid  may  contain  simultaneously  anticomplement,  antiamboceptor
or  anticomplement  and  procomplementoid.  Antiamboceptor  and
amboceptor,  complement  and  anticomplement  in  one  solution  can  be
excluded,  since  they  mutually  neutralize  each  other.

Another  important  point  which  belongs  here  is  the  recognition
of  concealed  amboceptors,  whose  activatibility  is  suppressed  by  the
simultaneous  presence  of  anticomplement.  For  the  experimental
technique  see  Morgenroth,  page  245.

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  treat  exhaustively  all  the  innumer-
able variations  which  come  into  question.  We  hope,  however,  that
the  methodical  exposition  here  given  has  shown  how  the  fundamental
doctrines  of  Ehrlich's  Side-chain  Theory  make  a  systematic  study  of
hsemolysins  possible.


XXX.  THE  TECHNIQUE   OF  BACTERICIDAL  TEST-
TUBE   EXPERIMENTS.


By  Professor  M.  Nbi


I,  Member  of  the  Institute.


In  order  to  measure  the  bactericidal  power  of  a.  serum  or  of
serum  mixture  by  means  of  a  test-tube  experiment,  the  plate  method
(Neisser,  liucliner)  is  still  the  safest.  Only  in  special  cases  can  one
obtain  useful  comparative  results  by  other  methods  (obsen-ing
hanging  drops  for  the  onset  of  granular  degeneration,  R.  Pfeiffer,
orbioBcopic  method,  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg').  But  even  the  plate
method  at  present  is  cumbersome  and,  what  is  of  more  consequence,
is  not  applicable  in  all  cases.  It  ja  not  a  sensitive  method  and  is  only
then  useful  when  marked  results  are  to  be  expected  in  consequence
of  strong  bactericidal  powers.  As  a  rule  such  marked  results  are
only  to  be  attained  with  immune  sera  and  only  rarely  with  normal


So  far  as  immtmiaation  is  concerned  it  la  impossible  to  make
general  statements,  and  I  shall  therefore  only  cite  a  few  examples.
Thus  in  the  case  of  chlorea  vibrios  a  single  subcutaneous  injection
of  three  dead  agar  cultures  into  rabbits  gives  good  results  (R.  Pfeiffer
and  Marx*),  as  does  also  the  intravenous  injection  of  extremely  small
quantities  (Mertens,  R.  Pfeiffer^).  In  immunizing  against  typhoid,
dogs  and  goats  are  most  useful.  In  this  case  a  single  injection  of
dead  cultures  does  not  suffice  in  order  to  obtain  a  high-grade  bac-
tericidal serum;  on  the  contrary  repeated  injections  of  living  cul-
tures are  necessary.  For  obtaining  a  serum  having  strong  bac-
tericidal properties  against  Shiga's  dysenter>-  bacilli,  horses  are  well
adapted;   goats  very  much  less  so;   rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  are  very

'  Miincli.  med.  Wochenach.  1900.  No.  37.
•ZeitMhr.  f.  Hygiene,  XXVII,  1898.
'Deutsche  med,  WocheDBch.  1901.


J


TECHNIQUE  OF  BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.  349

ill-suited  for  this  purpose.  One  should,  of  course,  never  forget
to  examine  the  normal  serum  for  bactericidal  powers  previous  to
immunization.

With  a  great  many  bacteria  it  has  not  yet  been  possible  to  pro-
duce a  serum  bactericidal  in  vitro.  Thus  our  experunents  in  this
direction  extending  over  many  years  were  unsuccessful  with  staphy-
lococcus pyogenes  aureus  (goat,  rabbit)  and  with  the  diphtheria
bacillus.  Nor  have  we  been  able  thus  far  to  obtain  bactericidal
effects  in  vitro  from  Susserin  and  other  similar  sera  which  are  effective
in  animal  tests.  The  reasons  for  this  behavior  are  not  yet  clear,
and  they  are  therefore  still  being  studied.

Bordet  and  Gengou  have  devised  a  method  (Annales  de  ITnstitut
Pasteur  1901)  by  the  aid  of  which  a  bactericidal  interbody  pro-
duced by  immunization  can  be  recognized  even  in  those  cases  in
which  plate  experiments  fail  (e.g.  erysipelas  of  swine).  This  method
depends  on  the  property,  said  to  be  possessed  by  bacteria  to  which
interbody  has  been  supplied,  of  combining  also  with  hsemolytic  com-
plements. This  loss  of  complement,  which  can  be  readily  detected,
shows  that  the  bacteria  have  combined  with  a  bactericidal  inter-
body. Without  entering  into  the  theoretical  significance  of  this
interesting  experiment  we  shall  content  ourselves  by  saying  that
in  several  cases  in  which  we  tested  bactericidal  immune  sera  in  this
way  we  failed  to  obtain  satisfactory  results.  The  method  does  not
seem  to  us  to  be  suited  to  a  quantitative  estimation  of  an  immune
serum.

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  first  requisite  for  the  success  of
bactericidal  experiments  is  that  all  vessels,  diluting  fluids,  as  well
as  the  sera  employed  be  absolutely  sterile.  Great  care  is  necessary,
especially  in  collecting  the  blood.  The  method  described  in  the
preceding  chapter  for  bleeding  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  is  sufficient
to  obtain  sterile  blood.  For  collecting  smaller  quantities  of  blood
from  the  ear  vein  of  rabbits  it  is  necessary  to  first  cleanse  the  ear
with  70%  alcohol  and  then  thrusting  a  short  sterile  hollow  needle
into  a  vein.  In  many  cases,  to  be  sure,  the  blood  can  also  be  col-
lected by  making  a  short  incision  across  the  marginal  ear  vein  with
a  sterile  scalpel,  and  then,  by  holding  the  animal  properly,  allowing
the  blood  to  flow  out  without  running  over  the  ear.

In  bleeding  pigeons  and  chickens  by  decapitation  one  cannot
always  coimt  on  sterile  serum;  hence  it  is  well  to  lay  bare  the  vessels
of  the  neck.    For  repeated  bleeding  of  guinea-pigs  one  must  also


350  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMI'NITY.

collect  the  blood  directly  from  the  vessels  of  the  neck  and  then  tie
the  vessel.  It  ia  an  easy  matter  to  obtain  very  small  quantities
of  sterile  pigeon  blood  from  the  wing  veins  by  first  carefully  removing
the  feathers,  disinfecting  the  skin  with  alcohol  and  then  after  incising,
touching  the  skin  as  little  as  possible.

For  purposes  of  collecting  the  serum,  the  blood  is  either  allowed
to  stand  overnight  (see  the  preceding  chapter),  or  by  means  of  a
sterile  funnel  is  allowed  to  flow  into  a  sterile  bottle  containing  sterile
glass  beads  or  steel  shavings.  The  bottle  is  then  stoppered  with
a  cork  (previously  burnt  off),  the  blood  defibrinated  by  shaking,
and  then  centrifuged.  As  a  rule,  centrifuging  does  not  injure  the
serum,  especially  if  afterwards  the  upper  layer  of  fluid  is  siphoned
off.  For  absolutely  certain  sterility  the  spontaneous  separation
of  the  serum  is  to  be  preferred  to  defibrination  and  centrifuging.

The  active  sera  used  for  complementing  are  to  be  employed  as
fresh  as  possible,  in  no  case  more  than  two  or  three  days  old  (refriger-
ator). The  immune  sera,  which  are  usually  employed  in  the  inactive
state,  will  keep  in  the  refrigerator  for  a  long  time.  Even  in  these,
however,  a  loss  of  power  is  observed.  In  the  case  of  high-grade
immune  sera  the  addition  of  0.5%  phenol  ia  allowable  for  preserva-
tion. In  the  small  quantities  in  which  the  serum  is  used  in  experi-
ments (about  0.01  cc.)  this  amount  of  phenol  is  without  effect  either
on  the  bacteria  or  on  the  complements.

Before  commencing  the  experiment  proper  it  is  necessary  to
determine  what  amoimt  sown  gives  the  most  favorable  results.
Thus  in  many  experiments  it  may  be  of  advantage  to  always  sow
Vsoo  cc.  of  a  one-day  bouillon  culture,  whereas  with  another  bac-
terium sowing  Viooo  or  Vioooo  '"wp  of  i  one-day  agar  culture  will
give  more  uniform  results.  It  is  further  necessary  to  repeatedly
convince  one's  self  that  the  control  plates  regularly  show  a  uniformly
good  growth,  for  only  when  that  is  the  ease  can  uniform  results  be
expected.  For  example,  although  the  bacillus  of  hog  cholera  gows
very  well  on  ordinary  slant  agar,  the  control  plates  may  result
most  irregularly.  In  that  case  one  can  make  use  of  glycerine  agar.
Other  bacteria  again  do  not  bear  suspension  in  O.SS'^  salt  solution
at  all  well;  in  that  case  one  must  use  bouillon  cultures  and  make
the  dilutions  with  bouillon  instead  of  with  salt  solution.  The  dilu-
tion should  always  be  managed  so  that  the  amount  finallv  sown  is
about  5-10  drops,  for  in  sowing  only  I  or  2  rlmps  considerable  varia-
tions in  the  number  of  colonies  may  occur.     In  any  case,  however,  the


M


TECHNIQUE  OF  BACTERiaDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.  351

plate  sown  must  contain  many  thousands  or  an  innumerable  number
of  colonies.  The  bactericidal  effect  will  then  be  distinctly  shown  by
the  reduction  in  the  proper  plates  of  this  large  number  of  colonies
to  zero  or  almost  zero.

The  test-tubes  most  advantageously  employed  are  the  little-
tubes  9-10  cm.  long  and  1,3  cm.  diameter.  The  cotton  stoppers  are
removed  and  all  the  different  components  filled  into  the  tubes.  Then
the  stoppers  are  replaced  after  being  flamed.  If  the  air  is  at  all
still  one  need  not  fear  keeping  the  tubes  open  for  this  length  of  time.

In  testing  an  immune  serum  one  commences  by  examining  the
immune  serum  in  the  fresh  active  state,  and,  of  course,  in  the  same
manner  that  the  serum  of  the  animal  in  question  was  examined  pre-
vious to  immunization.  For  this  purpose  a  number  of  test-tubes  are
filled  with  1.0,  0.3,  0.1, 0.03, 0.01  cc.  of  the  fresh  active  serum.  Finer
gradations  are  useless  in  view  of  the  lack  of  sensitiveness  of  the  test-
tube  method.  This  we  have  already  pointed  out.  The  amount  of
culture  to  be  sown  is  then  added  and  all  tubes  filled  up  to  2  cc.  with
physiological  salt  solution.  Finally  three  drops  of  bouillon  are  added
to  each  tube.  The  addition  of  bouillon  has  proven  to  be  of  consider-
able value,  for  it  suffices  to  balance  disturbing  variations  of  the
osmotic  pressure.  It  is  important  to  make  the  total  volume  of  fluid
the  same  in  all  the  tubes  by  the  addition  of  fluid.  Besides  this  it  is
important  to  have  a  number  of  controls,  namely,  a  control  of  the
culture  sown,  second,  a  control  testing  the  sterility  of  the  maximum
amount  of  serum  employed,  and  third,  a  control,  or  better  a  series
of  controls,  containing  the  culture  sown  plus  the  serum  in  an  inactive
form.  Bv  means  of  this  last  control  one  can  see  whether  a  thermostable
complement  is  present  or  not.  It  also  serves  to  show  that  the  bacteri-
cidal action  is  not  simulated  by  the  agglutinating  power  of  the  serum.

The  tubes  are  now  kept  in  the  thermostat  for  at  least  three  hours,
having  previously,  however,  been  carefully  shaken.  On  being  taken
out  of  the  thermostat  they  are  again  carefuUy  shaken  and  then
worked  up  into  plates.  For  this  purpose  5-10  drops  are  taken  from
each  tube  by  means  of  uniform  pipettes  and  made  into  plates  in  the
usual  way.  The  plates  are  placed  in  the  thermostat  upside  do\Mi,
and  kept  there  until  the  following  day.  The  growth  is  best  and
most  rapidly  described  by  means  of  approximate  estimates,  using  a
scheme  somewhat  as  follows:  0  or  almost  0,  about  100,  several  hun-
dreds, thousands,  very  many  thousands,  infinite  number.  A  distinct
bactericidal  action  is  only  then  present  if  the  controls  result  as  they


352


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


should,  and  if  a  rctluction  of  colonies  from  an  infinite  number  or
many  tiiousands  to  0  or  very  few  has  occurred.  Furthermore  the
test  can  only  then  bo  regarded  as  having  a  good  result  if  the  lower
limits  of  the  amount  of  active  serum  have  been  reached,  i.e.,  when
the  last  plates  again  show  an  increase  in  the  number  of  colonies.

A  certain  degree  of  control  on  the  plate  experiments  is  obtained
in  suitable  cases  by  placing  the  tubes  (from  which  a  few  drops  were
taken  for  sowing  into  plates)  into  a  thermostat  and  ob8er%'ing  them
the  next  day.  In  this  case  the  culture  controls  show  a  luxuriant
growth,  while  in  the  other  test-lubes,  depending  on  the  amount  of
serum,  either  a  growth  will  occur  or  not.  This  test-tube  experi-
ment, of  course,  will  only  then  show  a  result  if  the  bactericidal
power  of  the  serum  was  large  enough  to  kill  even  the  last  germ
in  the  corresponding  specimens.  But  if  even  only  a  few  germs
remain  alive  (in  consequence,  for  example,  of  a  special  resistance),
it  will  be  found  that  these  few,  after  the  bactericidal  substancea
are  used  up,  will  again  multiply  enormously.  Hence  the  test-tube
method  cannot  give  reliable  results  in  spore-bearing  bacteria.
For  the  same  reason  it  is  important,  in  making  plate  tests,  to
keep  the  tubes  in  the  thermostat  for  a  certain  particular  time,
which  must  be  determined  separately  for  each  bacterium;  for  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  killing  of  the  bacteria  can  be
represented  by  a  curve  whose  lowest  point  (lowest  number  of
living  germs)  must  be  appro.ximately  attained  if  marked  results  are
desired.  Either  side  of  this  point,  unless  this  point  be  0,  the  results
will  be  correspondingly  less.  Smaller  results,  however,  are  worth-
less for  all  these  experiments,  as  is  seen  when  we  consider  that  agglu-
tination, although  it  has  so  little  directly  to  do  with  bactericidal
action,  is  also  able  to  cause  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  colonies  on
a  plate  and  thus  simulate  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  germs.  This
is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  control  described  above  with  inactivated
senun,  in  which,  of  course,  the  agglutinin  is  still  present.  Is  so  im-
portant.

After  the  fresh  active  immune  aemm  has  been  tested  as  to  its
bactericidal  power  one  proceeds  with  the  examination  of  the  inactive
immune  .serum  plus  complement,  Inactivation  is  accomplished  in
accordance  mth  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  preceding  chapter.
For  complement  one  chooses  first  the  norma!  serum  of  the  .ajjecics
from  which  the  immune  serum  is  derived.  A  preliminary  trial  will
then  be  necessary  to  show  what  dose  of  this  normal  serum  can  be


TECHNIQUE  OF  BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.  353

employed  without  causing  bactericidal  action  by  the  normal  serum
itself.

The  dose  of  complement  should  be  such  that  the  plate  containing
only  complement  and  the  cultiu'e  differs  very  little  from  the  control
of  the  cultiu-e  sowing  alone.  Too  large  a  quantity  of  complement
should  be  avoided;  certainly  in  no  case  should  more  than  about  0.5  cc.
complementing  serum  be  used.  The  technique  then  is  as  follows:
1.0,  0.3,0.1,0.03,  0.01  cc.  of  inactive  inmiune  serum  are  placed  into
a  series  of  test-tubes;  to  each  of  these  is  then  added  the  same  amount
of  the  complementing  active  normal  serum  (e.g.  0.3  cc.)  and  the
bacterial  culture.  All  of  the  tubes  are  then  made  up  to  the  same
amount  (2  to  3  cc.)  with  physiological  salt  solution,  and  finally  each
tube  receives  three  drops  of  bouillon.  The  controls  in  this  case
must  be  still  more  numerous.  The  sterility  of  each  serum  must  be
demonstrated,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  inactive  immune  serum  by
itself  and  the  active  normal  serum  by  itself  are  inert.

The  result  of  such  an  experiment  is  usually  startling  at  first  sight
because  the  plates  which  had  the  largest  amounts  of  immune  serum
show  the  largest  number  of  colonies.  One  must  therefore  always
bear  in  mind  the  deflection  of  complements  in  consequence  of  an
excess  of  immune  body.  The  paradoxical  results  caused  by  this
deflection  of  complement  is  seen  not  only  in  the  plates  but  also  in
the  test-tube  experiment.  The  various  ways  in  which  the  comple-
ment is  deflected  from  its  destination  have  already  been  discussed
in  a  previous  chapter.  In  bactericidal  experiments  the  deflection
caused  by  an  excess  of  the  amboceptors  produced  by  immunization
is  especially  important.  In  a  mixture  of  bacteria,  complements,  and
large  amounts  of  amboceptor,  the  complement  is  bound  not  only  by
the  amboceptors  anchored  to  the  bacteria  but  also  in  large  measure
by  "  free  "  amboceptors  which  are  not  anchored  to  bacteria.  A
portion  of  the  anchored  amboceptor  therefore  finds  no  complement
at  its  disposal  and  is,  therefore,  imable  to  exert  any  bactericidal
action.  In  this  way  there  arises  a  relative  lack  of  complement.
This  can  occur  especially  if  part  of  the  amboceptors  has  become
changed  into  an  amboceptoid  with  increased  affinity  (Wechsberg,i
E.  Neisser  and  Friedemann^).  In  bactericidal  experiments,  how-
ever, the  cooperation  of  the  amboceptoids  has  not  yet  been  proved.

The  completion  of  amboceptors  can  be  disturbed  in  another  way.

»  Wiener  klin.  Wochensch.  1902.  »  Berl.  klin.  Wochensch.  1902.


354  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Thus  complement^iverting  groups  pre-existing  in  normal  serum  of
the  species  in  question,  und  which  have  not,  therefore,  onginsted
through  immimization,  may  be  present  or  may  be  act  free  by  the
inactivation  (normal  anticomplements,  etc.).  The  question  which
arisea,  namely,  whether  one  is  dealing  with  a  deflecting  body  of  nor-
mal serum  or  with  one  produced  by  imrnvniiation,  can,  of  course,
be  decided  by  the  previous  investigation  of  the  normal  serum  of  the
animal  in  question,  as  well  as  by  comparison  with  se\'eral  other  nor-
mal sera  of  the  same  species

In  all  of  these  cases,  however,  the  plates  with  the  largest  amounts
of  immune  serum  will  show  the  least  bactericidal  action,  i.e.,  the
lai^est  number  of  colonies.  From  this  it  follows  that  one  can  err
in  judging  the  bactericidal  power  of  a  serum  if  only  larger  amounts
of  immune  serum  are  used  for  the  bactericidal  test  (about  1.0,  0.3).
Thus  in  the  beginning  we  overlooked  the  high  bactericidal  power
of  a  dysentery  serum  (Shiga),  for  this  became  manifest  only  after
we  employed  doses  of  0.025  immune  serum  and  still  less.

The  deflection  of  complement  just  mentioned,  by  means  of  ambo-
ceptors produced  by  immunization  (or  by  amboceptoids) ,  permits
of  another  method  of  t«sting  by  which  also  the  serum  can  be  shown
to  be  a  specific  immune  scrum.  For  this  purpose  one  uses  an  active
normal  serum  bactericidal  in  itself  or  a  mixture  of  inactive  immune
serum  and  a  complement.  By  means  of  a  preliminarj'  test  one
determines  the  amount  of  serum  or  serum  mixture  which  completely
kills  the  amount  of  culture  sown.  To  such  a  dose  of  serum  or
senim  mixture  (bactericidal  in  itself)  decreasing  amounts  of  in-
active immune  serum  are  added,  when  it  will  usually  be  found  that
the  phenomenon  of  deflection  of  complement  again  appears.  Tliia
manifests  itself  by  the  fact  that  the  plates  with  the  larger  amounts
of  immune  serum  show  a  larger  number  of  colonies,  the  number  of
these  decreasing  in  proportion  with  the  amount  of  immune  serum
added.

In  order  to  interpret  the  results  of  the  plate  tests  correctly  it
is  first  necessary  to  be  sure  whether  one  is  dealing  with  a  normally
pre-existing  deflecting  body  or  with  one  produced  by  inununization
(see  alwve).  By  means  of  combining  experiments  it  must  also
bo  shown  whether  the  deflection  is  caused  by  amboceptors  or  aml>n-
ceptoids.  It  is  not  difficult,  by  binding  them  to  the  corresponding
bacteria,  to  remove  the  amboceptors  produced  by  immunization.
In  most  cases  the  addition  of  a  moderate  amount  of  bacteria


TECHNIQUE  OF  BACTERICIDAL  TEST-TUBE  EXPERIMENTS.  355

fully  killed  (65°  for  ^-1  hour)  and  centrifuged  will  suffice.  In  these
cases,  however,  the  supernatant  fluid  must  always  be  examined
microscopically  to  make  sure  that  all  the  bacteria  have  been  removed
by  the  centrifuging.  For  any  such  dead  bacteria  loaded  with  ambo-
ceptor, which  should  remain  in  the  fluid,  would  serve  to  deflect  com-
j)lements  in  the  further  course  of  the  experiment.  However,  in
many  cases  it  is  possible  to  remove  all  the  bacteria  by  centrifuging.
In  that  case  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  bactericidal,  as  well  as  the  com-
pi cmcnt-de fleeting  power  of  the  serums  has  disappeared  with  the  absorbed
amboceptor.  If  only  the  deflecting  power  of  the  serum  remains,
while  the  bactericidal  power  has  disappeared,  and  if  the  comparative
test  has  shown  that  one  was  not  dealing  with  a  normal  anticom-
plemcnt  or  such  like,  we  conclude  that  a  complementophile  ambo-
ceptoid  is  present,  one  which  has  originated  from  the  amboceptor
j)roduced  by  immunization.

In  many  cases  in  which  a  plate  test,  as  it  has  previously  been
decribed,  has  seemed  unsuited,  another  method  has  been  used  to
overcome  the  difficulty.  Thus  after  allowing  the  immune  serum  to
act,  instead  of  pouring  plates,  one  can  take  a  loop  from  each  test-
tui^e  and  make  slant  agar  streaks.  If  one  t"he  nmerely  regards
ver>'  broad  results,  such  as  no  growth,  luxuriant  growth,  one  will
obtain,  by  this  simple  means,  useful  comparative  values.  In  this
way  Dr.  Lipstein  and  I  have  several  times  determined  the  power
of  a  gonococcus  serum  which  we  produced  by  immunization.


XXXI.  THE    PROPERTY    OF   THE    BRAIN    TO
!  NEUTRALIZE  TETANUS  TOXIN.'


By  Dr.  £.  Marx,  Member  of  the  lostitute.

Wassermann  and  Takaki's*  communication  stating  that  it  is
possible  by  means  of  normal  brain  substance  to  decrease  the  toxicity
of  tetanus  toxin,  or  even,  in  suitable  closes  to  entirely  neutralize  it,
was  undoubtedly  of  great  theoretical  and  practical  significance.
Their  statement  was  confirmed  by  nmny  different  Investigators,
Ransom,^  Mctchnikoff,*  Marie ,^  lilumenthal,^  Milchner,'  Uanyz*
Ziipnik,*  and  others.  These  experiments  were  devised  by  Wasser-
mann and  Takaki  as  a  test  for  the  correctness  of  the  side-chain  theory-,
according  to  which  the  cells,  susceptible  to  the  poison,  possess  recep-
tors which  anchor  the  same.  They  argued,  if  the  theory  were  cor-
rect, that  the  brain-cells  which  in  vivo  are  susceptible  to  the  poison
should  also  be  capable,  at  least  in  the  fresh  state,  to  bind  the  poison
in  vitro,  i.e.,  it  should  be  possible  to  neutralize  solutions  of  tetanus
poison  with  brain  substance.  As  is  well  known  the  result  of  the
experiments  agreed  with  the  theoretical  premises  and  tliey  were  so
interpreted  by  Wassermann,

This  interpretation  was  first  denied  by  Metchnikoff.  He  as  well
as   Marie   had   repeated   Wassermann's  experiments   and   conceded

'  Reprint  from  the  Zcitiii^h.  f.  Hygiene  und  Infectiona-Kraiikheilen,  Vol.  40,
1902.

'  Berl.  klin.  Wochensch.

'  Deutsch.med.  Wochensch.  1S98,  No.  5  (communicated  through  v.  Behring).

•  Annalea  de  I'lnstit.  Pasteur,  180S,  pp.  81  and  263.

•Ibid.  1898.  p.  91,

'Deutsch.  raed.  Wocheawh.  1898,  No.  12.

'Ibid,.  1S98,  No.  16.

■  Annalea  de  I'lnstit.  Pasteur,  1899.

'  Prager  med.  Wochensch.  1899.  Nos.  U  and  15.


TETANUS  TOXIN  NEUTRALIZED  BY  BRAIN  SUBSTANCE.  357

their  correctness,  but  on  the  basis  of  further  experiments  made  by
Marie,  Metchnikoff  was  led  to  another  interpretation  of  the  results.
Marie  found  that  when  poison  and  brain  substance  were  injected
separately,  even  large  amounts  of  brain  substance  did  not  exert
any  protection.  Metchnikoff,  therefore,  did  not  believe  in  any  neu-
tralization of  poison  by  the  brain  substanc  in  vitro.  He  saw  the
cause  of  the  apparent  neutralization  in  mixtures  of  tetanus  poison
and  brain  substance  in  the  leucocyte-attracting  power  of  the  brain
substance  injected  with  the  poison.  According  to  him  the  leuco-
cytes were  the  agents  which  destroyed  the  poison,  and  the  brain
substance  only  the  means  for  attracting  these.

It  is  hardly  within  my  province  to  subject  these  experiments
to  a  thorough  criticism;  that  must  be  left  to  those  directly  interested.
I  should,  however,  like  to  mention  two  points  which  appear  to  me
not  to  be  sufficiently  regarded.  First,  it  must  be  remembered  that
with  a  dissolved  antitoxin  the  success  in  neutralization  on  mixing
antitoxin  and  poison  in  vitro  is  considerably  higher  than  the  thera-
peutic success  which  the  same  dose  attains  in  an  animal.  In  the
above  experiments  there  is  added  to  this  the  fact  that  we  are  not
dealing  with  a  dissolved  antitoxin.  On  the  contrary,  the  poison-
neutralizing  power  is  exerted  by  a  mass  which,  from  experience,  we
know  is  absorbed  with  great  difficulty.

Subsequently  v.  Behring,  as  a  result  of  his  combining  experi-
ments with  brain  substance,  expressed  doubts  as  to  the  correctness
of  Wasscrmann's  explanation,  without,  however,  positively  taking
either  one  side  or  the  other.  Basing  his  reasons  on  the  experiments
of  Kitashima,  v.  Behring  ^  stated  his  views  as  follows:

"  If  an  emulsion  of  fresh  brain  substance  from  a  guinea-pig  is
mixed  with  a  certain  dose  of  tetanus  poison,  a  dose  whose  power  is
exactly  known,  it  will  be  found  that  with  small  amounts  the  poison
will  completely  lose  its  poisonous  property;  with  larger  amounts
there  is  a  distinct  decrease  of  this  property.  One  would  now  sup-
pose that  large  amounts  of  poison,  whose  poisonous  property  has
been  decreased  by  means  of  brain  emulsion,  would  require  less  anti-
toxin for  their  neutralization  than  before  the  addition  of  the  brain
emulsion.  But  this  is  by  no  means  always  the  case.  In  the  experi-
ment—

*  V.  Behring,  Allgemeine  Therapie  der  InfectioDs-Krankheiten,  Part  J,
p.  1033.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


O.OOS  cc.  poison  solution  No.  3,
0.2  cc.  brain  emulsion;

one  hour  later:
Viooo  antitoxin  unit —

we  not  only  found  no  excess  of  antitoxin,  but  found  that  the  inji
tion  of  such  a  mixture  into  mice  caused  death  by  tetanus."

The  result  of  this  experiment  led  v,  Behring  to  conclude  that
further  study  of  the  poison-neutralizing  power  of  guinea-pig  brain
vould  probably  decide  the  question  in  favor  of  Melchnikofl's  views
as  outlined  above.  A  subsequent  study  from  v.  Beliring's  instv
tute  demonstrated  that  a  union  evidently  takes  place  when  livii
brain  and  tetanus  ]ioison  come  together.

Ransom '  studied  the  conditions  found  in  the  suI>arachnoid  8|
after  injections  of  tetanus  poison  or  tetanus  antitoxin.  It
lead  us  too  far  to  recapitulate  these  brilliant  experiments,  and
«hall,  therefore,  content  myself  by  quoting  Ransom's  conclusii
■which  are  as  follows:

"  These  experiments  strongly  corroborate   the  assumption
tetanus  antitoxin  is  bound  in  the  central  nervous  system;  they  a1
indicate  that  this  union   takes  place  somewhat  gradually.

There  is  surely  no  objection  to  our  placing  the^  experimeaj
on  the  living  brain  parallel  with  those  made  on  the  dead  brain,
■would  be  incomprehensible  for  a  brain,  removed  at  once  from
freshly  killed  animal,  to  be  different  in  its  property  of  binding  tetani
poison  frora  what  it  was  a  few  minutes  previously  in  the  living  animat

1  had  just  begun  a  study  in  thk  institute  dealing  with  these
problems,  but  discontinued  them  on  the  appearance  of  Ransom's
paper  since  that  had  so  well  covered  the  subject.

Some  time  after  this  Kitashima's  experiments  were  taken  up
Gruber,^  although  without  re-examination.  In  these  experimeol
Gruber  saw  further  proof  of  the  incorrectness,  according  to  him.
Ehrlich's  Side-chain  Theory.  In  resiionse  to  this,  however,  Paltauf '
very  aptly  demonstrated  that  a  simple  calculation  wilt  show  that
Kitashima's  experiments  cannot  in  any  way  be  regarded  as
elusive.    He  expressed  himself  as  follows:

•  Hoppe-Seyler's  Zeitschrift  tiir  physiol.  Ciiemie  1900-1901.  Vol.  XXX|
p.  282  et  seq.

'Munch,  med.  Wochensch.  1901,  Nos.  46-49.
■Wiener  klin.  Wochensch,  1901,  No.  51.


TETANUS  TOXIN  NEUTRALIZED  BY   BRAIN  SUBSTANCE.  359

"0.008  cc.  tetanus  poison  No.  3+0.2  cc.  brain;  one  hour  later,
^/looo  antitoxin  unit.  Tetanus  poison  No.  3  is  very  powerful.
1  cc.  equals  5  million  mouse.  15  mouse  is  a  fatal  dose  for  a  mouse;
in  the  experiment,  therefore,  40,000  mouse  or  more  than  2600Xthe  fatal
dose  is  employed,  which  quantity,  to  be  sure,  is  neutralized  by  Viooo
antitoxin  unit.  According  to  Wassermann,  however,  1  cc.  emulsion
can  at  the  most  neutraUze  10  fatal  doses;  according  to  others,  from
30  to  100  fatal  doses.  Usually  1/5  cc.  suffices  to  neutralize  not  over
20  doses  of  poison,  an  amount  which  is  very  minute  when  2600  doses
of  poison  are  concerned."

It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  Blumenthal  and  Wassermann  ^
opposed  Gruber's  view.  Blumenthal  called  attention  to  the  fact
that  when  brain  substance  is  added  to  a  toxin  solution  it  is  possible
by  centrifuging  to  show  that  the  original  toxin  solution  has  been
robbed  of  its  toxic  power,  a  result  which  cannot  be  obtained  with
boiled  brain.  He  also  reminded  his  readers  that  he  had  shown  how,
by  introducing  the  toxin  in  vivo,  the  power  of  the  brain  to  neutralize
poison  had  been  diminished,  as  was  seen  on  testing  the  same  post-
mortem. This  diminution  was  due  to  the  union  of  the  brain  sub-
stance with  the  toxin,  and  was  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  poison
injected.

Wassermann  too  is  still  convinced  that  there  is  a  chemical  union.
His  view  is  also  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  in  the  rabbit,  in  which,
according  to  the  researches  of  Donitz  and  Roux,  an  extensive  dis-
tribution of  receptors  capable  of  binding  tetanus  toxin  was  to  be
assumed,  other  organs  besides  the  brain  are  also  capable  of  neutraliz-
ing the  poison  in  vitro.  This  is  in  direct  contrast  to  the  guinea-pig
in  which  only  the  brain  possesses  this  power.

In  view  of  all  this  we  determined  to  finally  decide  whether  on  the
addition  of  brain  to  tetanus  poison  there  is  an  actual  union  of  poison,
and  whether  if  this  is  so  there  is  a  summation  of  neutralizing  actions
of  brain  and  antitoxin.  Our  old  studies  were  therefore  again  taken  up.
We  began  with  the  re-examination  of  Kitashima's  experiments,  but
under  such  conditions  that  the  errors  which,  independently  of  us,
Paltauf  had  already  pointed  out,  namely,  the  employment  of  too
large  doses  of  poison,  were  avoided.

1  Deutsche  med.  Wochensch.  1902,  Vereinsbeilage,  No.  3.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


The  Material  Ewplotbd,  and  its  Preparation.

In  these  experiments  b.  great  deal  depends  on  the  manner  in  which
the  brain  emulsion  is  prepared.  We  shall  therefore  again  describe
the  method  in  detail,  although  Wassermami  and  Takaki  did  so  when
they  reported  their  experiments.

Each  guinea-pig  brain  was  thoroughly  mbced  with  10  cc,  0.85%
salt  solution.  In  order  to  obtain  uniform  and  good  results  it  is  neces-
sary that  the  emulsion  be  as  fine  as  possible.  For  this  purpose  the
brain  substance  was  crushed  and  the  salt  solutionadded.at  first  drop
by  drop,  until  a  fine  uniform  emulsion  resulted.  It  is  well  instead  of
using  a  mortar  to  use  conical  glasses,  such  as  arc  employed  at  the
Rabies  Inoculation  Stations  for  preparing  the  fine  cord  emulsions  for
injections.  These  conical  glasses  are  about  10  era.  high  and  taper
not  to  a  point,  but  to  a  heraisplierical  surface  into  which  a  ground-
glass  pestle  fits.  •  This  very  fine  emulsion  is  then  forced  through
Herzberg  funnels,  such  as  are  used  in  testing  paper.  If  the  emulsion
is  forced  through  the  finest  of  these,  fitted  with  wire-gauze  with  the
smallest  mesh  obtainable,  it  will  be  found  that  the  emulsion  is  actually
free  from  macroscopically  coarse  particles.

The  poison  1  employed  was  a  tetanus  toxin  preserved  in  the
institute  for  diagnostic  purposes.  This  poison,  I  may  add,  owing
to  the  special  method  of  preparation,  difTered  from  Bchring's  test
poisons  (at  least  from  those  which  can  be  obtained  in  the  market)
in  being  free  from  spores.  This  fact  may  perhaps  not  be  without
significance,  for,  under  the  conditions  which  here  obtain,  a  development
of  the  spores  with  consequent  production  of  poison  in  the  animal  can-
not be  denied  oithand.

This  possibility  must  surely  often  be  counted  on.  It  was  for  this
reason  that  Ehrlich  long  ago  allowed  only  such  tetanus  poisons  as
were  freed  as  much  as  possible  from  spores  to  be  used  for  testing,
and  for  exact  experimental  studies.  I  shall  soon  publish  an  account
of  the  peculiarities  of  the  procedure  used  in  this  institute  for  obtaining
such  poisons,  and  also  describe  a  method  for  preserving  tetanus  poison
permanently,  which  we  have  found  very  useful.

The  antitoxin  used  was  also  that  preserved  for  testing  purposes.
1  grm.  contains  100  A.  E.  Bcbring.


TETANUS  TOXIN  NEUTRALIZED  BY  BRAIN  SUBSTANCE.  361


Method  of  Making  the  Experiments.

The  method  employed  followed  exactly  in  principle  that  em-
ployed by  Kitashima.  A  1  to  400  dilution  of  the  normal  solution
of  the  poison  was  prepared.  To  each  cubic  centimeter  of  this,  which
represents  forty  times  the  fatal  dose  for  a  mouse  of  15  grm.,  the
desired  number  of  doses  of  brain  emulsion,  or  of  a  1: 10  dilution  of
this  emulsion  was  added,  the  fluid  made  up  to  2.5  cc.  by  the  addition
of  0.85%  NaCl  solution,  and  the  mixture  thoroughly  shaken.  At
the  end  of  an  hour  0.5  cc.  of  the  dilutions  of  serum  in  question  were
added  and  after  once  more  thoroughly  shaking,  i-cc.  doses  of  this
mixture  were  injected  subcutaneously  into  white  mice  weighing  15  grm.
It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  controls  containing  only  brain  and
poison  the  procedure  was  exactly  the  same  except  that  0.5  cc.  NaCl
solution  were  added  at  the  end  of  the  hour  instead  of  0.5  cc.  serum.
The  control  containing  only  poison  and  serum  was  treated  in  exactly
the  same  manner  and  was  injected  in  the  usual  way  after  the  anti-
toxin had  been  allowed  to  act  in  the  toxin  for  thirty  minutes.  It
may  be  added  that  no  appreciable  difference  was  observed  if  the
mixture  of  poison -f brain -f serum  was  injected  directly  after  the
addition  of  the  serum  or  if  the  serum  was  allowed  to  act  on  the  brain
+  poison  mixture  for  half  an  hour.

Results  of  the  Experiments.

My  results,  obtained  from  over  two  hundred  experiments  on
mice,  do  not  furnish  the  slightest  ground  for  assuming  that  the  phe-
nomenon found  by  Kitashima  is  the  rule.  On  the  contrary,  from
my  experiments  I  can  positively  conclude  that  there  is  always  a
summation  of  the  poison-neutralizing  action  of  the  brain  and  anti-
toxin; furthermore  that  there  is  never  any  interference  with  the
antitoxic  action  of  the  senun  as  a  result  of  the  previous  action  of
the  brain  on  the  tetanus  poison.  This  fact  was  constantly  observed,
no  matter  whether  large  or  very  small  doses  were  employed.  The
series  of  tests  with  brain  emulsions,  as  well  as  those  with  brain  and
poison  alone  without  serum,  do  not,  to  be  sure,  proceed  as  smoothly
as  those  with  poison  +  senun;  however,  this  is  not  at  all  surprising;
on  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  natural  that  the  particles  suspended  in
the  emulsion,  even  if  they  are  very  fine,  cannot  produce  as  uniform
effects  as  a  solution  of  antitoxin.


362


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


The  results  of  my  experiments  were  bII  the  same  and  their  sig-
nificance is  absolutely  clear.  From  the  large  number  of  tests  I  shall
therefore  give  but  three,  These  will  inciclently  show  the  well-known
fact  that  the  power  to  neutralize  poison  is  often  very  tliflerent  in
different  cases.


Degree  □(  DUutiua  i


Control  TollD-l-


1:17500
1:16000
1:12500

1:10000
1:  8000
I:  6000
1:  4000
Control:  only  toxin  and
1.5  cc.  Drain


moderately  sick


Degr«  ol  Dilution

ftbe

Control  To»in  +Senini.

TheExperimenlrTnsin  +  O.act
Bruin  +  Serum,

1:17500

t3

moderately  sick

1:16000

t3

1:12500

t-*

1:10000

t4

very  severely  eick

1:   6000

(iverelyslok

1:   4000

moderately  sick

1:   3000

I:   1000

well

Control:  onlytoxi

0.2  ce.  bruin

nand

)

t4

Degrea  ot  Dilution  of  the
eerum.

Cflntro!

The  EsperinMinl,

0.1  «*.  Br^nV
8erum.

The  Experiment.

Benrall.     ToiiD  +

O.aoc.  Br«in  +

8b  mm.

1:17500
l:15O0O
1:10000
1:  5000
Control:  only  toxin  +
0.1  cc.or0.2cc.  brain

4

■■4

moderately  sick
J             ~

very  sick

moderately  eick
t4

very  sick
moderately  aick

t4

m


TETANUS  TOXIN  NEUTRALIZED  BY  BRAIN  SUBSTANCE.  363

All  of  these  experiments  show  that  the  mice  which  received  only
toxin  and  brain  died,  whereas  additions  of  antitoxin  as  did  not  by
themselves  suffice  to  neutralize  the  dose  of  poison  were  able  to  save
the  animals  which  received  the  doses  of  brain  emulsion.  Hence
the  action  of  the  brain  doses  (which  by  themselves  do  not  protect)
adds  itself  to  that  of  non-protecting  doses  of  antitoxin  and  so  forms
a  protective  dose.

Risumi.

1.  The  neutralizing  effect  possessed  by  guinea-pig  brain  on  tetanus
toxin  is  supplemented  by  that  of  antitoxin  when  tliese  are  allowed  to
act  on  the  poison  in  vitro,

2.  From  this  one  can  conclude  that  this  neutralizing  effect  of  guinea-
pig  brain  on  tetanus  toxin  and  that  of  the  antitoxin  can  be  regarded
as  equivalent  properties.


XXXII.  THE    PROTECTIVE    SUBSTANCES    OF    THE
BLOOD.i

By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehrlich.

More  than  ten  years  have  passed  since  the  studies  of  Fliigge
and  of  Buchner  and  of  their  pupils  directed  attention  to  the  bac-
tericidal substances  present  in  normal  blood  serum  and  their  rela-
tion to  natural  immunity.  Buchner  es[jeeially  assumed  that  the
senim  of  each  animal  species  contained  a  simple  definite  protective
body,  the  alexin,  which  was  able  to  kill  off  foreign  eell.s,  especially
bacteria  and  the  blood-cells  of  other  species;  that  this  acts  somfr-
what  after  the  manner  of  a  proteolj'tic  ferment  and  leaves  the  cell
elements  of  its  cvn  species  iinscatheti.  The  recent  development
of  the  doctrine  of  immunity,  inaugurated  by  v.  Eehring's  discovery
of  antitoxin,  has  also  shed  considerable  light  on  the  nature  of  pro-
tective bodies  preformed  normally,  so  that  it  now  seems  advisable
to  subject  the  mutual  relations  existing  between  these  to  a  closer
analysis.

There  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that,  in  accordance  with  the
principle  enunciated  by  Virchow  for  the  relation  existing  between
cell  physiology  and  cell  pathology,  the  normal  protective  substances
are  subject  to  the  same  developmental  laws  as  the  artificially  pro-
duced antitoxic  and  bactericidal  substances.  It  is  obvious  that
with  the  artificially  produced  protective  substances,  especially  with
the  antitoxins,  it  will  be  far  easier  to  gain  an  insight  into  the  mechan-
ism of  their  development,  for  in  tliis  ease  one  possesses  not  only
the  exciting  agent  (as,  for  example,  the  toxin),  but  also  the  resulting
specific  product  (the  specific  antitoxin),  making  it  possible  to  study
their  mutual  chemical  relations.


'  .\ddresa  delivered  in  (he  general  HeRsion  of  the  73d  Congres."  of  German
Naturaliata  and  Physicians.  Hamburg,  Sept.  25.  1901.  (Reprinted  from  the
DeulBChe  med.  Wochenschritt  1901.  Nos.  51  and  52.)


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD,  305

This,  however,  ia  not  possible  ia  the  case  of  the  substances  natu-
rally present,  and,  considering  the  complicated  chemistry  of  the
living  organism,  we  shall  probably  long  continue  to  be  ignorant
of  the  substances  which  act  as  the  physiological  excitants.

Hence  it  is  not  a  mere  coincidence  that  the  attempt  to  formu-
late a  theory  for  the  development  of  the  protective  substances  suc-
ceeded first  in  connection  with  those  artificially  produced.  Tliis  is
now  well  known  as  the  aide-chain  or  receptor  theory.  According
to  my  view  this  theory  ia  also  of  the  highest  significance  for  the  con-
ception of  the  nature  of  the  alexins.  I  shall,  however,  first  outhne
my  views  on  this  subject  as  they  are  applied  to  the  formation  of
antitoxin,  as  this  is  comparatively  the  simplest  to  study,

There  were,  as  you  all  know,  cliiefly  two  views  concerning  the
formalion  of  antitoxin,  namely,  the  hypothetical  metamorphosis  ol
toxm  into  antitoxin,  and  the  secretion  theory,  which  approaches
somewhat  the  side-chain  standpoint.  The  former  was  based  on
the  ol>servation  that  the  antitoxin  excited  by  a  certain  to;:in  acts
only  against  just  this  toxin  and  against  no  other.  This  specific
action  is  such  a  conspicuous  phenomenon  that  it  was  at  first  believed
that  the  intimate  relation  of  toxin  to  antitoxin  could  only  be  explained
by  assuming  the  toxin  itself  to  be  the  mother  substance  of  the  anti-
toxin. So  even  to  this  day,  Buchner  maintains  the  view  that  the
antitoxins  and  related  substances  do  not  correspond  to  preformed
or  even  wholly  newly  formed  constituents  of  the  organism,  but  that
they  are  non-poisonous  transformation  products  of  the  substances
introduced  for  purposes  of  immunization.  In  this  ca'ie,  therefore,
the  relationship  of  antibody  to  the  substances  exciting  its  produc-
tion would  be  due  to  a  similarity  of  the  two  components.  In  other
words,  there  would  be  no  antagonism  such  as  exists  between  acid  and
base,  but  an  attraction  of  like  to  hke,  as  is  seen,  for  example,  in  poly-
merization, in  the  attraction  of  crystallization,  or  in  the  structure
of  starch  granules.

Against  this  I  should  like  to  point  out  that  this  assumption  can-
not apply  even  from  a  purely  chemical  standpoint  because  the
processes  advanced  as  analogous  occur  in  concentrated  solutions,
while  neutralization  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  takes  place  in  extremely
dilute  solutions.

The  biological  conditions,  however,  constitute  the  most  serious
objection  to  the  assumption  of  a  transformation  of  toxin  into  anti-
toxin.    First  comes  the  enormous  diff'erence  in  quantity  which  may


36G  WtLLECTED  STLiUIES  IN  IMMUNITY,

exist  between  the  toxin  introduced  and  the  resulting  antitoxin.
Ivnorr,  for  example,  has  shown  that  the  injection  of  leUmus  toxin  into
a  horse  is  followed  by  the  production  of  an  amount  of  antitoxin  which
would  neutralize  100,000  times  the  dose  ol  poison  employed.  Such
an  enormous  disproportion  cannot  be  reconciled  with  Buchner'a  view.
according  to  which  each  part  of  toxin  would  make  an  aotitoxin
equivalent.  This  ratio  can  be  explained  only  by  a  theorj-  which
makes  the  production  of  antibody  more  independent  of  the  exciting
agent.

Another  fact,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  a  transformation
of  toxin  into  antitoxin,  is  the  marked  difference  existing  between
Bo-called  active  and  passive  immunity.  If,  for  example,  by  injecting
an  animal  with  poisons  or  bacteria  an  active  immunity  is  produced,
this  immunity  may  in  favorable  cases  persist  for  years,  while
in  passive  immunity  the  preformed  antitoxin  introduced  into  the
organism  exists  but  a  short  time,  Such  a  difference  cnuld  not  exist
if  the  antitoxin  were  nothing  else  than  transformed  toxin,  for  m
that  case  it  should  be  absolutely  immaterial  how  the  antitoxin  now
in  the  organism  had  originated.  The  difference,  however,  deifcnds
on  the  fact  that  in  active  immunity  the  tissues  of  the  body  con-
stantly produce  new  antitoxm,  keeping  pace  with  the  excretion  of
the  same.

This  production  of  the  antitoxin  by  the  body-cells  is  furtlier-
more  confirmed  by  the  interesting  experiments  of  Roux  and  \'aiUard.
and  of  Salomonscn  and  Madsen.  They  took  an  animal  which  liad
been  actively  immunized,  and  whose  serum  showed  a  constant  amount
of  antitoxin,  and  by  means  of  repeated  \enesection  abstractttl  a
considerable  portion  of  its  blood.  In  case  the  antitoxin  had  been
derived  from  the  toxin  introduced  there  should,  now  that  the  last
traces  of  poison  had  disappeared  from  the  body,  have  been  a  marked
loss  of  antitoxin  from  the  blood.  On  the  contrary  within  a  short
time  it  was  found  that  the  amount  of  antitoxin  had  again  reached
its  previous  level.  Another  point  in  support  of  the  assumption  that
the  body-celts  produce  the  antitoxin  is  an  experiment  of  Salomonscn
and  Madsen,  which  shows  that  the  amount  of  antitoxin  present  in  tlie
blood  of  an  actively  immunized  animal  is  increased  if  the  animal  is
treated  with  substances  which  increase  the  secretion  of  blood-cells
in  general,  e.g.  pilocarpine.  This  experiment  was  advanced  by
palomonsen  and  Madsen  as  absolutely  opposed  to  the  transfonnataon
hypothesis  and  supporting  their  secretion  theory.


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  367

There  is  one  fact,  however,  by  which  the  transformation  hypothesis
is  especially  refuted,  namely,  that  antitoxins  can  occur  in  the  blood
of  normal  individuals.  Thus  diphtheria  antitoxin  is  found  in  the
blood  of  horses  in  about  20-30%  of  the  animals  examined,  although
diphtheria  infection  is  surely  a  rare  exception  with  these  animals.
Horse  serum  furthermore  contains  antibodies  against  one  of  the  poisons
produced  by  tetanus  bacilli,  tetanolysin,  but  not  against  the  tetanizing
poison  of  the  same  bacilli,  the  tetanospasmin,  although  the  immune
serum  artificially  produced  contains  both  antibodies.

Just  these  observations,  which  can  easily  be  extended,  show  that
even  the  normal  organism  can  produce  true  antitoxins  without  the
intervention  of  the  corresponding  bacterial  substances.  Hence  these
antibodies  cannot  be  transformation  products  of  the  poisons  injected,
but  are  products  of  normal  cell  activity.  The  explanation  especially
of  these  normal  processes  constitutes  one  of  the  chief  points  in  the  side-
chain  theory.

This  theory  is  based  primarily  on  a  thorough  analysis  of  the
relations  between  toxin  and  antitoxin.  It  was  found,  by  means  of
test-tube  experiments  with  ricin  and  related  bodies  which  act  on  red
blood-cells,  that  it  was  extremely  probable  that  toxin  and  antitoxin
act  chemically  directly  on  each  other,  forming  a  new  innocuous  com-
bination. It  was  now  necessary  to  study  the  neutralization  of  these
two  substances  in  all  directions  in  great  detail.  For  this  purpose  1
chose  diphtheria  toxin  and  antitoxin,  because  the  guinea-pig  organism
furnishes  such  a  uniform  test  object  for  this  poison  that  exact  quan-
titative determinations,  such  as  are  used  in  physics  and  chemistry,
are  attainable  in  animal  experiments.  The  limit  of  error  in  the  titra-
tion of  diphtheria  senmi  titrations  is  not  more  than  1%,  surely  an
astonishing  result  if  we  consider  that  we  are  dealing  with  substances
which  chemically  aa  yet  are  entirely  unknown.

The  results  which  I  obtained  in  the  earlier  years  of  my  investiga-
tions were  really  very  discouraging,  for  they  seemed  to  present  an
insurmountable  obstacle  for  the  chemical  conception.  In  chemical
processes  when  two  substances  unite  to  form  a  third  substance,
in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  stoichiometry,  we  must  insist  that  these
components  act  on  one  another  in  definite  equivalent  proportions.
In  the  action  of  diphtheria  antitoxin  or  toxin,  however,  this  law
seemed  to  be  utterly  disregarded.  Thus  in  twelve  different  toxic
bouillons  I  first  determined  the  quantity  which  was  neutralized  by  a
constant  amoimt  of  antitoxin;    in  certain  instances  by  the  official


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN    IMMUNITY.

standard  unit  of  antitoxin.  The  figures  thus  obtained,  as  was  to  be
expected,  varied  greatly:  in  one  case  the  antitoxin  unit  neutralized
0.25  ec.  toxic  bouillon,  in  another  case  1.5  cc.  This  is  not  in  the  least
surprising,  for  it  is  well  known  that  the  an;iount  of  poison  given  off  by
the  bacteria  to  the  medium  depends  on  the  strain  of  the  bacilli,  on
the  preparation  of  the  bouillon,  etc.,  so  that  strong  poisons  and  weak
poisons  arise.  But,  assuming  that  the  toxin  molecule  follows  chemical
laws  in  its  union  with  antitoxin,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  in  the
different  poisons  the  amounts  neutralized  by  1 1.  E.  (Immun  £inheit=
Immune  Unit),  and  designated  as  Lq,  would  contain  equal  amounts
of  true  poison,  or  in  other  words  that  the  various  poisons  which  differ
in  their  Lg  doses  represent  nothing  more  than  more  or  less  concentrated
solutions  of  the  same  toxic  substance.  The  amount  of  poison  con-
tained in  a  solution  ia  measured  in  poison  units,  i.e.,  that  amount  of
toxic  bouillon  which  just  suffices  to  kill  a  guinea-pig  weighing  250  grm.
in  four  days,  Thus  if  in  a  certain  poison  A  we  find  the  amount  neu-
tralized by  1  antitoxic  unit,  i.e.,  the  Lq  dose,  to  be  1  cc,  and  if  we
further  find  that  0.01  cc.  of  the  same  poison  suffices  to  kill  a  guinea-pig,
we  say  that  in  this  poison  the  Lq  dose  represents  100  poison  units.
In  accordance  with  the  law  of  equivalent  proportions  we  should  liave
expected  that  the  Lo  dose  of  the  various  poisons  would  contain  the
same  number  of  poison  units.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  result
was  quite  the  reverse,  tor  we  found  that  the  number  of  poison  units
contained  in  Lq  varied  from  a  minimum  of  10  units  to  a  maximum
of  150.  According  to  the  view  held  at  that  time  that  the  antitoxin
was  bound  only  by  the  toxin,  this  wide  divergence  from  the  laws  of
equivalence  could  not  help  but  cause  the  assumption  that  the
relations  existing  between  these  two  opposing  substances  were  other
than  purely  chemical  ones.

Finally  by  employing  a  method  of  study  which  has  proved  of
considerable  value  in  scientific  investigations,  namely,  the  genetic
method,  I  succeeded  in  getting  some  light  on  this  subject.  Follow-
ing this  I  subjected  one  and  the  same  toxic  bouillon  to  comparative
tests  at  different  times.  I  may  be  permitted  to  demonstrate  this  by
means  of  a  simple  schematic  example.  In  a  freshly  made  poison
we  find  that  the  quantity  which  is  neutralized  by  1  I.  E.,  in  other
words  the  /-o  dose,  amnunts  to  1  cc,  and  that  this  contains  100  [xiison
units.  If  the  same  poison  is  examined  at  the  end  of  about  six  months,
it  is  found  that  the  Lg  dose  is  the  same,  but  that  this  contains  only
50,  i.e.,  half  the  number  of  toxic  doses.     That  is  to  say,  the  toxlo


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  369

bouillon  still  possesses  the  original  neutralizing  power  but  a  weaker
toxic  action.  Hence  toxic  action  on  an  animal  and  combining  power
for  antitoxin  must  be  two  different  functions,  the  former  remaining
constant  and  the  latter  decreasing.

If  we  regard  these  conditions  from  the  chemical  standpoint,  we
shall  see  that  they  are  most  readily  explained  by  assuming  that  the
toxin  molecule  produced  by  the  diphtheria  bacilli  contains  two  dif-
ferent groups,  of  which  one,  termed  the  haptophore  group,  effects
the  union  with  antitoxin,  while  the  other,  the  toxophore  group,
represents  the  actual  cause  of  the  toxicity.  These  two  groups  also
differ  in  their  stability,  for  the  toxophore  group  is  very  unstable
the  haptophore  group  far  more  stable.  Modified  poisons  in  which
there  has  been  a  destruction  of  the  toxophore  group  while  the  hap-
tophore group  has  been  preserved,  and  which  have  therefore  com-
pletely lost  their  toxic  action,  are  called  "toxoids."

The  presence  of  such  toxoids  fully  explains  the  apparent  devia-
tions from  the  laws  of  equivalence  which  are  observed  in  neutralizing
tests  with  toxin  and  antitoxin.  This  furnishes  new  and,  to  my  mind,
incontrovertible  proof  for  the  chemical  view  of  the  process  of  neutral-
ization.

In  diphtheria  poison  at  least,  for  reasons  into  which  I  cannot
here  enter,  it  seems  that  the  affinity  of  the  haptophore  group  of  the
toxoid  molecule  for  the  antitoxin  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  the
unchanged  toxin.  This  indicates  that  the  two  functionating  groups
of  the  toxin  molecule  possess  a  certain  degree  of  independence.  I
have  tried  further  by  means  of  refined  investigating  methods,  such
as  partial  neutralizations,  to  extend  the  views  concerning  the  con-
stitution of  the  poison  molecule.  My  observations,  so  far  as  the
facts  are  concerned,  have  been  completely  confirmed  from  various
sources.  Mention  should  be  made  especially  of  the  excellent  study
(A  Madsen  on  diphtheria  toxin  and  tetanus  toxin,  and  of  the  inter-
esting experiments  recently  published  by  Jacoby  on  ricin  and  its
toxoids.

In  studying  the  two  groups  of  the  poison  molecule,  we  are  con-
cerned not  only  with  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  process  of
neutralization.  The  presence  of  these  groups  gives  us  an  insight
both  into  the  nature  of  the  poisoning  and  the  origin  of  the  antitoxin.

So  far  as  this  last  point  is  concerned,  two  facts  in  particular
indicate  that  the  haptophore  group  takes  a  leading  part  in  the
immunity  reaction   in   the  organism,  viz.,  (1)  the  observation   that


370  COLLECTED  STtJDlES  IN   IMMUNITY.

toxoids,  which  lack  the  toxophore  group,  are  still  capable  of  exciting
the  production  of  typical  antitoxins,  and  (2)  that  toxins  whose
haptophore  group  is  preoccupied  by  antitoxins  lose,  as  a  result  of
this  procedure,  their  power  to  produce  antitoxins.  Now  in  order  to
understand  the  essential  rdle  played  by  the  haptophore  group  in  the
formation  of  antitoxins  and  of  the  antibodies  in  general,  it  is  neces-
sary above  all  to  study  the  other  side  of  this  question,  namely,  the
junctions  of  the  living  organism  in  the  formation  of  antibodies

The  demonstration  that  it  is  the  haptopliore  group  of  the  toxin
molecule  that  excites  the  production  of  immunity  leads  us  at  once
to  regard  the  process  of  assimilation  of  the  living  cells  as  most  im-
portant in  our  study.  Since  the  beginning  of  medicine  it  has  been,
and  still  is,  generally  accepted  that  chemical  substances  can  act  only
on  those  organs  with  which  they  are  capable  of  entering  into  closer
chemical  relations.  In  his  "Cellular  Pathology,"  Virchow  expressed
this  view  in  his  usual  clear  and  forcible  manner:  "Just  as  the  single
cell  of  a  fungus  or  an  alga  abstracts  from  the  fluid  in  which  it  lives
as  much  and  the  kind  of  material  as  it  needs  for  its  vital  processes,
so  also  the  tissue  ce!l  within  a  compound  organism  possesses  elective
properties  by  virtue  of  which  it  disregards  certain  substances  and
takes  up  and  utilizes  others."

"We  also  know  that  there  are  a  number  of  substances  which  have
a  special  attraction  for  the  nervous  system  when  introduced  into  the
body;  that  even  among  this  group  there  are  substances  which  pos-
sess intimate  relations  to  certain  particular  parts  of  the  nervous
system,  some  to  the  brain,  others  to  the  spinal  cord  or  to  the  sym-
pathetic ganglia,  a  few  to  certain  special  parts  of  the  brain,  cord.  etc.
1  may  mention  morphine,  atropine,  curare,  strychnine,  digitalin.  On
the  other  hand  we  know  that  certain  substances  are  intimately
related  to  ceitain  organs  of  secretion,  that  they  permeate  these
secreting  organs  with  a  certain  selective  action,  that  they  are  ex-
creted by  them,  and  that  when  supplied  in  excess  such  substances
cause  an  irritation  in  these  organs."

It  is  remarkable  that  this  axiom  was  not  re-echoed  in  the  develop-
ment of  scientific  pharmacology,  and  that  only  within  the  last  ten
years,  thanks  to  the  labors  of  Hotmeister,  Overton,  Spiro,  Hans
Meyer  and  myself,  an  improvement  has  taken  place  in  this  respect.

According  to  these  newer  researches  there  is  not  the  least  doubt
that  the  causes  of  this  elective  lodgment  in  certain  celt  domains  are
not  all  of  the  same  nature.     In  general  the  modem  pharmacological


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  371

school  now  believes  that  the  substances  ordinarily  foreign  to  the
organism,  such  as  the  indifferent  narcotics,  alkaloids,  antipyretics,
antiseptics,  do  not  effect  a  firm  chemical  union  with  the  body  ele-
ments, but  that  their  distribution  follows  the  laws  of  solid  solutions
or  of  the  formation  of  a  loose  salt.  In  the  case  of  the  poisons  acting
on  the  central  nervous  system  it  is  especially  the  fat-like  substances
of  the  nerve  tissue,  the  so-called  lipoids,  which  take  up  the  narcotics,
just  as  ether  takes  up  the  alkaloids  in  the  Stas-Otto  procedure  of
detecting  poisons.  There  are  a  number  of  reasons  in  support  of  the
view  that  the  pharmacological  agents  in  question  are  stored  up  un-
changed in  the  cells  or  in  certain  constituents  thereof,  especially  in
those  similar  to  tat.

Naturally  this  does  not  deny  the  possibility  that  certain  sub-
stances foreign  to  the  body  may  enter  an  albumin  molecule  by  sub-
stitution. Thus  if  protoplasma  is  treated  with  nitric  acid  the  nitro
group  enters  the  albumin  radicle,  giving  rise  to  a  yellow  color.  Such
substitutions,  how^ever,  in  the  conditions  under  which  pharmacolog-
ical actions  can  occur,  will  usually  only  be  effected  by  combinations
possessing  high  internal  tension  and  for  that  reason  capable  of  such
addition  reactions.  This  may  perhaps  be  the  case  with  vinylamin,
which,  according  to  Levaditi's  experiments  conducted  in  my  labora-
tory, produces  necrosis  of  the  renal  papillae  in  a  large  number  of
animals,  a  phenomenon  probably  to  be  ascribed  to  such  a  chemical
anchoring.

The  ordinary  medicinal  substances,  however,  are  not  so  constructed
that  they  can  produce  such  energetic  sections.  In  general  we  may
assume  that  chemo-synthetic  processes  do  not  play  a  prominent  part
in  their  distribution.

It  may,  however,  be  regarded  as  an  absolute  fact  that  synthetic
processes  play  an  important  role  in  the  life  of  the  cell  in  another
direction.  If  by  boiling  certain  cell  material  with  acids  we  are  able
to  split  off  certain  definite  groups  (such  as  those  of  sugar,  etc.),
this  fact  proves  the  chemical  character  of  this  combmation.  As  a
matter  of  fact  the  two  series  of  phenomena  which  we  are  here  dealing
with  have  long  been  separated  by  general  custom.  The  term  assim-
ilabUiiy  is  reserved  exclusively  for  those  substances  which  are  an-
chored by  the  cells  synthetically,  and  which  in  this  way  become  con-
stituents of  the  protoplasm.  No  one  would  think  of  speaking  of
morphine,  or  of  methylene  blue,  substances  which  enter  into  certain
cells  and  lodge  there,  as  being  assimilable


372  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  LMMUNITY.

These  explanations  will  suffice  to  sliow  that  Uie  t«rm  assimit&-
bility,  as  I  employ  it,  is  restricted  somewhat  more  than  is  customiarj',
for  I  reserve  it  exclusively  for  the  specific  nutritive  substances  of  the
living  protoplasm.  According  to  this  view  the  process  of  cell  assimila-
tions is  a  synthetic  one  which  presupposes  the  presence  of  two  groups
effecting  the  synthesis  and  having  a  strong  chemical  affinity  for  each
other.

Hence  I  assume  that  the  living  protoplasm  possesses  side-chains
or  receptors  which  possess  a  maximum  chemical  affinity  for  certain
particular  groups  of  the  specific  nutritive  substances,  and  that  they
therefore  anchor  these  substances  to  the  cell.  The  receptor  apparatus
of  the  cells  is  highly  complicated,  the  red  blood-cell,  for  example
possessing  perhaps  a  hundred  different  types  of  receptors.

If  this  view  is  accepted  and  it  is  recalled  that  in  the  toxin  mole-
cule it  is  the  haplflphore  group  which  effects  the  development  of
immunity,  only  a  very  small  step  is  required  in  order  to  gain  an
insight  into  the  nature  of  antitoxin  formation.  This  is  the  very
natural  assumption  that  among  the  various  receptors — perhaps  by
chance — the  haptophore  group  of  the  toxin  finds  one  which  possesses
an  especial  affinity  for  this  haptophore  prroup.  It  is  not  at  all  neces-
sary that  ever>-  bacterial  toxin  should  find  fitting,  i.e.  toxophile,
receptors  in  every  animal  species.  On  the  contrary  just  this  absence
of  ret^eptors  constitutes  one  of  the  reasons  why  certain  animal  species
are  immune  against  certain  particular  poisons.  Furthermore,  all
the  facts  indicate  that  the  susceptibility,  i.e.  the  receptiveness,  of  an
organism  for  a  certain  toxin  is  associated  with  the  presence  of  such
toxophile  groups  of  the  protoplasm,  a  point  which  finds  suitable
expression  in  the  term  receptors.

As  a  result  of  anchoring  the  toxin  molecule  by  means  of  the
haptophore  group  the  cell  is  influenced  in  two  directions.  Primarily
owing  to  the  lasting  influence  of  the  toxophore  group,  it  sickens,  a
condition  which  manifests  itself  by  disturbed  functions  and  possibly
by  pathological  anatomical  changes.  liesides  this,  however,  in  a
manner  shortly  to  be  discussed,  a  regenerative  process  ia  begun  which
can  lead  to  the  formation  of  antitoxin.  Since  this  regenerative
process  can  be  excited  by  toxoids  lacking  the  toxophore  group,  as
well  as  by  the  toxins  themselves,  we  must  assume  that  it  is  inti-
mately related  to  the  haptophore  group.  Hence  the  two  parallel
processes,  antitoxin  production  and  toxic  action,  are  independent  in
that  they  are  caused  by  two  different  groups.     In  harmony  with  this


I


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD  373

is  the  fact  that  the  two  processes  may  interfere  with  one  another;
a  marked  pathological  action  can  diminish  the  regenerative  process
or  even  prevent  it  entirely.  This  is  shown,  for  example,  by  the  fact
that  it  is  almost  impossible  in  the  case  of  certain  iinimals  highly
susceptible  to  tetanus  poison,  such  as  mice  and  guinea-pigs,  to  pro-
duce antitoxin  by  means  of  unmodiiied  poison,  while  the  result  is
easily  attained  by  the  use  of  toxoids.

Coming  now  to  the  regenerative  process,  which  leads  to  the  pro-
duction of  antitoxin,  it  will  be  found  by  any  one  familiar  with  the
fundamental  principles  formulated  by  Carl  Weigert  that  there  is
nothing  remarkable  about  the  process.  The  receptor  which  has
anchored  the  haptophoro  group  of  the  toxin  or  toxoid  molecule
becomes  useless  for  the  cell  because  of  this  occupation;  it  is  no  longer
able  to  exercise  its  normal  function,  namely,  the  anchoring  of  nutri-
tive substances.  The  cell  has  thus  suffered  a  loss  which  must  be
replaced.

In  such  processes  it  is  very  common  to  find,  as  Weigert's  re-
searches have  shown,  that  the  loss  is  not  merely  replaced,  but  that
it  is  overcompensated.  The  same  thing  takes  place  in  the  methodical
immunization  when  continued  and  ever  increased  doses  of  immu-
nizing substance  are  introduced.  Part  of  the  newly  formed  re-
ceptors still  attached  to  the  cell  are  occupied  by  the  immunizing
substance  only  to  be  replaced  by  a  regeneration  greater  in  degree
than  before.  Owing  to  this  increased  demand  the  prolopksm  to  a
certain  extent  is  trained  in  one  direction,  namely,  to  produce  anew
a  certain  kind  of  constituent,  the  receptors  in  question.  Finally,
such  an  excess  of  receptors  is  produced  that  there  is  no  longer  room
in  the  protoplasm  for  them.  Then  they  are  thrust  off  as  free  mole-
cules and  pass  into  the  body  fluids.  According  to  this  view  the  anti-
toxin is  nothing  more  than  the  thrust-off  receptor  apparatus  of  the
protoplasm,  i.e.,  a  normal  cell  constituent  produced  in  excess.

From  among  the  many  facts  already  at  hand  I  shall  select  merely
a  few  to  serve  as  proof  of  the  correctness  of  this  hypothesis,  this
"side-chain  theory,"  as  It  is  called.

The  first  point  deals  with  the  demonstration  in  normal  tissues
of  the  toxinophile  receptors  assumed  by  the  theory.  Although  such
an  anchoring  of  the  jMJisnn  by  the  organs  had  already  boon  demon-
strated by  the  clinical  course  of  the  poisoning  and  by  Donitz's  thera-
peutic experiments  on  animals  poisoned  with  tetanus  and  diphtheria
poisons,   it  remained  for  Wassermann   to  show   that  certain  body


374  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

elements  anchor  the  toxin  even  in  a  test-tube  and  neutralize  the
toxin  juat  as  does  the  antiUixin,  If  he  added  crualied  fresh  guinea-
pig  braiQ  to  tetanua  toxin,  he  found  that  the  brain  aubatanee  anchored
the  toxin  in  sucli  a  manner  that  not  only  was  the  supernatant  fluid
robbed  of  its  toxic  action,  but  that  the  brain  laden  with  tetanus
toxin  also  exerted  no  toxic  effect.  From  this  we  can  conclude  that
a  chemical  union  has  taken  place  between  constituents  of  the  ganglion
cells  and  the  tetanus  toxin.  This  combination  is  so  firm  that  it  is
not  broken  up  on  being  introduced  into  the  animal  body;  as  a  result
the  toxin  remains  innocuous.

That  this  is  really  a  specific  reaction  and  not,  for  instance,  merely
an  absorption  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  boiled  brain,  in  which  the
chemical  groups  in  question  are  destroyed,  is  just  as  little  able  to
exert  this  action  aa  the  pulp  of  any  other  organ  of  the  guinea-pig.

In  addition  to  this  Ransom  has  shown  that  the  brain  of  living
animals  pos.'iessea  the  same  toxin-destroying  power.  In  view  of
this  it  would  appear  that  the  objections  made  by  Danysz,  which
refer  to  the  divergent  behavior  of  the  decomposed  brain  pulp,  possess
no  great  significance.  1  will  not  deny  the  fact  that  the  favorable
result  achieved  in  tetanua  is  evidently  due  only  to  the  coincidence
that  the  tetanophile  receptors  are  present  in  large  quantity  in  the
brain.  Such  a  coincidence,  of  course,  need  not  obtain  for  every
poison.  If  the  organs  endangered  by  the  toxin  contain  only  smsJI
quantities  of  toxin  receptors  it  will  be  found  that  with  what  are,
at  best,  very  coarse  experimental  methods  these  receptors  escape
detection.  This  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  botulism  toxin  and
diphtheria  toxin.

Such  confusing  chance  occurrences  can,  however,  be  avoided
with  certainty  if  one  employs  poisons  artificially  produced,  poisons
which,  owing  to  their  mode  of  production,  are  directed  against  cer-
tain particular  kinds  of  cells.  The  hemolysins  producetl  by  injec-
tions of  blood,  spermoto.xins,  and  numerous  other  cytotoxins  may
serve  as  examples.  In  all  of  these  cases  it  can  positively  be  proved
that  the  toxin  is  anchored  by  the  susceptible  cells  in  specific  fashion.

The  second  point  concerns  that  premise  of  my  theory  which
states  that  the  same  organs  which  possess  a  specific  affinity  for  the
poison  molecule  are  able  to  produce  antitoxin.  In  this  connection
the  very  neat  experiments  made  by  Romer  on  abrin  immunization
should  be  mentioned.  As  is  well  known,  abrin,  the  toxalbumin  of
jequirity  beans,  is  able  to  excite  marked  inflammation  of  the  con-


THE   PROTECTIVE   SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  375

junctiva  in  man  and  animals.  I  have  shown,  furthermore,  that  it
is  possible,  by  means  of  conjunctival  instillations,  to  actively  immu-
nize rabbits  against  abrin.  Romer  immunized  a  rabbit  by  means
of  rapidly  increased  doses  into  the  right  eye  and  killed  the  animal
at  the  end  of  three  weeks.  It  was  then  found  that  the  conjunctiva
of  the  right  eye  which  had  been  the  site  of  the  inflammatory  process
was  able,  when  ground  up  with  a  suitable  amount  of  abrin,  almost
completely  to  neutralize  the  action  of  this  poison,  whereas  the  other
conjunctiva,  when  similarly  ground  up  with  abrin,  was  unable  to
protect  the  animal  from  death.  From  this  Romer  rightly  concludes
that  in  this  conjunctival  immunization  part  of  the  antitoxin  is  fur-
nished by  the  conjunctiva  which  reacts  locally.  Aside  from  its
theoretical  interest  I  believe  that  this  demonstration  of  the  local
origin  of  antitoxin  at  the  site  of  injection  possesses  great  practical
significance.  In  certain  cases  the  possibility  is  thus  given  to  trans-
fer part  of  the  antitoxin  production  from  the  vital  organs  to  the  in-
different connective  tissues.

The  third  point  concerns  the  thrusting-oflf  of  the  surplus  receptors.
A  prerequisite  for  this  thrusting-oflf  is  that  the  receptors  in  question,
which  are  normally  firmly  attached  to  the  protoplasmal  molecule,
become  loosened.  In  several  favorable  cases  it  has  been  possible
to  confirm  this  postulate  of  my  theory  experimentally,  though  to
be  sure  these  deal  with  immunization  by  bacteria  and  not  with  solu-
ble poisons.  Pfeiffer  and  Marx  succeeded  in  showing  that  with  a
suitably  conducted  cholera  immunization  it  is  possible  to  find  a
period  at  which  the  blood  is  still  free  from  protective  substances,
although  the  specific  protective  substances  can  be  abstracted  from
the  blood-forming  organs  by  crushing  them  up  with  salt  solution.
In  my  opinion  this  can  be  due  only  to  an  extraction  of  receptors
which,  since  it  is  just  previous  to  their  extrusion,  are  only  loosely
attached  to  the  protoplasmal  molecule.

Almost  simultaneously  with  Pfeiflfer  and  Marx,  the  same  results
were  obtained  by  Wassermann  with  typhoid,  and  these  were  later
confirmed  by  Deutsch.  In  all  of  these  experiments  the  hsemato-
poetic  system  represents  the  site  of  production  of  these  antibodies.
The  significance  of  this  circumstance  for  the  immunizing  process
has  been  pointed  out  by  Metchnikoflf's  teachmgs.

These  few  examples  will  suflSce  to  show  that  the  side-chain  theory
has  fully  stood  the  test  of  experiment.  During  the  many  years  of
my  experimental  activity  I  have  not  met  a  single  fact  which  con-


378  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

tradicts  thia  theory  and  mipht  serve  to  refute  it.  I  may,  there-
fore, regard  the  theory  as  well  established  and  proceed  to  discuss  in
detail  several  important  points  which  follow  from  it.

The  side-chain  theory  explains  in  the  mast  natural  fashion  the
specific  relations  existing  between  toxin  and  the  corresponding  anti-
toxin. Furthermore  the  theory  makes  the  immunizing  action  of  the
antitoxins  perfectly  comprehensible.  When  injected  subculaneously
into  animals  in  the  usual  manner  the  poisons  are  brought  to  the
organs  possessing  toxinophile  receptors  (susceptible  organs)  by
means  of  the  circulation.  If,  however,  these  poisous  meet  with
free  toxinophile  groups  in  the  blood,  they  will  at  once  combine  with
the  same  and  so  be  diverted  from  the  susceptible  organs,  v.  Beh-
ring  has  expressed  thia  hypothesis  as  follows:  "The  same  substance
which  when  in  the  cells  is  a  prerequisite  and  cause  of  the  poisoning
becomes  the  healing  agent  when  present  in  the  blood."

To  my  mind  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  general  biological  law
which  is  not  limited  to  the  toxins  but  applies  to  a  great  many,  if
not  to  all,  poisonous  substances.  I  need  only  cite  the  saixmin  poison-
ing of  red  blood-cells.  Ransom  found  that  the  blood-cells  take
up  saponin  owing  to  their  content  of  cholesterin  and  are,  as  a  result,
subjected  to  the  deleterious  action  of  the  poison,  whereas  certain
sera,  which  exert  a  protection  against  saponin  poisoning  owe  thia
protective  property  to  the  same  cause,  namely,  the  presence  of  choles-
terin in  the  serum.

Furthermore  the  theory  at  once  explains  the  fact  that  the  tissues
of  an  immunized  animal  are  subject  to  the  action  of  the  jwison  when
in  some  way  the  action  of  the  antitoxin  contained  in  the  serum  is
prevented.  Thus  Roux  showed  that  rabbits  immunized  against
tetanus  become  poisoned  just  as  rapidly  as  control  animals  if  the
tetanus  poison  is  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the  bmin-cells  by
means  of  intracerebral  injections.  This  fact  is  demanded  by  my
theory,  for,  just  as  in  immunized  animals,  the  ganglion  cells  contain
an  excess  of  toxinophile  groups  and  are  thus  especially  adapted  to
anchor  the  poison  which  injures  them.  It  was  a  grave  error  on  the
part  of  Roux  to  suppose  that  this  experiment  controverted  the  side-
chain  theory,  Rous  thought  that  according  to  my  view  a  consider-
able amount  of  antitoxin  had  accumulated  in  the  brain-cells  and
that  therefore  the  immunized  animals  should  possess  a  local  brain
immunity.  There  is  evidently  a  misconception  as  to  the  term  "anti-
toxin,"   Just  as  we  cannot  term  any  mass  of  iron  a  lightning-rod,


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  377

but  restrict  this  term  to  such  masses  of  iron  which  deflect  tlie  liglit-
ning  from  a  particular  point,  so  we  must  restrict  the  term  antitoxin
to  those  toxinophile  groups  which  circulate  in  the  blood  and  thus
deflect  the  poison  from  the  susceptible  organs.  The  toxinophile
groups  present  in  these  susceptible  organs  are  not  loxin  deflectors  but
toxin  atlr actors.

The  theory  also  explains  why  the  property  of  producing  antitoxins
is  restricted  to  certain  products  of  metabolism  of  living  cells.  All
experiments  to  produce  antibodies  by  means  of  chemically  well  de-
fined toxic  substances,  such  as  morphine,  strychnine,  saponin,  etc.,
have  failed.

If  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  distribution  of  these  substances  ia
the  organism  takes  place  without  chemical  union  and  therefore  with-
out the  intervention  of  receptors,  the  negative  result  of  these  experi-
ments will  not  surprise  us.  The  property  of  forming  antitoxin  is
possessed  only  by  such  substances  as  possess  a  group  able  to  unite
with  the  side-chains  or  receptors  which  eflect  assimilation.  It  must,
be  remembered  that  all  the  poisons  which  excite  the  production  o£
antitoxin  are  highly  complex  products  of  animal  and  vegetable  cells,
which  in  their  chemical  properties  approach  the  true  albumins  and
peptones.  In  1S97,  by  means  of  my  theory,  the  production  of  anti-
toxin and  the  binding  of  foodstuff  were  first  brought  into  connec-
tion. At  that  time  nothing  was  known  of  the  tact  that  even  ordiruiry
joadstufjs  are  capable  of  an  analogous  action.  I  have  therefore  been
able  to  regard  as  an  agreeable  confirmation  of  my  views  the  circum-
stance that  this  consequence  of  my  hypothesis  has  actually  repeatedly
been  demonstrated  within  the  past  year,  especially  by  Bordet.

If  animals  are  injected  with  milk,  it  is  found  that  their  serum
gains  the  property  of  precipitating  the  milk  in  curds.  This  precipita-
tion is  also  strictly  specific,  since  numerous  experiments  show  that
the  coagulating  serum  obtained  by  treatment  with  goat  milk  coag-
ulates only  goat  milk,  and  not  the  milk  of  other  species,  as,  for  ex-
ample, that  of  women  or  cows.

The  results  are  similar  if  animals  are  injected  with  other  albumi-
nous substances,  e.g.,  with  the  sera  of  different  species  or  with  egg
albumm.  In  this  case  in  the  serum  of  the  animal  there  develop  sub
stances  (termed  coagulins  or  precipitins)  which  specifically  precipitate
the  corresponding  kind  of  albumin.

Deviations  Irom  the  law  ol  RpeciGcity  ocoiir  only  in  ao  fai  as  the  sera  of
closely  related  animal  speciee  coDtain  subBtances  more  or  less  Bimilar      Tbua


^■r'.


378  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

the  coitgulin  obtained  by  teEling  rabbits  witfi  human  serum  precipjiates  only
human  serum  sod  tho  serum  of  the  ueureat  related  epecies.  upes.  This  leactioo.
which  was  developed  especially  by  llie  researches  of  [Ihlenhuth  and  of  Waseer-
maan,  was  thereiore  proposed  lor  the  forensic  identification  ol  blood.

From  this  we  see  that,  entirely  in  harmony  with  my  views,  the
injection  of  foodstuffs  is  followed  by  the  production  of  typical  anti-
bodies, which  combine  with  the  exciting  agent  in  a  sjwcific  manner.
An  analogous  reaction  takes  jilace  in  the  normal  processes  of  cell
nutrition  and  serves  as  the  chief  source  of  the  protective  substances
present  in  normal  blood  in  such  great  numbers.

The  conditions  become  much  more  complicated  than  those  just
described  if,  instead  of  the  relatively  simple  soluble  metabolic  prod-
ucts, living  cell  material  is  employed.  This  is  the  case,  for  instance,
in  immunization  against  cholera,  typhoid ,  anthrax,  erysipelas  of  swine,
and  many  other  infectious  diseases.

In  these  diseases  under  certain  circumstances  there  develop  many
other  reactive  products  beside  the  antitoxins  produced  against  the
bacterial  toxins.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  every  bacterium  is  a
highly  complex  living  cell  which,  when  it  disintegrates  in  the  animal
body,  gives  rise  to  a  large  number  of  different  components.  Of  these
a  great  many  are  able  to  produce  antibodies.

Hence  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of  bacterial  cultures,  in
addition  to  the  specific  Ijacteriolysins,  which  cause  a  solution  o[  the
bacteria,  we  see  substances  develop,  such  as  the  antiferments
{v.  Dungern,  Morgenroth,  Hriot),  the  much  discussed  agglutinins
(Gruber,  Durham,  Pfeiffer),  and  the  coaguhns  (Kraus,  Bordet),
which  specifically  precipitate  certain  albuminous  substances  that
have  passed  into  the  culture  fluid.

The  most  interesting  and  important  of  the  substances  arising  in
such  an  immunization  are  undoubtedly  the  bacteriolysins,  which
have  been  studied  especially  by  Pfeiffer  and  Bordet.  At  Brst  it  is
highly  surprising  that  the  injection  of  cholera  vibrios  into  the  animal
body  should  be  followed  by  the  formation  of  a  substance  which  is
able  to  dksolve  the  cholera  vibrio,  ami  only  (hv,  bacterium.  This
action  is  so  perfectly  adapted  to  the  purpose  and  is  apparently  so
novel  that  it  seems  to  fall  beyond  the  pale  of  the  normal  functions
of  the  body.  It  was  therefore  of  the  highest  importance  to  explain,
from  the  standpoint  of  cellular  physiology,  the  origin  of  these  siib-
etancea  also.     The  solution  of  this  problem  offered  considerable  diffi-


THE   PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  379

-culties  and  did  not  succeed  until  the  hsemolysins  were  used  in  the
experiments  in  place  of  the  bacteriolysins.

Hsemolysins  are  peculiar  poisons  which  destroy  red  blood-cells.
iSuch  hsemolysins  are  found  in  part  in  certain  normal  species  of  serum,
in  part  they  can  be  produced  artificially,  as  will  be  subsequently
described.  In  their  fundamental  properties  they  correspond  entirely
to  the  bacteriolysins,  but  possess  the  great  advantage  over  the  latter
in  that  they  readily  permit  the  employment  ot  test-tube  experiments
whereby  the  individual  variability  of  the  animal  body  is  excluded,
and  so  allow  accurate  quantitative  determinations.

Belfanti  and  Carbone  discovered  the  curious  phenomenon  that
the  serum  of  horses,  after  they  had  been  treated  with  blood-cells  of
rabbits,  contains  substances  which  are  highly  toxic  to  rabbits,  and
only  to  these  animals.  Bordet  showed  that  the  cause  of  this  toxicity
is  a  specific  hsemolysin  directed  againt  the  rabbit  blood-cells.  He
showed  further  that  such  hsemolysins,  derived  by  injection  of  foreign
blood-cells,  lose  their  power  to  dissolve  blood  when  heated  for  half
an  hour  to  55°  C.  Bordet  found  also  that  the  hsemoly tic  property  of
such  inactivated  sera  is  again  restored  if  certain  normal  sera  are
added.  These  important  observations  showed  a  complete  analogy
between  these  phenomena  and  those  observed  with  bacteriolysins  by
Pfciffer,  MetchnikoflF,  and  especially  by  Bordet.  In  the  case  of  bacteri-
olysins it  was  found  that  serum  freshly  drawn  from  a  goat  immunized
gainst  cholera  is  able  to  effect  solution  of  cholera  vibrios,  i.e.,  to  give
tlie  so-called  Pfeiffer  reaction.  Apparently  this  property  disappears
spontaneously  if  the  serum  is  allowed  to  stand;  it  disappears  rapidly
when  the  serum  is  heated  to  55°  C.  The  cholera  serum  rendered
inert  by  heating  exerts  its  protective  power  in  the  animal  body  un-
<jhanged;  and  in  test-tube  experiments  it  attains  its  original  solvent
power  on  the  addition  of  smah  amounts  of  normal  goat  or  guinea-
pig  serum,  although  the  latter  do  not  by  themselves  injure  cholera
vibrios.

These  experiments  show  that  in  bacteriolysis  two  substances  act
together;  one,  contained  in  immune  blood,  is  relatively  stable  and
represents  the  carrier  of  the  specific  protective  action;  the  other,  pres-
ent in  every  normal  serum,  is  easily  destroyed.  For  the  present
the  former  is  called  the  "immune  body/'  while  the  latter,  since
it  complements  the  action  of  the  immune  body,  is  called  the  '*com
plement."

Since  the  hsemolysins  are  by  far  the  most  convenient  for  ex  peri-


380  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMTmuy.

mental  study,  Dr.  Morgenroth  and  I  have  endeavored  in  these  to  dis-
cover the  mode  of  action  of  these  two  components  on  the  susceptible
object,  the  red  blood-cells.  For  this  purpose  we  first  prepared  solu-
tions coDtoining  either  only  the  immune  body,  or  only  the  complement.
These  solutions  were  then  brought  into  contact  with  the  appropriate
blood-cells,  after  which  the  fluid  and  blood-cells  were  separated  by
means  of  the  centrifuge.  The  two  portions  were  then  tested  to
determine  whether  these  substances  had  been  taken  up  by  the  blood-
cella.  These  experiments  showed  that  the  blood-cells  are  incapable
of  taking  up  complement  alone,  whereas  they  eagerly  take  up  the
immune  body.  If,  however,  the  serum  contains  both  components
they  are  both  bound  by  the  blood-cells  in  question.

A  confirmation  of  this  tact  was  furnished  by  Bordet,  who  showed
that  blood-cells  or  bacteria  which  by  previous  treatment  have  become
loaded  with  immune  body,  abstract  the  complement  from  fluids  con-
taining the  same  with  great  avidity.  These  facts  have  been  confirmed
from  all  sides.  They  show  that  the  blood-cells,  or  the  bacteria,  anchor
the  immune  body  but  not  the  complement,  but  that  the  complement
is  also  bound  as  soon  as  the  immune  body  has  been  anchored.

Morgenroth  and  I  have  made  these  relations  more  easily  com-
prehensible by  means  of  the  following  a-s-sumptions  concerning  tbe
constitution  of  the  immune  body  and  complement.

We  believe  it  necessary  to  assume  that  the  immune  body  possesses
two  kinds  of  haptophore  groups,  one  of  high  affinity  which  combines
with  a  corresponding  receptor  group  of  the  red  blood-cell  or  bacterium;
the  other  a  group  of  less  affinity  which  combines  with  the  complement
exerting  the  deleterious  action  on  the  cell.  Hence  the  immune  body
is  a  kind  of  intermediate  element  which  links  complement  and  red
blood-cells.  In  order  to  denote  this  function  I  have  proposed  the
name  "amboceptor,"  which  is  to  express  this  two-aided  grasping
power.

According  to  our  conception  the  complement  ptHsesses  a  con-
stitution analogous  to  that  of  the  toxins.  Tlius  it  possesses  a  hapto-
phore group  which  effects  the  specific  combination  with  the  ambo-
ceptor. The  presence  of  this  is  confirmed  by  the  existence  of  analogues
of  antitoxins,  namely,  corresponding  anticompiementa.  Besides  this
the  complement  possesses  a  second  group,  the  cause  of  the  injurious
action,  which  is  analogous  to  the  toxophore  group  of  the  toxins.
In  view  of  the  properties  of  this  group,  partly  toxic,  partly  ferment-
like.  I  have  decided  to  name  it  the  "zymotoxic"  group.     If  one  cares


THE   PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  381

to  illustrate  the  action  of  the  two  components  by  means  of  a  crude
comparison,  the  action  of  gun  and  cartridge  may  be  taken.  The
complement  in  itself  is  harmless,  like  a  cartridge,  whicn  only  acquires
destructive  power  by  being  introduced  into  the  gun.  In  like  manner
only  by  the  exclusive  mediation  of  the  amboceptor  is  the  injurious
action  of  the  complement  called  forth  and  transmitted  to  certain
particular  elements.

In  opposition  to  this  conception  Bordet  maintains  the  view  that
complement  and  immune  body  do  not  combine  as  we  believe,  but
that  the  entrance  of  the  immune  body  into  the  cell  substance  exerts
a  specific  injury  to  the  latter,  an  injury  which  manifests  itself  by
the  fact  that  now  the  cells  succumb  to  the  action  of  the  simple  pro-
tective substance  present  in  blood  serum,  namely,  Buchner's  "alexin."

In  other  words,  by  means  of  the  immune  substances  the  blood-
cells  are  made  susceptible,  "sensitized,"  to  the  action  of  the  alexin.
In  conformity  with  this  Bordet  terms  our  immune  body  or  amboceptor
the  "substance  sensibilatrice"  and  our  complement  the  alexin.

Although  this  view  is  also  shared  by  Buchner,  there  are  many
reasons  why  I  cannot  accept  it,  especially  in  view  of  the  observation
made  by  M.  Neisser  and  F.  Wechsberg  concerning  the  peculiar  phe-
nomenon of  deflection  of  complement  through  an  excess  of  immune
body.  To  begin  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  picture  to  one's  self  the
nature  of  this  sensitization.  If  Bordet  believes  that  the  sensitizer  acts
after  the  manner  of  a  safety-key  which,  when  introduced  into  a  par-
ticular lock,  makes  the  introduction  of  a  second  key  possible,  I  must
say  that  I  cannot  understand  this  comparison.  It  can  positively  be
proven  that  the  red  blood-cell  possesses  no  complementophile  groups,
since  neither  in  the  normal  state  nor  after  death  does  it  lay  hold
of  complement.  The  living  blood-cell,  as  well  as  that  killed  by
heating,  however,  through  the  occupation  with  the  immune  body,
acquires  the  property  to  anchor  complement.  It  surely  is  much  more
natural  to  believe  that  the  immune  body  itself,  the  amboceptor,  is
the  carrier  of  the  group  which  binds  the  complement,  than  to  assume
that  new  complementophile  groups  arise  owing  to  the  action  of  the
sensitizer.  Finally,  one  can  conceive  of  such  a  process  in  a  living
cell,  one  therefore  capable  of  alteration,  but  in  the  case  of  dead  cells
which  have  been  treated  by  heat  or  all  sorts  of  chemicals,  in  the  case
of  stabilized  albumin  as  one  might  say,  this  assumption  cannot  be
allowed.

Bordet 's  assumption  furthermore  does  not  explain  the  fact  that


382


COLLECTED  STTDIES  W  rMMnnTT.


;  body  derived  from  a  particular  species  ia  most  sufpIt
activated  bj'  the  serum  derived  from  the  same  species.  From  the
staodpoint  of  Bordet's  theory  it  would  be  most  puzzliog  to  under-
stand why  an  anthrax  immune  body  derived  from  a  sheep  should
sensitize  the  bacilU  against  just  the  sheep  alexin,  one  derived  from  a
rabbit  against  just  the  rabbit  alexin.  From  the  standpoint  of  tlie
amboceptor  theorj-,  however,  such  a  phenomenon  does  not  offer  the
least  difficulty,  since  it  is  natural  that  the  amboceptors  circulating
in  every  animal  species  are  fitted  to  their  own  complements.

I  wLih  to  mention  still  one  more  point  which  plays  a  giBst  rtle
in  Bordet's  views.  Bordet  assumes  that  the  alexin  is  a  simple  fein-
heitlich|  substance,  whereas  I  maintain  that  there  is  a  plurality  of
complements.  Some  very  interesting  experiments  have  recently
been  published  by  Bordet  which  appeared  to  support  theunitarian
view.

He  first  determined  that  a  certain  serum,  e.g.  guinea-pig  senini,
was  able  to  activate  two  different  immune  bodies,  e.g.,  a  cholera-
immune  body  and  a  hemolytic  immune  body.  To  this  guinea-pig
serum  Bordet  added  sensitized  blood-cells,  i.e.,  blood-cells  eager
to  take  up,  and  suwreptible  to  complement.  It  now  he  waited  until
hsemolysLs  had  begun,  he  found  that  the  guinea-pig  serum  liad  lost
its  property  to  dissolve  sensitized  cholera  vibrios.  The  same  thing
occurred  if  he  reversed  the  experiment.

Although  it  was  easy  to  confirm  the  experiment  of  this  distin-
guished investigator,  I  found  it  impossible  to  accept  Bordet's  con-
clusions. This  experiment  is  only  then  positive  proof  for  a  simple
alexin  (in  this  case  for  the  identity  of  bacteriolytic  and  hsemolytic
alexin)  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  two  immune  bodies  in  question
are  acted  on  by  only  a  single  complementophile  group  and  not  by  a
plurality  of  such  groups.  Previous  investigations,  however,  have
shown  that  the  immune  sera  artificially  produced  are  not  simple
in  character  but  are  made  up  of  a  number  of  different  amboceptors
possessing  different  complementophile  groups.

Nevertheless  I  consider  Bordet's  experiments  so  important  that  I
have  once  more  had  this  question  thoroughly  studied  by  Dr.  Sachs
and  Dr.  Morgenrotli.  These  gentlemen  were  able  to  establish
positive  proof  for  the  existence  of  different  complements,  Dr.
Sachs,  for  instance,  studied  these  conditions  in  goat  serum,  employ-
ing for  the  purpose  five  different  combinations  of  immune  body,
each  of  which  could  be  complemented  by  goat  serum.     If  goat  serum


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  383

contained  only  a  single  complement,  the  course  of  the  five  series  of
tests  should  have  been  identical  when  the  complement  was  affected.
It  was  found  on  the  contrary  that  under  the  influence  of  digestion^
for  example,  one  completion  remained  intact,  while  four  others  dis-
appeared. By  means  of  absorption  further  analogous  differences
were  manifested  which  made  the  assumption  certain  that  in  this  case
four  different  complements  come  into  action.  Since  these  results
positively  prove  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  complements  I  think
it  will  be  unnecessary  here  to  bring  forward  additional  evidence  in
support  of  this.

A  r^sum^  of  these  observations  confirms  my  view  that  the  mech-
anism of  haemolysis  and  bacteriolysis  is  most  easily  explained  by
the  amboceptor  theory.

So  far  as  the  orgin  of  the  two  components  which  take  part  in
this  reaction  are  concerned  there  is  not  the  least  doubt  that  they
are  of  cellular  origin.

1  assume  that,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  receptors  which  serve
to  take  up  relatively  simple  substances,  the  cells  contain  higher
kinds  of  receptors  designed  to  take  up  large-moleculed  albuminous
substances,  as,  for  example,  the  contents  of  living  cells.  In  this
case,  however,  the  fixation  or  anchoring  of  the  molecule  constitutes
only  a  prerequisite  for  the  cell's  nutrition.  Such  a  giant  molecule
in  its  natural  state  is  useless  for  the  nutrition  of  the  cell  and  can
be  utilized  only  after  it  has  been  broken  down  into  smaller  constit-
uents by  fermentative  processes.  This  will  be  accomplished  most
readily  if  the  grasping  group  of  the  protoplasm  is  also  the  carrier
of  one  or  several  fermentative  groups  which  will  immediately  come
into  close  relation  with  the  molecule  to  Be  assimilated.  It  seems
as  though  the  economy  of  cell  life  finds  it  advantageous  for  the  re-
quired fermentative  groups  to  come  into  action  only  temporarily,
perhaps  only  in  case  of  need.  This  purpose  is  effected  most  simply
if  the  grasping  group  possesses  another  haptophore  group  which  can
anchor  the  ferment-like  substances  present  in  the  serum,  the  comple-
ments. Hence  such  a  receptor  of  the  higher  order  possesses  two  hapto-
phore groups  of  which  one  anchors  the  foodstuff,  while  the  other  is
complementophile.  It  is  obvious  that  when,  as  a  result  of  immuniza-
tion, such  receptors  reach  the  blood,  they  will  exhibit  the  properties
which  we  have  found  to  belong  to  the  receptor  type.

In  regard  to  the  second  constituent,  the  complements,  we  shall
not  err  if  we  regard  these  as  simple  cell  secretions,  designed  to  serve


384  rOLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

internal  metabolism.  In  accordance  with  the  conception  of  Met^-h-
nikoR  we  must  fur  the  present  believe  that  the  leucocytes  are  pri-
fflarily  concerned  in  their  production.

From  these  points  ol  view  the  organism's  immunity  reaction  loses
the  mysterious  chamcter  which  it  would  have  if  the  protective  sub-
Stances  artificially  produced  represented  a  constituent  originally  for-
eign to  the  organism  and  to  its  physiological  economy.

But  we  have  seen  that  immunity  represent;*  nothing  more  than
a  phase  of  the  general  physiology  ot  nutrition,  a  view  in  which  1
agree  entirely  with  that  distinguished  investigator  Mctchnlkoff.
Phenomena  entirely  analogous  to  those  of  the  formation  of  anti-
bodies lire  constantly  occurring  jn  the  economy  of  normal  metabolism;
in  all  kinds  of  cells  in  the  organism  the  absorption  of  foodstuffs,  or
of  prfjducts  of  intermediate  metabolism,  can  lead  to  the  formation  or
the  thrusling-off  of  receptors.  Considering  the  large  number  of  organs
and  the  manifold  chemistry  of  their  cells  it  need  not  be  surprising
that  the  blood,  which  is  representative  ot  all  the  tissues,  contains
an  innumerable  number  of  such  thrust-off  receptors.  To  these  I
have  given  the  collective  name  of  "haptins."  Only  in  recent  years,
thanks  to  these  \ery  theoretical  considerations,  have  we  reached  a
point  where  we  can  get  some  idea  of  this  enormous  multiplicity.

In  addition  to  the  Irue  ferments  and  those  ferment-like  sub-
stances, tlie  complements,  already  mentioned,  the  blood  normally
contains  a  number  of  substances  which  act  specifically  against  eei^
tain  substances  present  in  solution.

Chief  among  these  I  may  mention  the  normal  anlito?dns.  and  as
examples  of  these  the  diphtheria  antitoxin  and  antitetanoiysin  of
normal  horse  serum,  the  an tistaphylo toxin  of  normal  human  serum,
and  the  anticrotin  of  pig  serum.  Next  come  the  antiferments,
such  as  antirennm,  antithrombase,  anticynarase,  and  others.  We
also  normally  find  substances  which  prevent  the  action  of  specific
hEcmolysins  and  bacteriolysins,  being  directed  in  one  case  against
the  amboceptor,  in  another  against  the  complement.  For  example,
in  goat  blood  1  discovered  an  an  ti amboceptor  which  was  directed
against  a  goat-blood  hiemolysin  obtained  in  accordance  with  Bordet's
procedure.  In  the  blood  of  one  animal  species  P.  Miiller  of  Graz
found  antibodies  directed  against  certain  complements  of  other
species  of  animals,  and  which  may,  therefore,  be  termed  normal
anticomplements.

Of  still  greater  interest,  however,  are  those  haptins  which  are


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  385

directed  against  living  cells  of  all  kinds,  thus,  against  vegetable
cells,  such  as  bacteria,  and  against  animal  cells,  such  as  red  blood-
cells,  leucocytes,  spermatozoa,  epithelia,  and  others.  The  haptins
which  are  so  antagonistic  to  cells  are  divisible  into  two  large  groups:
(1)  the  agglutinins,  which  cause  the  bacteria  or  other  cells  to  stick
together,  and  which  through  the  researches  of  Gruber,  Durham,
and  Widal  have  attained  such  great  diagnostic  significance;  (2)
the  bactericidal  or  cytotoxic  substances,  and  these  are  intimately
related  to  natural  immunity.  In  case  the  substances  not  only  kill
but  also  exert  a  solvent  action  we  call  them  lysins,  and  speak  of
hsemolysins,  bacteriolysins,  etc.  Thus  a  certain  blood  serum,  e.g.
dog  serum,  will  simultaneously  exert  antitoxic,  antifermentative,
agglutinating,  bacteriolytic,  and  cytotoxic  effects  against  the  appro-
priate sul)stances.  If  we  consider  one  of  these  functions  by  iti-elf,
e.g.,  the  agglutinating  function  of  a  certain  serum,  we  shall  be  met
with  the  question  whether  or  not  this  property  is  due  to  one  simple
substance,  the  agglutinin.  Numerous  experiments  have  shown  that
this  is  not  so,  but  that  in  this  precipitating  process  just  exactly  as
many  different  agglutinins  take  part  as  there  are  present  different
agglutinable  substances.  It  is  easy  to  demonstrate  this  plurality
by  means  of  the  principle  of  specific  union  mtroduced  by  me.

If,  for  example,  a  certain  serum  is  able  to  agglutinate  two  varieties  of  blood-
cells,  say  rabbit  and  pigeon  blood-cells,  and  two  kinds  ot  bacteria,  as  ciiolera
and  typhoid,  it  should  be  found,  in  case  this  plural  effect  were  produced  by
a  single  simple  agglutinin,  that  absorption  by  one  of  these  elements,  e.g.  the
cholera  vibrios,  would  remove  the  other  three  actions  also.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  however,  the  serum  which  has  been  shaken  with  cholera  vibrios,  while
it  will  no  longer  agglutinate  cholera  vibrios,  is  still  able  to  produce  agglutina-
tion in  the  other  three  elements,  and  vice  versa.  In  this  case,  therefore,  tour
different  agglutinations  take  part.

Results  entirely  analogous  to  these  are  obtained  if  the  other
functionating  groups  contained  in  blood,  e.g.  the  antitoxic,  bacterio-
lytic, etc.,  are  examined  in  a  corresponding  manner.  These  facts
confirm  the  pluralistic  view  first  maintained  by  me,  according  to
which  every  blood  serum  contains  many  hundreds,  or  even  thou-
sands, of  effective  haptins.  All  of  these,  with  the  exception,  per-
haps, of  ferments  and  complements,  owe  their  origin  to  an  excessive
assimilative  metabolism.  Their  peculiar  action  on  certain  substances
foreign  to  the  body  may  be  regarded  as  due  to  an  incidental
meeting.    To  a  large  extent,  therefore,  they  are  to  be  looked  u^^on


3S6  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

as  luxuriea  which  are  not  in  themselves  of  any  significance  for  the
life  of  the  organism.     Of  what  use  is  it  to  a  person  or  to  an  animal

to  have  ciroiilating  in  his  blood  a  great  variety  of  substances
directe*!  against  heterogeneous  materials  whirh  wnder  normal  cir-
cumstanre^  never  come  into  account,  and  which  at  the  most  are
brought  into  relation  with  these  substances  only  by  the  experi-
menter? Of  what  use  ia  it  to  a  goat  to  have  in  its  blood  certain
substances  which  are  directed  against  the  red  bJood-cclla  or  the
spermatozoa  of  other  animals,  since  these  do  not  normally  get  into
the  circulation?  Furthermore  every  experimenter  finds  that  the
blood  serum  is  subject  to  constant  change  in  most  of  its  haptins,  a
fact  which  argues  strongly  against  the  assumption  that  all  of  these
substances  in  a  frrc  state  play  an  important  or  even  necessary  r61e
in  the  organism.

I  cannot  and  do  not  deny  that  with  Buch  a  superabiin dance  of
combinations  in  every  serum  substances  will  also  be  present  wiiicb
either  by  themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  complements  are  able
to  destroy  invading  injurious  bodies,  especially  bacteria.  These
substances  then  may  be  regarded  as  acting  as  defensive  agents.  In
spite  of  this,  however,  I  believe  it  is  wrong  to  group  this  most  com-
plex system  of  haptins  under  the  collective  name  alexin,  because
this  leads  to  an  incorrect  unitarian  view  which  cannot  help  scientific
progress.  These  remarks  are  in  no  way  intended  to  detract  from
the  very  valuable  work  of  Muchner;  his  study  on  alexins,  viewed
in  the  light  of  that  lime  and  according  to  the  then  state  of  science,
must  be  regarded  as  a  ma.sterpiece  which  has  been  of  enormous  value
in  the  development  of  this  subject.

Still  another  difference  of  opinion  existing  between  )3uchner
and  myself  concerns  the  bactericidal  and  ha-molytic  power  of  nor-
mal blood  serum,  and  these  properties  Ruchner  again  ascril)e3  to
the  action  of  his  alexin  conceived  as  a  simple  substance.  In  oppo-
sition to  this  I  have  demonstrated  that  the  conditions  in  normal
hsemolj-sins  are  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  artificial  hspmolysins,
for  here  again  two  different  components  act  together:  one  of  them
is  thermostable  while  the  other  corresponds  to  the  complements.
This  fact  has  been  confirmed  by  a  large  number  of  observers,  among
whom  I  may  mention  v.  Dungern,  Mnxtcr.  Ix)ndon,  P.  MiJIIer.  Mcltzer.
All  these  authors,  like  mv-'^elf,  have  tome  to  the  conclusion  that  th&
thermostable  substance  necessary  for  the  lytic  process  corresponds
in  every  way  to  the  artificially  produced  immune  bodies  or  ambo-


THE  PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  387

ceptors.  The  hapmolysins  occurring  naturally  and  those  artificially^
produced  manifest  their  action  according  to  exactly  the  same  mechan-
ism. According  to  the  observations  of  Pfeiffer  and  of  Moxter,  as
well  as  to  certain  experiments  of  Wechsberg  and  M.  Neisser,  still
to  be  published,  the  same  holds  tnje  for  the  bactericidal  substances.

Against  this  view  Buchner,  while  in  general  he  confirms  our  find-
ings of  fact,  maintains  that  the  thermostable  substances  of  normal
sera  are  not  analogous  to  the  immune  bodies,  but  are  something
apart  by  themselves.  He  therefore  gives  them  a  distinct  name,
"  Hilfskorper  *'  [= aiding  body].  Such  a  separation  of  the  con-
nection between  the  physiological  and  the  pathological  is  opposed
to  the  teachings  of  Virchow.  Aside  from  this,  however,  I  regard
the  proof  which  Buchner  advances  for  placing  these  "  Hilfskorper ''
by  themselves  as  insufficient.  It  is  entirely  negative  and  consists
in  this,  that,  according  to  Buchner,  proof  has  not  been  offered  that
in  normal  haemolysis  a  **  Hilfskorper  "  does  not  always  come  into
action.  Against  this  I  should  like  to  point  out  that,  in  the  very
large  number  of  cases  of  normal  haemolysis  studied  during  the  past
years  by  myself  and  fellow  workers,  we  have  always  succeeded  in
discovering  the  amboceptor  effecting  the  action.  At  times,  of  course,
this  required  a  great  deal  of  labor  and  trying  all  sorts  of  sources
for  complement.  Experiments  like  those  recently  published  by
Buchner,  in  which  only  one  combination  chosen  at  random  from
the  many  possible  ones  is  employed,  do  not  argue  against  the  pres-
ence of  amboceptors  in  case  the  experiment  results  negatively,  for
no  one  versed  in  this  subject  would  assume  that  every  amboceptor
must  find  a  fitting  complement  in  every  serum  used.  Hence  Buchner
does  not  furnish  any  proof  that  haemolysis  can  be  produced  by  the
alexin  alone.

In  connection  with  this  I  should  like  to  call  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  alexin  or  complement  action  possesvsed  by  normal  serum  is
due  to  a  plurality  of  substances,  not  to  a  single  one.  Each  comple-
ment by  itself  is  harmless,  for  only  through  the  intervention  of  the
amboceptor  is  its  injurious  action  carried  over  to  certain  tissues.
When  this  occurs,  however,  the  action  is  the  same  on  its  own  as  or?
foreign  tissues.  It  is  surprising  to  watch  how  guinea-pig  blood-cells
which  have  been  loaded  or  sensitized  with  certain  amboceptors  at
once  dissolve  if  their  own  serum  is  added,  this  serum  now  acting  as
a  deadly  poison.  There  is  very  little  ground,  therefore,  to  regard  the
complements  as  playing  the  rAle  of  defenders  against  foreign  invaders.


3S8  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMBlFfmT.

That  they  appear  to  play  this  rfile  is  due  to  the  action  of  what  I  have
termed  the  "horror  autotoxicus,"  which  prevents  the  productioa
within  the  organism  of  amboceptors  directed  against  its  own  tissues.

In  this  "borror  autotoxicus"  we  are  dealing  with  a  well-adapted
regulatory  contrivance  which  it  may  be  well  to  discuss  briefly.  Tlie
investigations  of  numerous  authors  have  shown  that  by  injecting
animals  with  any  kind  of  foreign  cell  material  cytotoxic  substanees
can  be  produced  directed  exactly  against  the  material  used  for  im-
munization. Thus  if  a  dog  ia  immunized  with  an  emulsion  of  goose
brain,  it  will  be  found  that  the  dog's  serum  will  be  highly  toxic  only
for  geese,  killing  these  animals  with  cerebral  symptoms.  In  the  same
way  we  can  produce  other  poisons,  hepatotoxins.  nephrotoxins,  etc.,
each  of  which  acts  only  on  a  certain  organ  of  a  particular  species.
In  human  pathology,  however,  we  must  consider  the  absorption  of
the  body's  own  constituents  and  not  of  those  of  other  bodies.  The
former  may  occur  under  many  conditions;  for  example,  in  hsemorrhagea
into  the  body  cavities,  in  the  absorption  of  lymph-gland  tumors,  in
the  febrile  waste  of  body  parenchj'ma.  It  would  be  dysteleological
to  the  highest  degree  if  under  these  circumstances  poisons  against
the  body's  own  parenchyma,  antotoxina,  were  to  arise.  I  have
attempted  to  solve  this  question  by  injecting  gouts  with  the  blood  of
other  goats.  The  sera  of  animals  so  treated  did  not  dissolve  their
own  blood-cells,  but  dissolved  those  of  other  goats.  Hence  it  did
not  contain  an  autotoxin,  but  an  "isotoxin,"  in  conformity  with  the
law  to  which  I  give  the  name  "horror  autotoxicus."

1  believe  that  the  isotoxina  may  perhaps  come  to  play  an  im-
portant rflie  in  diagnosis  and  pathology.  In  the  serum  of  dogs  in
which  he  had  produced  a  chromium  nephritis,  Metchnikoff  found
that  an  isonephrotoxin  had  developed,  for  when  this  serum  was
injected  into  normal  dogs  it  produced  a  nephritis.  It  ia  more  than
probable  that  in  man  also  the  greatest  variety  of  iaotoxins  is  formed.
In  the  case  of  the  blood  this  has  already  been  positively  demonstrated
by  a  number  of  authors,  such  as  I-andstciner.  Ascoli,  etc.

With  the  exception  of  the  red  blood  corpuscles  we  cannot,  of
course,  undertake  any  studies  in  man  concerning  the  isotoxina  of
the  parenchyma.  Many  considerations,  however,  indicate  that  it
will  be  possible  to  carry  out  these  ex[«'rimpnt.s  on  monkeys  and  eo
gain  a  new  foundation  for  patbnlogy  and  therapy  in  man.

The  number  of  combinations  present  in  the  blond  serum  and
making  up  the  ever-changing   haptin  apparatus  is  infinitely  great


THE   PROTECTIVE  SUBSTANCES  OF  THE  BLOOD.  389

Of  these  especially  the  substances  of  the  amboceptor  type  are  in
most  intimate  relationship  to  the  processes  of  natural  immunity,  for
it  is  they  which,  in  conjunction  with  the  complement,  effect  the  de-
struction of  the  injurious  bacteria.  Hence  if  there  is  a  loss  of  natural
immunity,  it  will  next  be  necessary  to  inquire  whether  there  is  a  lack
of  complement  or  of  amboceptor.

1  am  convinced  that  these  haptin  studies  open  up  a  new  and
important  field  of  biological  investigation  and  will  add  to  our  knowl-
edge concerning  the  process  of  assimilation.  Clinically  they  should
be  of  even  greater  importance.  Since  1  am  not  in  the  position  to
make  such  chemical  investigations  on  an  abundance  of  material,  I
have  thought  it  my  duty  to  clearly  define  my  point  of  view,  thus
furnishing  to  others  the  basis  for  a  proper  study  of  this  subject.  The
significance  of  this  method  for  pathology  and  therapy  will  not  perhaps
be  fully  realized  until  after  the  lapse  of  years.


XXXin.    THE    RECEPTOR  APPARATUS    OF  THE     RED
BLOOD-CELLS.  I


By  Professor  Dr.  P.  Ehbucb.

We  know  of  a  large  number  of  agents  which  are  able  to  injure
the  red  blood-cella  or  kill  them.  In  a  study  entitled  "Zur  Physiologie
und  Pathologic  der  rothen  Blutscheiben  "  (Charite  Annalen,  Vol.  !0)
1  have  shown  that  solution  of  red  blood-nells  is  brought  about  by
all  agencies  (mechanical,  chemical,  or  thermic)  which  kill  proto-
plasm. At  that  time  I  had  already  expressed  the  hypothesis  that
the  erythrocytes  possessed  a  peculiar  protoplasm,  the  discoplasma,
whose  chief  function  consists  in  preventing  the  escape  of  the  ha?ma-
globin  into  the  blood  plasma.  If  the  disco  plasma  is  killed,  the  haemo-
globin will  immediately  diffuse,  i.e.,  the  blood  becomes  laky.  This
process  ia  in  nrf  way  connected  with  conditions  of  osmotic  tension,
for  in  many  blood  poisons,  such  as  digitoxin,  vpratrin,  solanin,  cor-
rosive sublimate,  etc.,  this  destriiction  takes  place  in  ver>-  high  dilu-
tions which  hardly  change  the  molecular  concentration  at  all.

The  ordinary  blood  poisons,  and  they  are  very  numerous  (saponin
bodies,  helvellic  acid,  aldehydes,  polyphenols,  etc.),  are  chemically
clearly  defined  substances;  they  exert  their  deleterious  action  in
exact  accordance  with  the  principles  which  we  have  already  studied
in  connection  with  the  distribution  of  pharmacological  substances.
such  as  alkaloids,  etc.  Recently,  however,  we  have  come  to  know
another  group  of  blood  poisons  which  exert  their  injurious  action
after  the  manner  of  toxins,  i.e.,  through  the  agency  of  special  hapto-
phore  groups  which  fit  into  suitable  receptors.  All  of  these  sub-
stances are  highly  complex  derivatives  of  living  animal  or  vegetable


'  Reprint    from:    Schliisahelraclitum^en ;    Erkrankiingen  dea  Ulute
nagers  Specielle  Patbologie  und  Tberapie,  Vol.  VllI,  Vienna.  1»0I


Noth-


THE  RECEPTOR  APPARATUS  OF   THE  RED  BLOOD-CELLS.  391

cells;  for  the  present  at  least  their  chemical  nature  is  unknown.     Into
this  class,  to  mention  only  the  simplest  types,  belong  the  following:

1.  Poisonous  phytalbumoses:  ricin,  abrin,  crotin,  phallin;

2.  Bacterial  secretions:  tetanolysin  (Ehrlich,  Madsen),  staphylo-
toxin (van  de  Velde,  M.  Neisser,  and  F.  Wechsberg),  pyocyaneous
poison  (Bulloch),  streptococcus  poison  (v.  Lingelsheim),  cholera
poison,  and  probably  many  others.

3.  Poisonous  animal  secretions,  especially  the  various  snake
venoms.

The  majority  of  these  substances,  especially  all  of  the  bacterial
products,  produce  ordinary  haemolysis.  In  contrast  to  this,  as
Robert  has  shown,  abrin  and  ricin  cause  a  rapid  clumping  of  the
er}'throrytes,  a  process  which  is  analogous  to  the  agglutinative  phe-
nomena studied  by  Gruber,  Durham,  and  Widal.  However,  in  the
case  of  the  poisonous  phytalbumoses  we  cannot  assume  that  there
is  an  essential  difference  between  haemolysis  and  agglutinatin,  be-
cause one  of  them,  crotin,  has  been  show^n  by  Elfstrand  to  exert  a
pure  agglutining  action  on  certain  species  of  blood  (sheep,  pig.  ox)
and  a  pure  solvent  action  on  others  (rabbit).^

Of  especial  importance,  however,  is  the  fact  that  all  these  poisons
on  being  introduced  into  the  animal  body  produce  specific  antitox-
ins (antiricin,  antiabrin  (Ehrlich);  anticrotin  (Morgenroth) ;  anti-
tetiinolysin  (Madsen);  antileucocidin  (van  de  Velde).  In  view  of
what  we  have  already  discussed  this  fact  alone  is  sufficient  to  ascribe
to  these  substances  the  possession  of  a  haptophore  group  through
wliich  they  exert  their  toxicity.  Furthermore,  just  like  the  true
toxins,  they  possess  a  second  group  which  is  the  cause  of  the  toxic
action.  As  Madsen  has  shown  in  the  case  of  tetanolysin,  and  M.  Neisser
and  F.  Wechsberg  for  staphylolysin,  it  is  possible  to  change  these
poisons  into  modifications  which  have  more  or  less  completely  lost
their  toxicity  but  which  preserve  unchanged  the  properties  dependent
on  the  possession  of  the  haptophore  group  (affinity  for  the  anti-
body, production  of  immunity).    These  modifications,  first  recognized


'  Even  ricin.  which  is  apparently  purely  agglutinating,  exerts  an  action  on
the  discoplasma  which  causes  hsemolysis.  In  the  ordinary  technique  of  the
experiment  this  action  is  obscured  by  the  fact  that  in  the  agglutinated  masses
the  conditions  are  very  unfavorable  for  diffusion.  If  these  conditionri  are
made  more  favorable  by  breaking  up  the  clumps  by  shaking,  one  can  easily
observe  the  escape  of  the  haemoglobin.


392  C0L1.ECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMfNlTY.

by  me  in  diphtheria  poisons,  depend  on  the  separate  d^^st^uction  of
the  very  unstable  toxophore  group.

In  passing  now  to  the  substances  contained  in  blood  plasma  I
shall  discuss  first  the  agglutinins.  Even  normal  serum  frequently
contains  substances  which  clump  certain  bacteria  and  erythrocytes.
Although  at  first,  in  accordance  with  Buchner's  views,  one  single
substance  was  made  responsible  for  the  different  actions,  I  believe
that  at  present  the  pluralistic  standpoint  first  maintained  by  me  is
generally  accepted.  The  plurality  of  normal  agglutinins  was  at  once
proven  as  soon  as  my  principle  of  specific  combination  was  applied  to
this  question,  as  was  done  by  Bordet  and  Malkow.  The  latter  showed
that  it  goat  serum  which  agglutinates  the  erythrocytes  of  pigeon,
man,  and  rabbit  is  shaken  with  the  red  cells  of  one  of  these  species,
e.g.  pigeon,  it  will  be  found  that  the  centrifuged  fluid  still  contains
the  two  other  agglutinins  unchanged,  whereas  the  agglutinin  for  pigeon
blood  is  absent.

These  substances  can  be  obtained  artificially  by  following  the
procedure  of  Belfanti  and  Carlione.  who  injected  animals  with  con-
siderable amounts  of  foreign  red  Ijlood-cells  (blood-cell  immunization).
They  are  readily  separated  from  the  hsemolysins  developing  simul-
taneously by  heating  for  halt  an  hour  to  56°  C  As  a  result  of  this
the  action  of  the  amboceptor  lysine  is  destroyed  while  the  agglutinins
themselves  are  unaffected.  To  be  sure  if  the  temjierature  is  increased
to  70°  C.  it  is  possible  to  destroy  also  the  agglutinating  action.  In
that  case,  however,  the  addition  of  normal  serum  no  longer  exerts  a
reactivating  action.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  agglutinins '  are
not  of  such  complex  constitution  as  the  amboceptor  lysins;  analogous
to  the  toxins  they  contain  a  haptophore  group  and  a  zymophore
which  causes  the  coagulation  process.  In  accordance  with  this  I
believe  that  the  agglutinins  are  nothing  more  than  receptors  oj  the
second  order. ^


'  Tlie  agglutinins  hero  deBcrlbetl,  in  tontrast  to  ricin  and  abriu,  give  rise
lo  uo  further  injurious  action  on  the  discoplasma.

'  In  the  lirxt  part  of  " SuhluBsbeCraehtungon "  I  htkve  diatinguisbed :

i.  Recrptura  0/  (Ae  first  urder,  which  concern  Ihetnselvea  with  the  aBsimilation
of  simple  subetances  (toxins,  remienlfi.  and  other  cell  Beoratiooe).  For  Iliis
purpose  a  single  haptophore  group  Bufncea,  When  thruRt  off  into  the  blood
in  consequence  of  the  inlroductioo  of  toxins,  these  receptors  cDnstitut«  the
antitoxins  (antiferroente).

2.  Receptors  of  the  seamd  order,  which  in  addition  lo  the  haptophore  group
possess  a  second  group  which  effects  the  raagulation.    After  they  have  been


Fifl.  1.— The  \

'.,  Receptors  oj  th  i  r  I  ih  I  i  — llii  tvpc  i  pictured  in  a.  The  portion  e
represents  the  huptuphore  group  ubiUt  b  represents  a  toxin  molecule,
wbii-'h  possesses  a  haptophoro  group  c  and  a  toxophoro  group  d.  'J'his
represents  the  union  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  or  ferment  a:id  aatifer-
ment,  the  union  between  antibody  and  the  toxin  or  ferment  being  direct.

.  Receptors  of  the  Second  Order  are  pictured  in  c  Here  e  represents  the
haptophore  group  and  d  (he  z>iaophore  group  of  the  receptor,  /  being
the  food  moTecufe  with  nhich  this  receptor  combined.  Such  receptors
arc  posEiesiied  by  agglutinins  and  precipitins  It  is  to  be  noted  that
the  «ymophnre  group  is  an  mtegral  part  of  the  receptor.

.  Reeeplora  oj  the  Thirl  Order  are  pictiiiwl  in  III  e  being  the  haptophore
group  and  g  the  complementophile  group  of  the  receptor.  The  com-
plement k  poBspssee  a  hnptophore  group  h  and  zymotoxic  ^up  »;
wiulst  /  representi  the  food  molecule  which  has  heeome  linked  to  the
receptor.  Such  receptors  are  found  in  hipmolvsins.  bacteriolysins,  and
other  cytolvBins  (he  union  with  these  cellular  elements  being  effected
by  the  amboceptor  (n  thniat-off  receptor  of  this  orderl.  It  is  to  be
noted  that  the  digesting  body  the  complement,  is  distinct  from  the
receptor,  a  point  m  nhich  these  receptors  therefore  differ  from  those
of  the  preceding  order


394  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Next  we  come  W  the  very  important  substances  in  serum  which
j^uae  hEemolysis.  I  have  previously  dwelt  in  detail  on  the  fact  that
in  this  the  action  ia  always  due  to  amboceptors  which  attract  both
blood-cells  and  complement.  Hence  I  may  limit  myself  at  this  time
to  some  supplementary  remarks.  It  has  long  been  known  that  the
blood  serum  of  one  species  injures  and  dissolves  the  er>'throcytes  of
other  animal  species.  This  is  the  case  not  only  in  distantly  related
types,  such  as  6sh  and  mammals,  but,  as  was  shown  by  therapeutic
blood  transfusions,  occurs  also  in  comparatively  near  relatives-
Buehner  was  the  first  to  appreciate  the  significance  of  this  phenomenon,
and  assumed  that  the  scrum  contained  a  substance  innocuous  for  its
own  body  but  acting  destructively  on  foreign  elements  (bacteria  and
b lood -cells) .  This  substance  he  therefore  terms  alexin.  Not  until,
in  later  years,  the  mechanism  of  artificially  produced  lysins  became
clear  was  this  unitarian  view  shown  to  be  untenable.  First  it  was
found  that  the  lysins  contained  in  normal  blood  are-  not  simple  in
nature,  but  are  composed  just  like  those  artificially  produced,  of
two  components,  the  amboceptor  and  the  fitting  complement.  Further-
more, corresponding  to  the  results  in  the  case  of  agglutinins,  and  by
means  of  the  same  methods,  it  was  found  that  a  given  serum  can  con-
tain a  large  number  of  different  amboceptor  lysins.  If  a  certain
serum  (e.g.  dog  serum)  dissolves  the  erj-throcytes  of  different  species,
the  specific  combining  method  has  shown  that  this  property  is  due
to  the  presence  of  different  amboceptors,  each  of  which  is  related
to  only  one  of  these  species  of  blood-cells.  In  fact  it  even  seems  as
if  different  complements  may  correspond   to   these  amboceptors.

In  view  of  what  has  been  said  we  are  fortunately  able  to  regard
these  diiferent  agents  which  injure  the  blood  from  a  common  point
of  view.  Whether  we  are  dealing  with  \'egetable  or  animal  prod-
ucts, whether  with  lysins  or  agglutinins,  whether  with  substances
of  toxin-like  nature  or  of  the  complex  amboceptor  type, — in  all  of
these  cases   the   prerequisite  and  cause  of  this  poisonous  action  is  the

thrust  oS  into  the  blood  they  constitute  aggiutinius  and  precipitins.  The
toxins  also  lire  to  be  regarded  as  receptors  of  the  second  order  thrust  oB  by
bacteria,

3.  ReceploTt  0/  the  Ihtrd  order,  which  possess  two  haptophore  groups,  ooe
of  which  effects  the  union  with  the  loodstuff.  whereas  the  other  lays  hold  on
certain  substances  circulating;  in  the  blood  plasma,  the  com  piemen  ts,  which
cause  fertuent-like  lurtions.  After  they  are  thrust  off  these  receptors  con-
aitute  the  "amboceptors  "


THE   RECEPTOR  APPARATUS  OF    THE  RED   BLOOD-CELLS    395

same,  namely j  the  presence  of  suitable  receptors  on  the  blood-discs^  i.e.,
receptors  which  fit  the  haptophore  groups  of  the  toxin  or  the  corre-
sponding groups  of  the  amboceptor.  This  view,  already  generally
accepted  for  the  toxin  poisonings,  is  supported  by  considerations  of
two  kinds.  First  is  the  positive  proof  in  the  case  of  the  manifold
blood  poisons,  that  theii:  injurious  action  is  always  preceded  by  the
anchoring  of  the  poison  to  the  blood-cell.  Only  such  species  of
blood-cells  are  susceptible  to  a  certain  haemolysin  which  are  able
to  anchor  the  same.  This  has  been  confirmed  again  and  again  in
the  case  of  amboceptor  lysins.  Conversely,  therefore,  there  is  the
closest  connection  between  natural  immunity  and  absence  of  receptors.
That  the  fixation  of  the  poisons  is  not  due  to  mechanical  effects,
such  as  surface  attraction,  but  to  a  true  chemical  process,  is  at  once
shown  by  the  strict  specificity  which  obtains.  This  is  observed
especially  in  the  amboceptor  lysins  produced  artificially.  This
specificity  is  in  marked  contrast  to  the  many-sided  and  non-selective
action  of  surface  attraction  (charcoal,  etc.).  The  second  point
which  supports  the  above  view  is  the  fact  that  the  action  of  a
certain  poison,  and  only  of  this  one,  is  inhibited  by  the  correspond-
ing antitoxin.  According  to  my  views,  the  action  of  antitoxins  is
explained  by  assuming  that  they  occupy  the  haptophore  groups  of
the  toxin  molecule  and  so  prevent  these  from  combining  with  the
receptors  of  the  tissues.  It  is  quite  incomprehensible  to  me  how
the  specificity  of  the  antitoxins  can  more  easily  be  explained  on
the  basis  of  the  mechanical   conception.

This  brings  us  to  a  very  important  point,  namely,  the  surprising
plurality  of  receptors.  Even  in  the  blood  poisons  each  antiserum
protects  only  against  the  substance  through  which  it  was  produced
by  immunization.  This  law  of  specificity,  which  has  so  repeatedly
been  confirmed  in  the  infectious  diseases,  is  thus  seen  to  apply  here
without  any  change.  Antiricin  serum  protects  the  blood-cells  only
against  ricin,  antitetanolysin  only  against  tetanolysin,  every  anti-
am})oceptor  only  against  a  corresponding  amboceptor.

Hence  in  every  species  of  blood-cell  w^e  shall  have  to  assume
the  existence  of  as  many  different  kinds  of  receptors  as  there  are
poisons.  This  is  obviously  a  very  large  number.  Thus  if  the  blood-
cells  of  rabbits  are  injured  by  ricin,  crotin,  abrin,  phallin,  by  the
most  diverse  products  of  bacterial  metabolism,  and  by  a  large  num-
ber of  sera  of  other  species,  we  shall  have  to  assume  a  certain  recep-
tor (ricin  receptor,  etc.)  for  each  case.    Almast  every  day,  however,


396  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMfMTV

we  are  coming  to  know  more  such  blood  poieons;  the  Dumber  of
diflerent  receptors  which  we  can  determine,  therefore,  continue
to  inciease.

In  this  connection  1  should  like  to  present  the  results  which
Dr.  Moigenroth  and  I  have  obtained  in  atlempting  to  produce  uuto-
lysins  b)  immunizing  goats  with  blood  from  the  same  species  instead
of  blood  from  foreign  species.  In  only  one  single  instance  were  we
succesdtul.  i.e.,  in  obtaining  a  solution  of  the  animal's  own  blood-
cells.  In  all  other  cases  we  obtained  merely  an  isolysin,  which  dis-
solved the  blood-cells  of  other  goats  but  not  those  of  the  goat  immu-
nized. II  the  blood  of  a  large  number  of  goats  is  tested  with  a  par-
ticular isolysin,  it  would  be  found  that  of  some  goats  the  blood  is
highlv  susceptible,  of  others  it  is  feebly  susceptible,  and  of  still  others
the  blood  is  not  at  all  susceptible.  In  the  case  of  the  susceptible
bloods  il  can  be  shown  that  the  isolysin  consists  oE  the  amboceptor
which  is  anchored,  plus  a  complement  of  normal  goat  &erum.  In
course  of  time  we  have  produced  thirteen  such  isolytic  sera,  and  found
to  our  surprise  that  they  all  differed  from  one  another,  i.e.,  that
they  represented  different  isolysins.  Thus  the  first  serum  dissolved
the  blood-cells  ot  A  and  li;  a  second  serum  those  of  C  and  D;  a
third  A  and  D,  etc.  V.y  means  of  this  one  experiment  we  have,
therefore,  come  to  know  thirteen  different  lysins,  to  which,  of  course,
a  similar  number  of  receptors  must  correspond.  It  was  fortunate
lor  us  that  in  the  blood-cells  of  an  animal  all  the  receptors  were  not
present,  but  only  a  part  of  the  same,  for  it  was  only  owing  to  this
fact  that  a  separation  of  the  different  kinds  was  possible.

It  IS  worthy  of  note  that  many  receptors  may  be  present  in  the
blood-cells  in  relatively  large  amounts.  If  wc  designate  as  the  single
lethal  dose  (L.D.)  that  amount  of  a  cert^n  amboceptor  which  when
supplied  with  sufficient  complement  just  suffices  to  completely  dis-
solvt  a  constant  amount  of  blood,  we  tan,  by  employing  different
amounts  oi  amboceptor  solutions  inactivated  by  heat,  readily  deter-
mine tow  many  L.D.  can  be  anchored  by  the  amount  of  blood  in
question.  As  a  result  of  this  it  has  been  found  that  in  some  cases
only  just  the  single  L.D.  is  bound.  More  frequently  the  combining
power  of  the  erythrocytes  is  much  higher,  so  that  two  to  ten  and
even  fifty  times  the  L.D.  is  bound.  In  such  cases,  therelore,  we
are  dealing  with  a  marked  excess  of  these  particular  receptors.  An
analogous  ease,  by  the  way,  has  long  been  known  as  a  result  of
VVosseiroann's  experiment  concerning  the   power  ot   brain  substance


THE   RECEPTOR  APPARATUS  OF    THE   RED   BLOOD-CELLS    397

to  bind    tetanus   {)oison.     In  virtue  of  such  an  excess  of  tetanus
receptors,  the  brain  also  absorbs  a  considerable  multiple  of  the  L.D.
Hence  in  test-tube  experiments  it  is  still  possible  to  neutralize  con
siderable  quantities  of  poison  with  the  brain  cf  a  guinea-pig  which
has  died  of  tetanus.

All  of  these  tacts  lead  to  the  conception  that  the  red  blood-cells
possess  an  enormous  number  of  receptors  which  probably  belong
to  hundreds  of  different  types.  Of  these,  again,  a  few  may  be  present
in  relatively  large  quantities.  This  fact  is  surprising;  for  in  a  way
it  is  opposed  to  the  view  held  until  now  concerning  the  function
of  the  red  blood-cells.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  simple  inter-
change of  oxygen,  a  purely  chemical  function  of  the  haemoglobin,
would  require  so  complex  an  arrangement  as  that  just  described.
In  my  opinion,  therefore,  this  enormous  apparatus  indicates  that
the  red  blood-cells  actually  exercise  properties  which  we  have  thus
far  overlooked.  If  we  consider  that  the  receptors  in  general  serve
to  take  up  foodstuffs,  or  in  some  cases  the  products  of  internal
metabolism,  we  may  easily  assume  that  the  receptor  apparatus  of
the  erythrocytes  fulfills  this  same  purpose.  Since,  however,  we
know  that  the  vita  propria  of  the  blood-cells  is  very  limited,  we
shall  have  to  assume  that  the  substances  taken  up  are  not  tor  the
blood-cells'  own  consumption,  but  are  designed  to  be  given  off  to
other  organs.  The  red  blood -cells  may  therefore  be  regarded  as
storage  reservoirs  in  the  sense  that  they  temporarily  take  up  the
most  varied  substances  derived  from  the  food  or  from  the  internal
metabolism,  provided  these  substances  are  supplied  with  haptophore
groups.  I  may  be  permitted  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
erythrocytes  contain  chiefly  receptors  ot  the  first  order,*  i.e.,  recep-
tors which  take  up  substances  but  do  not  further  digest  them.

After  these  explanations  I  feel  justified  in  believing  that  the
study  of  receptors  has  opened  up  a  new  and  important  field  of  bio-
logical investigation.  In  order  to  make  my  meaning  clearer  I  should
like  to  quote  the  following  paragraph  from  Verworn  (Beitrage  zur
Physiologie  des  central  Nerven-Systems,  I.  Thiel,  page  68)  in  which
our  present  knowledge  is  reviewed:  **The  living  substance  of  every
cell,  so  long  as  it  actually  is  living  and  manifests  vital  phenomena,
is  constantly  decomposing  automatically  and  constantly  forming
new  substances.     Dissimilation  and  assimilation  are  the  fundamental


'  See  note,  page  392.


398


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY


pheuomeiia  of  metabolism,  while  ihey  are  also  at  the  same  time  the
two  phaaes  of  the  vital  process,

"  As  a  result  of  a  large  number  of  facte  we  have,  as  is  well  known,
arrived  at  the  concluaion,  confirmed  chiefly  by  Pfluger,  that  Che  mid-
point of  metabolism  is  repreaenled  by  complicated  combinations  of
egg  albumin  called  by  PHiiger  living  albumin.  Such  combinations
are  exceedingly  labile,  decomposing  to  a  certain  extent  sponta-
neously, and  to  a  greater  degree  in  response  to  stimuli  In  these
combinations  we  are  dealing  with  chemical  substances  whose  mole-
cules, just  because  of  this  easy  decomposition,  disclose  a  chemical
constitution  quite  different  from  the  lifeless  albuminous  bodies  which
we  know,  I  have  therefore  proposed  to  replace  the  name  'living
albumin  molecule'  by  the  term  'biogen  molecule."  The  dccompon-
tion  and  -prodvction  oj  the  biogcns  is  OurefoTc  the  corncTslone  of  Ike
mtat  process  in  every  living  celt.  The  substances  given  oft  by  the
cell  are  derived  from  the  decomposition  ol  the  biogens;  the  material
for  the  formation  of  new  biogen  molecules  is  furnished  by  the  food
taken  up  and  transformed  by  the  cell.  1  have,  however,  called
attention  to  the  fact  that  this  view  needs  to  be  extended  in  one
direction  (Allg.  Physiologie,  Jena,  1897).  A  number  of  facts  indi-
cate that  the  decomposition  of  the  biogen  molecule  is  not  complete
and  that  all  of  the  atomic  groups  thus  arising  are  not  giv-en  off  by
the  cell."

In  view  of  these  explanations  Verworn  assumes  that  in  the  de-
composition of  the  biogens  a  residue  is  always  left  which  again
takes  up  lood  substances  and  8o  regenerates  the  biogen  molecule.
It  seems  to  have  entirely  escaped  Verworn  that  I  had  expressed
entirely  analogous  views  in  much  greater  detail  twelve  years  pre-
viously ("  Uber  den  Sauerstoffbediirfniss  des  Organismus,"  Berlin,
1SS5).  I  assumed  that  the  specific  function  of  the  cell  is  depen-
dent on  a  central  group  in  the  living  protoplasm,  of  peculiar
structure;  furthermore,  that  atoms  and  atomic  gronijs  are  attached
to  this  central  group  as  side-chains.  These  aide-thuirta  are  o/  subonli-
nate  jmponanee  for  the  specific  ceU  function,  but  not  so  for  the  life  ilsilf.
I  also  said  that  everything  indicated  that  it  was  just  through  these
indifferent  side-chains  that  physiological  combustion  was  effected,
for  one  portion  of  these  side-chains  effects  combustion  by  giving
oft  oxygen,  the  other  portion  being  thus  consumed.  On  page  II  of
this  monograph  I  expressed  myself  as  follows:  "Tlie  question  as
to  the  manner  in  which  the  side-chains  constantly  being  consumed


THE   RECEPTOR  APPARATUS  OF   THE  RED  BLOOD-CELLS.  39^

are  regenerated  must,  of  course,  excite  the  greatest  interest.  It
can  be  conceived  that  ceitain  portions  of  the  functional  central
group  [Leistungskern]  can  fix  combustible  molecular  groups,  and  that
these  groups  are  thus  rendered  more  susceptible  to  complete  com-
bustion."

It  is  at  once  clear  that  these  fixing  portions,  which  I  now  term
receptors,  correspond  exactly  m  their  nature  to  the  biogen  residues
of  Verworn.

Probably  no  one  who  has  seriously  studied  these  questions  will
question  the  importance  of  these  deductions.  In  spite,  however,
ot  the  decades  which  have  elapsed  since  Pfliiger's  publication  we  have
not  advanced  one  step  in  our  experimental  knowledge  of  this  sub-
ject, a  fact  which  is  due  to  the  endless  diflSculties  occasioned  by  the
nature  and  instability  of  the  living  material.  I  hope  that  my  theory
is  destined  finally  to  bridge  this  wide  gap.  The  knowledge  that  the
numerous  antibodies  are  nothing  more  than  thrust-off  receptors  of
the  cell  should  make  it  possible  to  get  at  the  nature  of  assimilating
processes.  By  means  of  inmiunization  we  can  compel  the  thrusting-
off  of  certain  particular  receptors  which  then  collect  in  the  serum.
Free  from  the  disturbing  connection  with  the  protoplasm,  they  no
longer  offer  any  difficulties  for  biochemical  investigations.  Viewed
in  this  light,  I  believe  that  the  facts  which  I  have  determined  con-
cerning the  action  of  uniceptors  and  amboceptors  constitute  a  new
step  toward  a  true  conception  of  the  vital  processes.

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  red  blood-cells,  owing  to  their
relatively  simple  structure  and  the  ease  with  which  they  can  be
manipulated,  are  better  adapted  for  these  purposes  than  other  cellular
elements.  I  also  believe  that  clinical  investigations  are  destined  to
play  a  leading  r61e  in  the  solution  of  these  problems,  simply  because
the  various  types  of  disease  offer  a  much  greater  variation  in  the  vital
conditions  than  we  can  attain  by  means  of  experiments.  Even
aside  from  the  gain  to  pure  biological  science,  clinical  medicine  should
derive  the  greatest  advantage  from  such  studies,  for,  as  already  men-
tioned, they  deal  with  the  true  conception  of  the  pathology  of  the
red  blood-cells.

In  order  somewhat  to  facilitate  such  a  study  it  may  perhaps  be
well  to  give  a  brief  sketch  of  the  facts  which  in  conjunction  with
my  colleague.  Dr.  Morgenroth,  I  have  discovered  regarding  the
physiology  of  the  receptors.

Considering  the  large  number  of  receptors  which  each  species


400


COLLECTED  STtTOiES  IN  IMMIINITV.


of  blood-cell  possesses,  it  is  not  surprising  that  certain  tvpea  are
common  to  the  majority  if  not  to  all  the  vertebrate  species.  In  this
connection  I  shall  only  point  out  the  fact  that  receptors  for  ricin,
abrin,  ichthyotoxin  (which  injure  a  large  numl>er  of  different  erythro-
cytes) are  widely  distributed  in  the  animal  kingdom.  Side  by  side
witli  such  generally  distributed  groups,  however,  there  are  types
which  are  limited  to  a  comparatively  small  group  of  animal  species.
Thus  by  means  of  cross  immunization  we  have  demonstrated  that  the
blood-cells  of  goat  and  sheep  possess  several  special  receptors  in
common.  This  was  shown  by  the  fact  tiiat  the  isolysins  obtained
by  injecting  goats  with  goat  blood  usually  effected  solution  of  sheep
blood-cells,  although  to  a  less  degree.  In  malting  llie  counter  ex-
periments, immunizing  goats  with  sheep  blood-cells,  we  obtuned
in  addition  to  sheep  lysin  the  isolysin  acting  on  goats.

Besides  this  there  are  groups  of  receptors  whicli  are  specific  for
each  animal  species.  This  is  best  shown  by  the  normal  course  of
the  Belfanti-Bordet  experiments.  In  these  as  a  rule  only  specific
hiemolysins  are  formed,  i.e..  ha?molysins  directed  against  the  erythro-
cytes exciting  the  immunization.'

Such  variations  in  the  zoological  distribution  of  certain  recep-
tors (also  of  the  complements,  etc.)  is  readily  explained  by  the  very
natural  assumption  that  the  metalx)lic  processes,  whose  indicator
the  receptors  really  are,  show  corresponding  variations.  It  is  just
as  little  to  be  doubted  that  certain  assimilative  processes  are  specific
for  only  one  si>ecies  of  animal  as  that  others  occur  in  exactly  the
same  manner  in  man  and  in  the  frog.

It  is  alw  of  considerable  importance  that  in  any  given  animal
species  a  considerable  individual  variation  of  the  receptors  may  occur,
a  fact  first  observed  in  experiments  with  crotin  on  rabbits.  The
strongest  confirmation  of  this  [joint  is  the  result  of  our  experiments
on  goat  isolysins.  As  already  stated,  out  of  the  goats  we  used  there
were  always  only  a  few  which  reacted  to  one  of  the  thirteen  different
isolysins.

Through  the  opportunity  so  offered  we  convinced  ourselves  of
another  important  fact,  namely,  that  the  susceptibility  of  a  given
individual  can  change  in  a  comparatively  short  time.  We  found
that  a  goat  which  reacted  to  a  certain  isolysin   became   unsuscep-


■  Wc  have  olitaioed  entirely  atialoguUH
of  blood  serum,  eg.,  with  complemeata.


THE  RECEPTOR  APPARATUS  OF   THE  RED  BLOOD-CELLS.   401

tible  after  several  weeks,  and  further  that  in  this  case  there  had
been  a  disappearance  of  the  special  receptors  previously  demon-
strated as  present.  We  have  also  encountered  the  reverse  of  this,
namely,  the  appearance  of  receptors  previously  absent.

Evidently  this  coming  and  going  of  certain  receptors  reflects
internal  metabolic  processes  which  may  be  dependent  on  a  large
number  of  external  or  internal  factors.  In  this  connection  a  fact
observed  by  Kossel  is  especially  interesting.  This  observer  found
that  during  the  course  of  immunization  with  eel  blood  the  blood-
cells  of  rabbits  acquire  a  high  degree  of  resistance  against  the  poison,
a  fact  which  we  should  perhaps  ascribe  to  a  lack  of  receptors.  In
this  case  we  are  dealing  with  something  which  is  specific  for  the
immunization  with  eel  blood,  for  we  could  not  obtam  these  results
with  two  other  blood  poisons,  crotin  and  tetanolysin.

To  a  certain  extent  the  experiments  of  Kossel,  Gley,  and  Tschis-
towitsch  furnish  a  clue  to  the  mechanism  of  these  phenomena.  They
show  that  the  first  phase  of  immunization  is  that  of  antitoxin
formation,  and  that  the  unsusceptibility  of  the  red  blood-cells  is
not  developed  until  later.

The  way  in  which  blood-cells  which  have  previously  been  sus-
ceptible to  a  certain  poison  become  unsusceptible  to  this  can  very
readily  be  explained.  We  have  seen  that  those  blood-cells,  which
are  susceptible  to  the  action  of  a  poison  (e.g.,  eel  blood)  possess
appropriate  receptors.  Under  physiological  conditions  the  oflSce  of
these  is  to  anchor  a  certain  particular  product  of  metabolism,  2.  If
now  through  treatment  with  the  poison  the  specific  antitoxin  is
produced,  it  is  clear  that  this  antitoxin  when  present  in  the  circu-
lation is  able  to  anchor  not  only  the  poison  but  also  the  normal  meta-
bolic product,  X,  thus  preventing  the  latter  from  combming  with  the
erythrocytes.  Since  this,  however,  renders  the  corresponding  recep-
tors permanently  useless,  the  possibility  of  their  disappearance  is  at
once  given — after  the  manner  of  atrophy  through  disuse.  This  will
occur  most  readily  in  those  cases  in  which  the  substance  x  can
readily  be  spared  by  the  cell,  i.e.,  cases  in  which  (as  in  sugar)
the  substance  can  be  replaced  by  some  other  kind  of  material
(e.g.,  fat).

A  disappearance  of  the  receptors  can,  however,  occur  without
the  development  of  such  a  deflecting  antibody,  as  is  shown  by  the
isolysin  experiments.  The  most  natural  conclusion  is  that  the  lack
of  receptors  in  this  case  is  produced  by  an  inconstant,  perhaps  only


■i02  ('(H.LErTED  STUDIKS   IN   IMMUNITY

a  temporary,  met.aimlic  proJurt.  Perhaps  this  can  be  brought  inS
connection  with  the  interesting  observation  of  Gley  that  the  blood
cells  of  new-born  rabbits  are  highly  resistant  against  eel  poison,
acquiring  the  normal  high  susceptibility  only  ir  the  course  of
weeks.

Be  this  as  it  may,  everything  indicates  that  there  is  an  organic
harmonious  connection  between  the  metabolism  of  any  given  period
and  the  nature  of  the  receptors  present.  Tliis  connection  depends  on
the  fact  that  substances  with  haptophore  groups  exert  a  stimulus
on  the  protoplasm  which  excites  the  production  of  the  receptors  in
question.

In  conclusion  I  wish  to  point  out  that  many  tacts  indicate  that
the  species  of  receptors  found  in  the  erj-throcyles  may  also  Im?  present
in  the  cells  of  other  organs.  Thus,  mentioning  only  one  example,
tetanolysin  is  anchored  not  only  by  the  erythrocytes,  but  also  by
the  brain  and  other  organs.  This  phenomenon  also  shows  itself  in
the  immunizing  test.  Von  Dungern,  for  e.xample.  found  that  serum
of  rabbits  which  had  been  treated  with  tracheal  epithelium  of  oxen
exerted  a  marked  hemolytic  action  on  ox  blood  in  addition  to  its
injurious  action  on  epithelium.  Metchnikoff'a  objection  that  this
was  due  to  an  error  in  technique  (the  injection  of  admixed  blond-
cells)  was  controverted  by  von  Dungern,  who  showed  that  injections
of  cow  milk,  a  material  absolutely  free  from  blood-cells,  produced
the  same  hsmolysins.  It  follows  that  certain  receptors  rouft  be
common  to  the  red  blood-cells  and  the  epithelial  tissue  or.  the  milk
derived  from  this.

The  wide  distribution  of  a  particular  combining  group  harmonizes
very  well  with  the  assumption  discussed  above  concerning  the  func-
tions of  the  receptor  apparatus  of  the  red  blood-cell&.

According  to  Miescher's  comparison  the  red  blood-cells  serve  ea
a  sort  of  bank  of  deposit  where  the  metabolic  products  in  excess  at
any  given  time  may  be  stored  temporarily.  In  this  case  the  sub-
stances will  be  yielded  up  only  to  organs  possessing  suitable  receptors.
This  process  will  be  all  the  more  complete  if  the  affinity  of  the  tissue
receptors  is  greater  than  that  of  the  blood  receptors.  There  are
many  reasons  for  believing  that  the  atTmity  of  the  tissue  receptors
is  not  constant,  and  that  it  can  be  considerably  increased  through
certain  stimuli  (assimilative  stimuli).  It  is  obvious  that  hunger,  if
we  may  apply  the  term  to  purely  cellular  processes,  must  constitute
one  of  the  most  important  assimilative  stimuli.     This  functional  in-


THE   RErEFrOH   APPARATUS  OF    THE   RED   BLOOD-CELLS    403

crea.se  of  affinity  would  constitute  a  wonderful  illustration  ot  how
well  the  process  of  assimilation  is  adapted  to  its  purpose.

Note  —Subsequent  addition  to  paf^e  400:

Calmette  also  bas  recently  reported  (Compt.  rend,  de  I'Acad^mie  des  ftciences,
T.  134.  No.  24,  1902)  that  the  blood-cells  of  animals  highly  immunized  witli
cobra  poison  preserve  their  sensitiveness  completely  against  the  hspmolysin
of  the  cobra  poison.  In  a  goat  highly  immunized  with  ricin.  Jacoby  fHof-
meister's  Beitr^e  z.  cbem  Physiologic  und  Patbologie,  Bd.  11,  1902)  was
unable  to  discover  any  increased  resistance  ot  the  red  blood-cells  agamst  the
action  of  the  ncm.


XXXIV.  THE  RELATIONS  EXTSTTNO  BETWEEN   CHEM-
ICAL   CONSTITTTION,  DISTRIBUTIOX,    AND
PHARMACOLOGICAL   ACTION.'

(An  Address  delivered  iii  the  "Verein  (ur  mtwre  Mediein,"  Dec    12,  1S98.)
By  Professor  Dr.  P   Eurucii.


Until  recent  years  the  relations  between  chemistry  and  medicine
were  in  general  confined  to  purely  scientific  cjueations.  In  Ihe  last
decade,  however,  a  change  has  taken  place.  bUch  oa  has  rarely  been
seen  in  the  history  of  medicine.  One  is  justified  in  saying  that  at
the  present  time  the  chemical  view  constitutes  (he  axis  about  which
the  most  important  views  in  medicine  turn,  and  that  Ihe  [wo  poles
are  the  synthetic  construction  of  new  thera[>eutic  agents  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  discovery  of  specific  therapeutic  products  of
living  cells  on  Ihe  olher.  The  contrast  Itetween  these  two  methods
is  very  pronounced,  In  the  first  case,  one  makes  use  of  the  retort
and  simple,  definite  reactions;  in  the  other,  of  the  mysterious  jKiwers
of  living  nature  so  infinitely  well  suited  to  Iheir  purpose.  A  RreaKr
contrast  cannot  be  imaguied  than  tliat  existing  between  the  modern
medicaments,  whose  constitution  is  known  down  to  Ihe  finest  details,
and  diphtheria  antitoxin,  which  we  know  only  through  its  specific
action  and  about  whose  chemical  constitution  we  l:now  al)solut«ly
nothing.  Thus  far  the  genius  of  the  mo.st  eminent  chemists  has  not
availed  to  produce  these  bodies  in  a  pure  form  and  get  an  insight
into  their  chemical  nature.  All  that  Ihi.s  endless  study  has  brought
forth  is  the  conviction  that  we  are  dealing  with  atomic  groups  of
the  utmost  complexity,  which  for  the  present  are  entirely  beyond
our  chemical  researches  and  which,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  will  long
remain  so


'  lieprint  \roai  the  v.  Lejdeu  Festschrift,  Vol.  I.


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION    AND   PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.     40S

As  a  result  of  this  and  other  considerations  the  view  haa  become
prevalent  that  the  chemo-therapeutic  and  the  bio-therapeutic  ten-
dencies are  absolutely  different  from  each  other.  As  late  as  two
years  ago  a  certain  high  authority  said  that  the  antitoxins  act  after
the  manner  of  specific  forces  (in  a  physical  sense).  If  this  theory
of  '* forces"  were  to  be  upheld  every  ix)ssibility  of  bridging  the  con-
tradictions would  be  completely  lost,  for  then  every  tertium  compara-
tionis  would  be  lacking.

If  instead  of  this  we  assume  that  both  kinds  of  substances  exert
their  power  by  purely  chemical  means,  we  shall  find  that  certain
questions  arise  which  are  of  great  significance  for  the  further  develop-
ment of  therapeutics.  Convinced  that  this  is  correct  1  have  busied
myself  during  the  past  ten  years  with  attempts  to  prove  the  chemical
theory  of  toxins  and  antitoxins  experimentally.  I  believe  I  am
justified  in  claiming  that  I  have  caused  the  chemical  conception  to
be  accepted  among  ever- widening  circles.     This  1  have  accomplished :

1.  By  the  introduction  of  the  test-tube  experiments.

2.  By  systematic  investigations  concerning  the  mutual  satisfying

affinities.

3.  By  the  demonstration  of  toxoids  and  their  various  modifications.

I.

If  then  the  medicaments  of  known  constitution  and  the  biothera-
peutic  products,  both  act  only  in  a  chemical  manner,  i.e.,  if  both
effect  the  organism  chemically,  the  first  problem  to  be  solved  is  to
determine  on  what  factor  the  very  dissimilar  action  of  these  two
classes  of  bodies  depends.  It  will  be  well  to  begin  with  the  simplest
condition,  and  to  study  first  the  mode  of  action  of  bodies  whose
chemical  constitution  is  well  known.

It  is  particularly  desirable  to  gain  an  insight  into  the  relations  exist-
ing between  chemical  constitution  and  pharmacological  action.  Dur-
ing the  last  few  decades  these  have  come  to  play  an  important  role  in
the  modern  synthetic  tendencies.  The  history  of  this  tendency  is
comparatively  recent,  dating  from  the  year  1859  when  Stahlschmidt
demonstrated  that  strychnine  loses  its  tetanizing  action  when  a
methyl  group  is  introduced,  being  transformed  into  a  curare-like
poison.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  this  methylation  forms  an  ammo-
nium base,  Fraser  and  Braun  studied  a  number  of  other  ammonium
bases  derived  from  various  alkaloids  and  found  that  all  of  these  bodies


406


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


possessed  a  rurare-like  action.  Since  that  time  a  large  number  of
ammonium  baaee  derived  from  the  most  varied  alkaloids  have  been
investigated,  most  all  of  which  showed  the  same  action.  The  final
step  was  achieved  only  recently  when  Bohm  showed  that  curai-in  is
itself  an  ammonium  base.  He  found  that  the  cuiares  contain  a
tertiary  alkaloid,  ciirin,  which  is  of  slight  toxicity.  If  this  curin
was  subjected  to  methylation  an  animoniimi  base  was  formed  which
cor  res  I  ion  ded'  completely  in  properties  and  actions  with  the  natural
curarin,  but  was  about  260  times  as  toxic  as  the  original  substance.
Since  this  time  these  questions  have  been  stutiied  on  many  different
combinations  by  a  large  number  of  investigators,  among  whom
may  be  mentioned  Nencki,  Jaffe,  Filehnc,  Mering,  Brunton,  Brieger.
Gibbs,  and  Aronson.  I  cannot,  however,  go  into  details  and  must
confine  myself  to  giving  a  short  epitome  of  what  has  been  dune  m
the  development  of  synthetic  remedies.

First  in  importance  are  the  artificial  antipyretics,  of  which  the
main  types  are  the  antipyrin  series  and  the  phenacetin  series.  The
history  of  the  origin  of  these  two  groups  is  absolutely  unlike.  In
one  case  the  starting-point  was  the  tact  that  quinine  contains  a
hydrated  chinolin  derivative;  by  means  of  simpler  combinations  it
was  attempted  to  obtain  the  same  end.  Finally,  after  chinolin,
kairin  and  thallin  had  proved  of  such  little  value,  antipyrin  was
obtained  and  found  most  useful.  The  second  group,  which  includes
phenacetin  and  its  numerous  relatives,  owes  its  discoverj'  not  to
theoretical  speculations  but  to  a  coincidence,  the  result  of  an  error.

Of  the  other  therapeutic  agents  the  discovery  of  the  hypnotic
action  of  sultonal  by  Baumann  has  proven  of  great  practical  and
theoretical  significance.  The  same  holds  true  of  the  production  of
the  new  ana«thetics  (orthoform  and  eucain).  which  was  closely  con-
nected with  the  discover)'  of  the  constitution  of  cocaine.  In  recent
years  efforts  are  constantly  being  made  to  do  away  with  the  by-
effects  possessed  by  certain  remedies,  such  as  guaiaco]  and  formal-
dehyd.  These  efforts,  first  undertaken  by  Nencki,  seek  by  means
of  suitable  combinations  and  cleavages  to  give  rise  to  a  gradual
Uberation  of  the  active  component.  While  of  great  practical  value
they  have  but  Httle  interest  in  the  cjuestion  concerning  the  connection
between  constitution  and  action.

When  now  we  come  to  inquire  what  conclusions  we  can  draw
from  the  study  of  the  large  number  of  therapeutic  agents,  which  now
embrace  many  hundreds   of  different   remedies,  conclusions  ^hich


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION      407

will   apply  to  the  study  of  the  relation  between  constitution  and
action,  we  find  that  the  results  are  still  very  meagre.
In  the  main  they  are  as  follows:

1.  The  discovery  that  the  antipyretic  action  of  the  anilin  and
amidophenol  derivatives  (phenacetin)  is  proportional,  within  cer-
tain limits,  to  the  amount  of  p-amidophenol  split  off  in  the  organism
(Hinsberg).  Hence  all  such  combinations  in  which,  through  im-
proper substitution  of  the  amido  group  or  of  the  main  group  (p-
amidoacetophenon,  NH2-C6H4COCH3),  the  liberation  of  p-amido-
phenol is  prevented  cannot  be  used  as  antip)rretics.

2.  The  discovery  by  Kendrick,  Dewar,  Filehne,  that  in  the  pyri-
din  series  the  hydrated  products  act  more  strongly  than  the  parent
substance.  Thus  piperidin,  CsHiqNH,  is  a  much  stronger  poison
than  pyridin,  CsHsN.  In  this  the  transformation  of  the  tertiary
nitrogen  atom  in  the  imin  group  plays  a  certain  rdle,  as  is  shown
especially  by  the  observations  of  Filehne  on  the  tetra-hydro-chinolin
series.  According  to  these  the  replacement  of  the  imid's  hydrogen
atom  by  alcohol  radicals  reduces  the  irritant  action.

3.  The  demonstration  that  the  antipyretic  power  of  antipyretics
is  destroyed  by  the  introduction  of  salt-forming  acid  radicals,  such
as  SO3H,  CO2H  (Ehrlich,  Aronson,  Nencki,  Penzoldt).  Hence
so  far  as  this  action  is  concerned  acetanilido-acetic  acid,
C6H5N(COCH3)CH2C02H,  is  inert.  So  also  are  acetanilin  sulfonic
acid,  C6H5NHCOCH2SOJH,  the  carbonic  and  sulfonic  acids  of
phenacetin,  and  the  ethoxy-phenylglycin  which  is  similar  to
phenacetin.

p    TT    /OC2H6

U«4\NH.CH2C02H.

4.  The  demonstration  by  Filehne,  Einhom,  Ehrlich,  and  Poulson,
of  the  anaesthesiophore  character  of  the  benzoyl  radical.  Homo-
logues  of  cocaine,  such  as  are  obtained  when  other  acid  radicals,
such  as  succinic  acid,  phenylacetic  acid,  cinnamic  acid,  are  intro-
duced into  the  ecgoninmethylester,  lack  these  anaesthetic  properties.
This  discovery  resulted  in  the  production  of  new  potent  anaesthetics
containing  the  benzoyl  group  as  the  active  agent,  e.g.  eucain  (Merling)
and  orthoform  and  nirvanin  (Einhom).

5.  The  function  of  the  ethyl  group.  This  has  been  brought  out
very  clearly  by  Baumann's  discovery  that  the  hypnotic  action  of
certain  disulfons  is  due  exclusively  to  the  presence  of  ethyl  groups


408


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


and  that  it  increases  with  the  number  of  these  groups:  thus  sulfonal,
(CH3)2-C-(S0202Hs)z,  and  trional,  CH3C2H6-C-(S02C2H5)2.  Of
the  other  hypnotics  which  owe  their  action  in  part  to  the  ethyl  group
I  may  mention  amy!  en  hydrate,  C(CH3)3(C2H5)  OH,  and  ethyl  ui^
ethan,  N'HiCOOCaHfi.  The  influence  of  the  ethyl  radical  isfiirther-
more  clearly  shown  in  another  series  of  combinations.  In  an  arti6cial
sweetening  sul>stance,dulein,  which  is  about  two  hundred  times  sweeter
than  sugar,  this  influence  is  very  evident.  This  substance  is  phenyl
urea  ethoxylatcd  in  the  para  |X)&Ition,  C2H60-C6H4-NHCOXH2.
Since  neither  simple  phenyl  urea  nor  the  methoxy  combination,
CHs-O-TaHj-NH-CONHs,  analogous  to  dulcin,  possesses  anysweet
taste  whatsoever,  we  are  forced  to  conclude  that  this  is  due  to  a  functiou
of  the  ethyl  radical.  Of  the  remedies  containing  the  ethyl  radical
there  may  still  be  mentioned  phcnacelin,  CjHs-OCaHj-NH-CO  CHs,
and  two  anassthetics,  holocain,  CaHsO-CeH*  NH-CCCHa):
N-CBHi-OCaHfi,  and  acoin,  all  three  of  which  are  derived  from
phenetidin.  It  is  significant  that  of  the  entire  series  of  alcohols
only  ethyl  alcohol  has  become  established  as  a  beverage,  and  that
since  the  earliest  time  attention  was  directed  to  producing  it  as  pure
as  po-ssible,  i.e.,  to  free  it  from  higher  and  lower  relatives.  In  all
of  these  examples  we  are  dealing  with  an  influence  on  the  nervous
system,  the  central  system  {sulfonal  ethylurethan,  amylen  hydrate,
alcohol),  as  well  aa  the  peripheral  endings  (dulcin,  anesthetics).
Hence  we  shall  probably  not  err  if  we  assume  that  the  ethyl  group
possesses  a  certain  relation  to  the  nervous  system.  In  this  con-
nection an  observation  which  I  made  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Mirhaelis
may  perhaps  be  of  some  significance.  We  were  studying  a  blue-green
azo  dye  which  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  diazotated  diethyl-
saffranin  and  dimethylanilin,  and  which  therefore  is  expresed  by
the  formula


(C2H5)2N|


It  was  found  that  this  substance  has  the  power,  somewhat  like
methylene  blue,  to  stain  the  nerve  endings  of  living  (?)  tissue  organs,


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION   AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION      409

whereas  the  corresponding  dyes  derived  from  saffranin,  tolusaffranin,
and  dimethyl-saflfranin  do  not  possess  this  property.  Some  time  after
this  we  received  a  second  dyestuff,  of  unknown  constitution,  which
possessed  the  same  neurotropic  properties,  and  we  therefore  at  once
assumed  that  this  body  also  contained  a  diethylanilin  radical.  On
inquiry  of  the  manufacturer  we  found  our  conjecture  verified.  This
staining  experiment  may  perhaps  afford  valuable  confirmation  of  the
view  expressed  above  concerning  the  function  of  the  ethyl  radical.

This  synopsis  will  show  that  our  actual  knowledge  concerning  the
relation  between  constitution  and  action  is  still  in  its  very  infancy.
Hence  the  expectation  to  be  able  to  construct  new  remedies  of  pre-
determined action  on  the  basis  of  theoretical  conceptions  will  prob-
ably have  to  be  deferred  for  a  long  time.  To  the  initiate  the  lack
of  sufficient  positive  knowledge  is  revealed  by  the  inactivity  which
now  characterizes  a  field  once  entered  upon  with  so  much  promise.
The  innumerable  remedies  which  have  overwhelmed  medicine  in  the
past  few  years,  of  which  only  a  few  are  of  any  value,  and  thus  denote
any  real  progress,  have  sufficed  speedily  to  allay  the  original  enthu-
siam.  A  feeling  of  indifference  has  thus  been  engendered  which  is
constantly  being  increased  by  the  advertisements  which  are  daily
becoming  more  and  more  evident.  Aside  from  these  evils,  however,
this  line  of  study  is  at  present  suffering  especially  from  two  other
evils:

1.  The  habit,  when  a  remedy  has  been  partly  accepted,  of  imme-
diately following  it  with  a  dozen  rivals  of  similar  composition.

2.  The  exclusive  preference  given  to  remedies  acting  purely
symptomatically,  which  are  not  true  curative  agents.

A  change  for  the  better  will  only  then  occur  if  pure  biological
points  of  view  are  adopted,  i.e.,  if  the  initiative  is  transferred  from
the  chemical  to  the  biological  laboratory.  As  physicians  we  must
stop  remaining  content  with  the  auxiliary  r61e  of  counsel  in  these
important  questions.  In  this  subject,  our  very  own  since  time
immemorial,  we  must  insist  on  taking  first  place.  Just  now  it  is
essential  that  we  gain  more  general,  biological  conceptions,  and  it
is  therefore  every  one's  duty  to  contribute  his  mite  to  the  develop-
ment of  this  therapy.


CWLLECTEU  STLDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


n.

One  of  the  main  causes  which  has  made  an  insight  into  the  rela-
tion between  conalitulion  and  action  so  dilFicuU  to  obtain  is  to  be
found  in  the  fact  that  these  reJations  were  considered  to  be  murfi
simpler  than  they  really  are,  and  in  the  further  fact  that  purely
chemical  conceptions  were  applied  arbitrarily  to  biological  process**.
In  pure  chemistry  there  is  an  abundance  of  materia!  for  observing
the  relations  between  physical  properties  and  chemical  constitu-
tion. In  such  a  study  it  is  first  necessary  to  determine  which  proper-
ties, to  follow  Ostwald'a  terminology,  are  "additive"  and  which
"constitutive  "  by  nature.

The  question  arises  what  are  the  essential  properties  which  are
still  found  in  the  combmations.  Evidently  they  are  such  as  pet-
tain  to  the  subslaTice  of  the  elements  and  are  independent  of  the
ajTatujtmenl  of  these.  These  properties  accompany  the  elements  m
their  combinations,  assuming  therein  values  which  represent  the  sum
of  the  values  of  the  elements.  In  other  words  these  are  "additive"
properties.

Real  additive  properties  are  not  known  apart  from  mass.  The
neaiest  approach  lo  them  are  perhaps  the  specific  heat  of  solid  com-
binations, and  m  a  less  degree  the  refraction  of  organic  substances  uid
their  property  to  occupy  space.  In  these,  however,  another  factor
becomes  evident,  namely,  the  arrangi-mcnt  of  the  elements  in  their
combinations,  This  factor  is  of  paramount  importance  in  deter-
mining such  properties  as  color,  boiling-  and  melting-point,  form  of
crystals,  etc.  The  properties  which  are  under  the  mutual  control
of  the  nature  of  the  elements  and  their  arrangement  are  called
"constitutive"  properties.  The  extreme  in  this  direction  is  made
up  o!  those  properties  which  are  no  longer  in  any  way  dejiendent
on  the  nature  of  the  substances  but  only  on  their  arrangeoicnt,
these  are  called  "colligative  "  properties.

To  which  group,  then,  do  the  properties  of  affinity,  i.e.,  the  jwwer
of  elements  to  effect  chemical  reactions,  belong?  Evidently  tu  the
constitutive,  for  daily  experience  teaches  us  that  the  nature  as  well
as  the  arrangement  of  the  elements  is  a  factor.  Acetic  acid,  lactic
acid,  and  glucose  cimtain  the  same  elements  in  the  same  piopta-
tions  by  weight,  yet  they  manifest  entirely  different  reacting  capaci-
ties,    Ilutyric  acid  and  acetic  ester  are  not  only  of  the  same  con-


CHEMICAL   CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.    411

stitution  but  have  the  same  molecular  weight,  yet  their  affinities
are  different.^

There  is  probably  no  doubt  that  those  properties  of  organic  sub'
stances  which  interest  us  as  therapeutists  are  constitutive  in  nature.

R.  Meyer  has  published  a  most  interesting  article  on  certain  re-
lations between  fluorescence  and  chemical  constitution.  In  this  he
calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  relations  between  the  color  of
chemical  combinations  and  their  constitution  have  not  up  to  the
present  time  been  studied  with  the  exactness  with  which  charac-
teristics less  apparent  have  been  examined,  such  as  rotation  and
the  refractive  index.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  refractive  index
of  a  body  is  a  definite  number,  the  specific  rotation  an  angle  whose
size  can  be  exactly  determined,  whereas  color  is  more  qualitative
in  character,  and,  strictly  speaking,  is  not  a  physical  but  a  physio-
logical characteristic.  A  body  which  possesses  strong  ultraviolet
absorption  bands  is  colorless  to  our  eyes,  yet  it  may  appear  colored
to  a  visual  organ  differently  constituted  than  ours.  We  see,  therefore,
that  even  in  so  conspicuous  a  property  as  color  the  physiological
factor  interferes  with  our  gaining  a  clear  insight  into  the  relations
existing  between  constitution  and  action.  It  will  at  once  be  con-
ceded that  this  is  true  to  a  still  greater  degree  in  the  complex  processes
which  underlie  pharmacological  action.

l^>ut  it  is  just  because  of  this  intermediate  position  that  the  chem-
istry of  dyes  tuffs  affords  so  good  a  point  of  vantage  for  our  con-
sideration. 1  may  therefore  perhaps  be  permitted  to  briefly  outline
what  has  thus  far  been  learned  concerning  the  relations  between
color  and  constitution,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  1  shall
frequently  have  to  touch  on  the  biology  of  dyes  in  the  succeeding
chapters.

In  1868  C.  Graebe  and  C.  Liebermann  demonstrated  that  color
was  in  some  way  associated  with  a  certain  denser  combination  of  the
atoms.  If  this  is  overcome  by  the  addition  of  hydrogen  the  color
will  disappear,  the  dye  passing  into  the  **leuco"  combination  (thus
indigo  into  indigo  white),  out  of  which  it  can  again  be  produced  by
oxidation.

A  great  advance  was  then  made  by  O.  N.  Witt,  who  showed  that
the  color  properties  of  a  dyestuff  are  due  to  the  presence  of  a  certain
unsaturated  group  of  atoms  which  he  terms  the  color-producing  or

'  Ostwald,  Grundriss  der  allgemeinen  Chemie.


412


COLLECTEU  STUUIES  IN   IMMUNITY


"  chromophore  "  group.  Concerning  the  devils  ol  the  varioua  types
of  chromophorea  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  admirable  work  of  Nietzki.
I  may,  however,  say  here  that,  as  a  rule,  the  action  of  the  chromophore
groups  as  such  does  not  become  manifest  if  the  group  is  part  of  a
molecule  very  poor  in  carbon  atoms.  Hence  colored  combmations
are  rare  in  the  fatty  series;  they  belong  almost  exclusively  to  the
aromatic  series  (Nietzki).  The  presence  of  a  chromophore  group
does  not,  however,  by  itself  suffice  to  produce  true  dyes.  Thus
ajtobenzol,  which  possesses  the  chromophore  azo  group,  \  =  N.  is
no  dye,  because  it  possesses  no  affinity  for  tissues.  For  this  reason
Nietzki  terms  azobenzol  a  "chromogen,"  i.e.,  a  combination  which
becomes  a  true  dye  when  suitable  graups  are  introduced.  Radicals
which  have  the  power  to  develop  the  nature  of  a  dye  are  called
"  auxochrome  "  radicals  (Witt).  Thus  far  we  know  but  two,  namely,
the  OH  group  which  produces  dyes  of  an  acid  character,  and  the
amido  group  which  produces  basic  dyes.  In  contrast  to  thio  it  i»
found  that  other  salt-forming  groups  are  not  auxochromic.  This
holds  true  not  only  lor  acid  complexes,  such  as  the  carboxyl  group
and  the  radical  of  sulpho  acids,  but  also  for  certain  basic  radicals
as  NH4,  CH^NHi,  CH,.N-(CH3)a,  andOCHrf  N  {CH3)..

From  every  chromogen,  therefore,  two  series  ot  dyes  may  be  de-
rived, acid  and  basic,  each  acid  derivative  having  an  analogous  basic
one.     Thus

Acid  BaEic

Oxyazobenzol    AmiduazulieDiol

Dioxyazobenzol  (reEorcin  yellow) DlamidoaiobeDzoI  (chrysoidiii)

RoGolic  acid       .  .    .      .... RoeaniljD

Thionol Thionolin

ApoBuflranoD       ApoiiafTraoiD

If  several  similar  auxochromes  are  introduced  into  a  chromogen
it  will  be  found  that  up  to  a  certain  point  the  intensity  of  Ihe  shade
and  the  affinity  for  the  tissues  increaaes  with  the  number  of  groups  in-
troduced; thus,  amidoazobenzol — yellow;  diamidoazobenzol— orange,
triamidoaKO  benzol— brown.

Witt's  observations  extended  only  to  Ihe  question  whether  and
under  what  conditions  a  body  is  colored.  Nietzki  went  a  step  fur-
ther and  showed  that  the  simplest  azo  bodies,  as  also  all  the  most
eimply  constituted  dyes,  possess  a  yellow  eolor.  He  showed  that
the  tint  deepens  not  only  with  the  mcrease  in  auxochrome  groups
just  mentioned,  but  also  with  the  accumulation  ol  carbon  aluniB  io


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION     413

the  molecule.  In  many  eases  the  color  thus  passes  through  red  into
violet,  in  other  cases  it  passes  into  brown.  Besides  this  the  chemistry
of  the  rosanilin  dyes  furnishes  many  examples  of  change  in  tint  through
the  introduction  of  substituting  groups;  thus,  rosanilin— red;  tri-
methylrosanilin — red  violet;  hexamethylrosanilin— blue  violet;  tri-
phenylrosanilin — blue.

I  may  add  that  in  several  cases  these  views  have  been  applied
also  to  bodies  possessing  physiological  action.  In  cocaine,  for  ex-
ample, the  ester-like  benzoyl  radical,  (COCeHs),  undoubtedly  repre-
sents the  ansesthesiophore  group;  the  tertiary  amin  contained  in  the
basic  portion  representing  an  analogue  of  the  auxochrome  group,
and  hence  called  auxotox.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  determined
by  me  that  cocaine  loses  its  ansesthetizing  properties  when  through
methylation  the  tertiary  amin  is  converted  into  a  quaternary  ammo-
nium base.  Analogous  to  this  is  the  fact  that  through  complete
methylation  tertiary  groups  lose  the  property  to  act  as  auxochromes,
for  the  ammonium  radicals  thus  formed  merely  give  rise  to  an  in-
creased solubility.  Thus  through  the  introduction  of  a  methyl  group,
hexamethyl  violet,  which  possesses  three  dimethylamido  radicals,
passes  over  into  the  soluble  methyl  green,  which  possesses  two  di-
methylamido groups  and  one  ammonium  group.  Hence  methyl  green
is  a  tripheny^-methan  dye  which  contains  two  dimethylamido  groups
as  auxochromes.  In  this  it  is  like  malachite  green,  which  it  therefore
matches  entirely  in  tint.

The  third  portion  of  the  cocaine  molecule,  the  carboxylmethyl
group,  COOCH3,  on  the  other  hand,  is  probably  of  but  little  im-
portance, as  can  be  seen  from  the  strong  anaesthetic  action  of  benzoyl-
pseudotropein,  which  does  not  possess  this  group.


III.

Having  thus  briefly  sketched  some  of  the  more  important  points
concerning  the  relation  between  chemical  constitution  and  action,
1  pass  on  the  pharmacological  side  of  the  subject,  in  which,  to  be
sure,  the  conditions  are  far  more  complex.  It  will  be  well  to  com-
mence with  a  very  simple  example.  We  know  a  large  number  of
poisons  which  through  appropriate  substitution  are  practically  de-
prived of  their  deleterious  action.  As  was  shown  by  Aronson  and
myself,  this  is  true,  especially  of  the  radicals  of  sulphuric  and  carbonic
acids.     Independently  of  us,  Nencki  came  to  the  same  conclusion.


414


COLLEfTED  STIIDIES  IN  IMMtlNITY


Thus  by  allowing  sulphuric  acid  to  act  on  anilin,  which,  as  is  well  known,
is  highly  toxic,  the  toxicity  ib  completely  destroyed,  for  the  result-
ing aiilfanilic  acid  can  be  taken  in  large  doses  without  injury  In
like  manner  the  amidobenzoic  acids  are  non-toxic;  so  also  the  meta-
and  para-oxy benzoic  acido  derned  from  phenol,  while  the  ortho
isomer  (salicylic  acid)  -.till  exhibits  the  familiar  toxic  effects,  although
they  are  far  loss  intense  than  those  of  phenol.  These  surprising
results  cannot  be  ascribed  to  purely  chemical  effecta,  as,  for  example,
by  assuming  that  the  acid  dcrivati\es  are  more  difficult  to  oxidize  thaa
the  original  substance  and  that  they  therefore  do  not  abstract  oxyp;ea
from  the  tissues.  Certain  observations,  however,  which  1  had  made
many  years  previously  in  connection  with  vital  staining  furnish  a
very  simple  explanation.  I  found  that  the  power  to  stain  gray  nerve
tissue  is  possessed  by  only  a  small  number  of  dyes,  and  especially
by  certain  basic  dyes  (chrysoidin,  Bismarck  brown,  neutral  red.
phosphin.  flavanilin,  methylene  blue),  whereas  of  the  acid  dyes,  in
which  OH  constitutes  the  auxochrome  group,  only  one.  alizarin,
possesses  this  property.  All  dyes  which  contained  a  sulphuric  acid
radical  were  absolutely  negative,  and  I  examined  a  very  large  number.
What  is  especially  significant  is  that  even  neurotropic  stains  lost  this
property  entirely  if  sulfonic  acids  were  introduced,  a  fact  demonstrated
in  the  flavanilin  sulfonic  acids,  the  alizarin  sulfonic  acids,  and  the
sulfonic  acids  derived  from  methylene  blue.  From  this  il  follows  that
the  introduction  of  the  above-mentioned  acid  group  changes  the  dis-
tribution in  the  organism  and  causes  especially  a  complete  destruc-
tion of  neurotropic  properties.  The  central  action  of  a  poison  is  to
be  explained  logically  by  an  accumulation  of  the  toxic  substance  in
the  central  nervous  system.  Since,  therefore,  the  central  part  of  the
toxic  action  has  been  completely  destroyed  by  the  introduction  ot  a
sulfonic  acid  radical  we  find  that  the  reduction  in  toxicity  is  readily
explained.  It  is  obvious  that  under  these  conditions  other  toxic
properties,  which  do  not  depend  on  the  central  nervous  system  may
be  preserved  intact.  Thus  according  to  my  observations  the  b!ood
destructive  properties  of  phenylhvdrazin  and  benzidin  are  stilt  present
in  their  monosulfonic  acids.'

'The  action  of  tliese  com bi nations  ix  not  oa  btrong  as  tbe  original  aub-
stance,  but  this  is  probably  due  to  tbe  fact  that  the  sulfonic  acid  radical  (and
even  fbe  neutral  sulfonic  radical)  by  itself  reduces  ihe  toxic  power  of  tbe  amido
group.  This  mitigating  action  explains  why  eiitfanilic  acid  which  is  derived
from  anilin  Is  no  blood  poison;   tbia  power  of  the  sulfonic  acid  group,  bon'ever.


J


CHEMICAL  CONSTITirnON   AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION    415

From  these  considerations  it  is  at  once  clear  that  there  is  a  link
between  chemical  constitution  and  pharmacodynamic  action,  namely,
the  disiribvtion  in  the  organism.  In  this  we  are  dealing  with  a  prin-
ciple which  has  long  been  known,  and  which,  I  might  say,  is  almost
self-evident,  but  which  nevertheless  is  clearly  expounded  in  but
few  text-books  on  therapeutics  (see  Stock  vis,  de  Buck,  and  especially
H.  Schulz).

Unfortunately  we  have  been  satisfied  with  a  mere  theoretical
acknowledgment  of  this  principle,  and  have  practically  made  no
efforts  to  gain  a  deeper  insight  into  the  laws  governing  this  distribu-
tion. This  is  esepcially  true  of  the  new  synthetic  tendency,  which
labors  exclusively  for  symptomatic  effects  and  leaves  questions  con-
cerning localization  absolutely  untouched.  To  my  mind  just  this
neglect  is  to  blame  for  the  insufficient  progress  thus  far  made,  and
I  believe  that  new  points  of  vantage  can  easily  be  gained  if  the
distributive  views  are  given  greater  prominence.  In  this  connection
I  may  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  through  the  application  of  the
principle  of  localization,  which  I  have  attempted,  new  and  promising
paths  have  been  opened  up  in  the  domain  of  bacteriology,  although
this  subject  was  already  beginning  to  become  barren  under  the  sche-
matic application  of  the  doctrines  of  immunity.

To  be  sure  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  are  enormous  difficulties
attending  the  determination  of  the  distribution  of  chemical  substances
with  the  necessary  degree  of  precision.  We  are  here  confronted
with  a  problem  whose  solution  is  simple  in  only  a  few  special  cases.
These  we  shall  discuss  in  a  moment.  In  the  great  majority  of
chemical  compounds,  however,  only  a  combination  of  various  methods
gives  us  any  definite  knowledge.

Animal  experiments,  as  such,  do  not  give  us  complete  informa-
tion concerning  the  distribution  in  the  organism;  they  only  mark
the  regions  most  susceptible  to  the  poison,  and  then  usually  only  for
those  systems,  such  as  the  nervous  or  muscular  system,  in  which
disturbances  of  function  are  recognizable.  The  animal  experiment,
however,  furnishes  but  little  information  concerning  the  processes  in
the  vital  parenchyma,  for  to  these  graphic  or  other  ordinary  physio-
logical methods  are  inapplicable.

The  assistance  afforded  by  pure  chemical  analysis  is  very  slight.


is  insufficient  to  destroy  the  powerful  NH*NH«  group  of  phenylbydrazin,  or
the  two  amido  groups  of  benzidin.


416  COLLECTED  STUniES  IN  IMMUNITY,

It  can  be  carried  out  exactly  with  only  a  very  small  number  of  readily
determinable  substances,  hence  primarily  with  inorganic  romhinations.
Besides,  the  demonstration  that  a  poison,  for  example  arsenic,  occurs
in  a  certain  organ,  as  the  brain,  is  of  little  value,  for  this  does  not
tell  us  what  is  really  of  the  greatest  importance,  namely,  the  localiza-
tion in  the  separate  cell  constituents  of  the  various  organs.

The  pathological  and  histological  findings  are  of  far  greater
importance.  To  be  sure,  if  one  turns  the  pages  of  the  text-books.
one  will  not  have  very  great  hopes  in  this  direction,  for  the  same
banal  changes,  fatty  degeneration  of  the  liver,  nephritB,  destruetJon
of  the  blood,  are  always  given.  Nissl's  investigations,  however,
demonstrated  that  exact  histological  studies  on  the  central  ner\'oiis
system  allow  the  points  of  attack  to  be  recognized.  He  showed  that
certain  poisonings  always  affected  certain  groups  of  ganglion  cells.
How  fruitful  these  points  of  view  may  be  was  shown  by  the  pretty
investigations  of  Goldscheider,  through  which  he  showed  that  the
motor  ganglion  cells  had  already  suffered  demonstrable  lesions  from
tetanus  poison  at  a  time  when  even  the  slightest  clinical  symptoms
were  absent.  In  many  other  cases  also,  mast  valuable  information
may  be  furnished  by  minute  histological  investigations;  in  this
connection  I  may  mention  that  with  cocaine  I  have  found  in  mice
an  absolutely  specific  foam-like  degeneration  of  the  liver  cells  in  a
form  which  I  have  seen  with  no  other  substance.  In  general,  I  may
add  that  the  chronic  poisonings  extending  over  several  days,  and  not
the  acute  poisonings,  are  best  suited  for  the  demonstration  of  specific
injuries  to  certain  organs,  a  point  which  has  already  been  emphasized
by  Nissl.

In  my  pharmacological  investigations,  which  far  antedate  Nissl's
publications,  I  have  given  this  method  special  preference.  I  also
described  a  method  (Deutsche  med,  Wochensch.  1890.  No.  32)  by
which  these  otherwise  laborious  experiments  can  be  carried  out  with
ease.  This  method  depends  on  feeding  mice  with  biscuit  which  con-
tains a  certain  amount  of  the  substance  in  question.  It  is  then  very
easv  to  find  a  dose  which  will  kill  the  animals  in  the  desired  period
of  time.

Although  the  results  of  these  anatomical-pathological  investiga-
tions are  most  valuable,  it  cannot  be  gainsaid  that  through  them
one  only  discovers  the  injury  to  the  most  susceptible  organs,  but
that  the  general  distribution  of  a  certain  substance  within  the  entire
organi.sm  remains  unknown.


J


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION    417

In  my  opinion,  however,  this  general  distribution  is  a  very  im-
portant problem,  for  just  these  facts  furnish  the  most  valuable  in-
formation concerning  the  chemical  functions  of  the  organs,  and  of
the  elements  which  compose  them.  At  present  this  problem  can
only  be  solved  by  the  employment  of  dyes  whose  distribution  we  can
readily  follow  both  macroscopically  and  microscopically.  It  is  to  be
deplored  that  these  investigations,  which  possess  such  a  high  didactic
value  should  thus  far  have  found  so  few  adherents;  they  are  only
exceptionally  studied  and  then  for  some  particular  purpose.

If  rabbits  are  injected  with  dyes  it  will  be  found  that  even  macro-
scopic study  yields  most  interesting  pictures.  There  are  certain
dyes,  although  not  very  common,  which  stain  only  a  particular  tissue,
e.g.  fat  tissue;  these  are  called  "  monotropic."  Usually  a  dye
possesses  an  affinity  for  a  number  of  systems  of  organs,  although
frequently  it  then  happens  that  one  particular  organ  is  stained  in
an  especially  conspicuous  manner.  Very  often  one  finds  that  the
maximum  staining  is  in  the  kidney  (especially  in  the  cortex)  and  in
the  liver.  Other  dyes,  such  as  acridinorange  and  dimethylamido-
methylene  blue,  exhibit  their  stain  particularly  in  the  thyroid  gland;
still  others,  as  dimethyl phenylene  green,  stain  especially  the  fat  tissue;
some,  such  as  alizarin  blue,  the  submaxillary  gland,  etc.

Alizarin  blue,  besides  staining  brain  and  kidneys,  stains  the  sub-
maxillary gland  with  especial  intensity.  As  examples  of  polytropic
stains  we  may  mention  neutral  red  and  a  basic  dye,  brilliant  cresyl
blue,  for  these  stain  the  majority  of  body  parenchyma  intensely  and
apparently  uniformly.  It  is  particularly  significant  that  the  majority
of  basic  dyes  which  stain  the  brain  are  also  stored  up  by  fat  tissue.
As  we  shall  soon  see  neurotropism  and  lipotropism  are  related  to
one  another.

The  variation  in  the  localization  of  dyes  frequently  corresponds
to  certain  peculiarities  in  their  excretion;  the  chief  points  of  excre-
tion are  probably  kidney  cortex,  liver,  and  intestine.  In  contrast
to  the  great  majority  of  dyes  which,  like  methylene  blue,  fuchsin,
alizarin,  indigo  carmine,  and  many  others,  gain  access  to  the  urinary
secretions  very  easily,  there  are  several  which  seem  incapable  of
doing  this  and  which  therefore  seem  by  preference  to  be  excreted
through  the  bile  or  through  the  intestinal  juices.  An  example  of
this  is  benzopurpurin,  a  very  large-moleculed  cotton  dye  which  is
made  from  diazotated  toluidin  and  naphylaminsulfonic  acid.^

'  It  18  possible  that  this  pbenomenon  can  be  fully  explained  by  this  that  vve


418  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

Besides  this,  however,  one  could  assume  that  analogous  dyes  also
effect  a  loose  combination  with  the  blood  albumin,  which  makes
excretion  through  the  kidney  impossible.  In  that  case  the  condi-
tions would  be  analogous  to  those  which  we  see  with  many  metals,
e.g.  iron  or  lend,  and  to  those  which  obtain  in  the  excretion  of  a
poisonous  albuminous  substance,  ricin,  as  they  have  been  deter-
mined by  investigations  in  the  Pasteur  Institute.  \one  of  the  sub-
stances which  occur  in  the  circulation  in  the  form  of  albumin  com-
binations pass  into  the  urine,  since  the  albumin  molecule  is  unable
to  pass  through  the  intact  kidney  filter.  In  contrast  to  this,  how-
ever, the  intestinal  glands  or  liver  allow  even  these  large-moleculed
substances  to  pass  ilirough.

The  salivary  glands  do  not  play  any  important  part  in  elimina-  *
tion,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  with  the  majority  of  dyes  the  saliva
is  not  at  all  colored,  and  with  certain  others,  e.g.  alizarin    blue,  is
but  slightly  tinged.     This  is  apparently  because  of  the  fact  that  the
salivary  elands  are  not  well  adapted  to  the  secretion  of  subst-ances
with   large  molecular   weights.     In   the  excretion  of  substances  of
small  molecular  weights,  however,  they  may  play  a  prominent  r6le.
as  can  be  seen  from  the  behavior  of  various  salts,    e.g.,  potassium   J
iodide,  rodan  combinations,  and  the  salts  of  mercury.     In  the  arc-    I
matic   series   it   is   particularly  paraphenylendiamin,   dimethylpara-    1
phenylendiamin,    trihydroparaoxychinolin.    and    related    substances,
which  are  excreted  through  the  submaxillary  gland  of  rabbits  and
there  give  rise  to  marked  inflammatory  changes  (cedema,  necrosis).

The  least  important  rflle  is  that  taken  by  the  sweat  glands.  So
far  as  1  am  aware  the  only  dyes  excreted  on  the  body  surface  are
those  of  the  phosphin  series,  as  is  shown  by  Mannabeig's  researches
concerning  the  therapeutics  of  malaria.

Much  greater  significance,  however,  attaches  to  the  possibility  of
exactly  determining  the  distribution  of  the  dyes  by  means  of  the    J
microscope.     I  need  only  call  to  mind  the  vital  staining  of  nerve
endings  by  means  of  methylene  blue,  a  procedure  which  has  found


are  bere  dealing  with  large-moleculed  fiubstuDcea  which  are  soluble  wiib  diffi-
culty and  which  tberefore  must  be  regarded  more  like  colloids  In  conttut
to  methylene  blue,  methyl  violet,  and  many  other  dyes,  beDzopurpunn  is  aEy
Bolutely  noD-dlfiufiibte  According  to  the  researches  of  Kraflt  (Bericht  der
deutBcb.  chem.  Gesell.  1899)  solutions  of  ben/opurpurin  (raieiog  of  the  boiling-
poinl)  showed  an  apparent  molecular  weight  o!  3000  instead  of  77A  reckoned
out  from  the  fonnula.


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.  419

extensive  application  in  the  histology  of  the  nervous  system.  Then
there  are  the  wonderful  vital  stains  which  the  majority  of  granules
give  with  neutral  red;  and  the  beautiful  stains  of  these  same
bodies  which  can  be  effected  with  brilliant  cresyl  blue  (oxazin  dye).
I  cannot  here  enter  into  still  other  interesting  and  important  vital
stains.

Besides  this  each  stain  possesses  its  own  peculiar  characteristics.
Thus  methylene  blue,  besides  staining  the  nerve  endings  and  a  number
of  the  most  diverse  granules,  stains  intensely  the  cell  protoplasm  of
the  islands  of  Langerhans  of  the  pancreas,  and,  further,  also  muscle
cells  of  a  certain  particular  function,  striped  as  well  as  smooth.  I
am  practically  convinced  that  in  the  vascular  system  certain  muscle
fibres  which  can  be  stained  with  methylene  blue  cause  a  marked
narrowing  and  perhaps  even  a  complete  closure  of  the  lumen  after
the  manner  of  a  ligature.  These  muscle  fibres  never  form  a  con-
tinuous lining  of  the  vessel  wall  but  only  occur  singly  and  separated
from  one  another  by  comparatively  wide  intervals.  The  uniform
calibration  of  the  tube  would  then  fall  to  the  lot  of  the  evenly  dis-
tributed muscle  lining  which  takes  no  stain.  We  should  thus  have
what  is  surely  of  great  significance,  namely,  the  fact  that  vessel
calibration  and  vessel  closure  are  two  functions  which  are  absolutely
distinct  anatomically  and  biologically.  In  a  description  so  general
in  character  as  this  one  I  cannot  enter  into  still  other  interesting
groups  of  dyes,  e.g.,  those  that  stain  nuclei  vitally,  etc.

Exactly  the  same  differences  which  we  have  observed  in  the  case
of  dyes  manifest  themselves  if  we  introduce  other  kinds  of  sub-
stances into  the  body,  it  matters  not  whether  they  are  well  defined,
organic  or  inorganic  combinations,  or  whether  they  constitute  chem-
ically unknown  and  highly  complex  bacterial  products.  In  general
we  shall  probably  have  to  assume  that  substances  which  are  chemically
ivell  defined  are  to  a  great  extent  polytropic  in  character.  In  my
•studies  with  several  substances  readily  demonstrable  by  means  of  color
reactions  and  whose  distribution  can  therefore  readily  be  followed.
I  have  convinced  myself  that  the  aromatic  bases  as  a  rule  have  an
affinity  for  many  different  kinds  of  parenchyma.  If  in  spite  of  this
the  clinical  injury  manifests  itself  in  only  one  tissue,  this  in  no  way
contradicts  the  polytropic  character  of  these  substances.  It  merely
proves,  what  is  really  a  matter  of  course,  that  among  a  number  of
tissues  there  are  some  that  are  particularly  susceptible  to  an  equal
injury.     To  what  extent  other  circumstances,  such  as  saturation  of


420


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  1MMUNIT\


the  tissues  with  oxygen,  reaction  of  the  tissues  (nephritis  in  chromium
poisoning),  conditions  of  alkalinity,  peculiarities  of  elimination,  etc
affect  the  result  in  any  given  case  cannot  now  be  discussed.  W«
find  exactly  the  same  conditions  to  hold  with  bacterial  poisons.
Tetanus  poison,  for  example,  as  is  shown  by  the  experiments  <rf
Donitz,  Roux,  and  others,  is  monotropic  in  highly  susceptible  animals,
whereas  in  other  animals,  rabbits,  pigeons,  etc.,  the  tetanus- binding
groups  are  present  not  only  in  the  brain  but  also  in  a  number  of  other'
organs  of  less  biological  importance.  This  explains  why,  for  instance,
in  guinea-pigs  the  lethal  dose  is  the  same  whether  the  poison  is  in-
jected subcutaneously  or  intracerebral ly,  whereas  in  the  pigeon,
and  to  a  certain  extent  also  in  the  rabbit,  much  larger  doses  are
required  for  subcutaneous  poisoning.  Under  these  circumstancta -
part  of  the  poison  is  laid  hold  of  by  the  body  parenchyma  and  thus
deflected  from  the  endangered  organs.

We  may  perhaps  regard  it  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  these  laws
of  mutual  deflection  play  an  important  rflle  in  all  polytropic  sub-
stances, and  that  we  shall  gain  a  real  insight  into  the  action  of  drugs
only  if  we  regard  this  factor  sufficiently.  If,  for  instance,  as  is  so  often
the  case,  a  poison  is  both  neurotropic  and  lipotropic,  if  the  same  J
amount  of  poison  per  kilo  body  weight  is  injected  into  a  lean  animal  '
as  into  a  very  fat  one,  it  is  clear  that  the  share  of  poison  which  fails
upon  the  brain  in  the  former  case  is  much  greater  than  in  the  latter.


IV,

We  now  take  up  the  question  as  to  how  this  varied  distribution
occurs.  As  a  rule  the  poisons  reach  the  tissues  through  the  circu-
lation, and  we  shall  therefore  first  study  the  influence  of  the  vascular
system  on  ihis  distribution,  A  moment's  consideration,  however,
shows  that  although  the  circulation  may  be  the  prerequisite,  it  can
in  no  way  be  the  cause  of  the  varied  distribution  discussed  above.
According  to  the  views  held  by  the  majority  of  investigators  and
also  by  me  this  localization  in  certain  organs  depends  in  every  in-
stance on  causes  within  the  tissues  and  not  on  the  vascular  distri-
bution. For  example,  if  in  a  rase  of  jaundice  we  find  that  the  brain
shows  not  a  trace  of  bilirubin  coloration,  while  many  other  tissues,
such  as  kidney,  liver,  etc.,  are  saturated  with  bile  pigment,  this.
my  opinion,  is  due  to  the  chemistry  of  the  brain  substance.  Tte
brain  lacks  all  such  substances  which  attract  bilirubin,  that  is  to


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION    421

eay  bilirubin  is  not  neurotropic.  In  recent  years  a  different  view
has  been  promulgated,  especially  by  Biedl,  who  ascribes  a  decisive
role  in  the  distribution  of  poisons  to  the  vessel  wall.  As  a  result
of  my  own  long  experience  with  the  great€st  variety  of  substances
I  am  unable  to  assume  thai  the  vascular  endothelium  as  such  exer-
cises different  functions  in  different  organs,  so  that,  for  example,
a  liver  capillary  is  permeable  for  certain  substances  which  will  not
pass  through  other  capillaries.'

On  the  other  hand  the  vascular  system  plays  a  very  important
rfile  in  a  different  direction,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  following  strik-
ing example.  Mice  are  fed  according  to  my  "biscuit  method  "  with
derivatives  of  paraphenylendiamin  (acetylparaphenylendiamin,  thio-
sulfonic  acid  and  mercaptan  of  paraphenylendiamin).  On  autopsying
the  animals  very  peculiar  changes  are  observed  in  the  diaphragm.
The  parts  surrounding  the  central  tendon  are  stamed  intensely  brown,
while  the  peripheral  portions  are  usually  unstained.  Frequently
the  margin  of  the  stain  is  wavy  and  marked  by  a  more  intense  colora-
tion. At  times  I  have  observed  similar  changes  in  other  muscular
regions,  namely,  in  those  of  the  eye,  larynx,  and  tongue.  Micro-
scopical examination  shows  that  this  is  not  a  case  of  infarct,  but
that  there  is  apparently  a  uniform  brown  staining  of  the  muscle
areas  in  question.  The  cross  striation  is  preserved  intact,  and  a
moderate  degree  of  fatty  degeneration  is  not  infrequently  observed.
Usually  also  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  hyperipmia.  We  are  not
dealing  with  a  derivative  of  htemoglobin;  on-the  contrary  it  is  much
more  probable  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  highly  complex  oxidation
product  of  the  paraphenylendiamin,'

The  question  which  now  arises  is  why,  in  this  feeding,  only  part
of  the  muscles,  a  very  small  part,  show  this  vital  staining.

It  was  soon  seen  that  the  groups  of  muscles  affected  were  analo-
gous in  other  respects.     Thus  with  injections  of  methylene  blue  it

'  It  was  eapccEally  gratifying  lo  note  tliat  ISniDo,  as  a,  reault  of  tbo  iDvesti-

ana  wbicli  he  made  under  the  direrlion  of  It.  Gottlieb,  is  also  very  skeptical
regarding  Biedl'a  views  (Deutscbe  med.  Worlienscb.  1R99,  No   23).

'  This  aasumption  baa  subscriuently  been  dearly  uoalinned  by  the  work  of
Dr.  Rebn"  (Archiv  internat  de  Pharniaeodj-narnie.  Vol.  VIII.  p  2()3)  It
I  found  in  animals  poiNoned  acutely  with  paraphenylendiamin  that  ihe
musotes  which  were  saturated  nitb  the  poison  assumed  the  lypictil  brown  color
wben  brought  in  contact  with  air  I  would  alito  cull  attention  to  the  laet  that
both    paraphenylendiamin   and   paramidophenol  are  employed,   by   oxidation,

,rue  browD  and  black  dyes  for  hair  and  fur  (Ursol  dye}


422


rOLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


is  just  in  th&«p  arca^i  that  the  motor  nervn  endings  take  a  ttionp  or
less  complete  stain.  In  comparative  pathology  also  we  find  ihia
group  in  evidence,  for  triohinse  invade  by  preferenre  diaphragm,  and
the  muscles  of  the  pye  and  larynx

These  farts  are  very  readily  explained.  In  aceordanpp  with  a
principle  discovered  by  Robert  Mayer,  the  blood-supply  of  tho  niuscles
i«  dependent  on  their  biological  importance.  Muscles,  such  as  the
diaphragm,  which  laboi  continuously  and  whose  failure  to  act  would
constitute  a  marked  disturbance  of  health  are  far  better  supplied
with  blood  than  othera  of  less  importance.

Naturally  in  this  group  of  "most  favored"  muscles,  corrcflpond
ing  lo  the  greater  supply  of  blood,  there  will  also  be  a  maximum
Biipply  of  oxygen,  foodstuffs,  and  all  other  materials  present  in  the
circulation.  Hence  such  a  muscle  cell  will  be  more  highly  cbar^
with  oxygen  and  can  therefore  exert  a  more  energetic  oxidizing
action,  as  is  manifested  in  the  brown  staining  with  paraphenylen-
diamin  The  staining  of  the  muscle  end-plates  is  explained  in  exactly
the  same  way.  through  the  increased  supply  of  methylene  blue  on
the  one  hand,  and  the  saturation  with  oxygen  and  the  alkaline  eon-
Btitution  of  the  nerve  endings  on  the  other.

An  important  principle  governing  the  distribution  of  substances
in  the  organism  can  be  deduced  for  these  experiments,  namely,  that
myotropie  and  neurotropic  substances  can  produce  an  isolated  injury
to  certam  systems  solely  through  the  character  of  the  blood-supplv.
It  would,  however,  be  nTong  to  assume  that  all  muscle  and  nerve
poisons  must  always  injure  only  the  most  favored  system  of  muscles
as  described  above.  That  would  be  disregarding  the  fact  that  the
poisonous  action  is  dependent  not  only  on  the  supply  of  poisons
hut  also  on  the  capacity  of  the  tissues  to  take  up  the  poison.  A
nerve  ending  of  neutral  or  acid  reaction  will  take  up  other  eulistances
(e.g.  alizarin)  than  one  of  alkaline  reaction  (methylene  blue);  a
mmcle  loaded  with  oxygen  will  oxidize  certain  substances  and  so
overcome  their  poisonous  action,  whereas  this  same  poison  will  re-
main  intact  in  muscle  tissue  deficient  in  oxygen.

I  believe  that  the  various  nerve  endings— motor,  sensory,  and
secretory  ^are  made  up  of  the  same  chemical  material.  If,  however,
we  consider  the  manifold  and  specialized  actions  of  the  alkaloids,
for  example,  the  very  different,  actions  of  digitalis,  curare,  piloearpin,
and  atrnpin,  and  if  we  ascribe  (he  toxic  action  to  an  accumulation,
we  shall  be  forced  to  conclude  that  the  nerve  endings,  though  com-


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION    423

posed  of  the  same  chemical  substances,  are  subjected  to  different
conditions  in  the  various  tissues,  conditions  which  may  possess  a
decisive  influence.  Foremost  among  these  I  regard  variations  in  the
reaction  and  in  the  degree  of  oxygen  saturation  to  which  I  have
already  referred.  As  a  result  of  my  experiments  in  biological  stain-
ing I  assume  that  certain  nerve  endings,  central  and  peripheral,  are
characterized  by  a  particular  complex  of  such  determining  factors,
and  that  this  "chemical  milieu  "  represents  the  resultant  of  the  normal
physiological  functions  Whether  these  views  possess  any  heuristic
value  for  the  further  development  of  the  science,  I  do  not  know.
P'or  the  present  I  shall  content  myself  by  remarking  that  the  isolated
disease  of  nerve  or  muscle  apparatus,  so  far  as  it  affects  certain  par-
ticular groups  (lead  paralysis,  arsenic  paralysis),  is  readily  explained
from  this  point  of  view.  We  shall  have  to  assume  the  existence  of
just  as  many  different  types  of  nutrition  as  we  can  demonstrate
different  types  of  disease.

This  brings  me  to  a  further  question  which  concerns  this  dis-
tributive therapy,  and  that  is  whether  it  is  possible  simply  by  chem-
ical means  to  change  the  type  of  distribution  of  a  given  substance.
This  question  can  readily  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  If,  for
example,  a  frog  is  injected  with  methylene  blue,  the  nerve  endings,
as  is  well  known,  will  be  stained  in  the  living  state.  However,  if
an  easily  soluble  acid  dyestuff,  e.g.  orange-green,  is  added  to  the
methylene  blue  solution  so  that  a  clear  green  solution  results,  it
will  be  found  that  the  injection  of  such  a  mixture  no  longer  produces
staining  of  the  nerve  endings.  Hence  we  see  that  the  conditions  are
entirely  analogous  to  those  which  we  find  in  the  staining  of  dry  prepa-
rations. The  basic  dyes  by  themselves  stain  nuclei,  whereas  the
combination  of  basic  dyes  with  acid  dyes,  which  I  introduced  into
histological  technique  under  the  name  of  **triacid  dyes,"  lack  this
property  to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  In  both  cases  we  are  dealing
with  a  distribution  of  the  methylene  blue  between  the  acid  dye  and
the  tissue  constituents.  The  tissues  as  well  as  the  acid  dyestuff  have
an  affinity  for  the  methylene  blue.  If  the  affinity  of  the  tissues  is
greater,  they  will  be  stained  blue;  if  that  of  the  acid  dye  is  the  greater,
the  staining  will  not  occur.i


^  Naturally  this  phenomenon  will  occur  conspicuously  only  in  those  cases
in  which  the  tissue  substanced  possess  an  affinity  for  the  base  only  and  not  tor
the  acid  dye     If  the  latter  oonditiOD  obtains  the  mixture  of  both  components


424  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

In  the  deflection  of  methylene  blue  by  means  of  orange  we  thus
have  presented  a  phenomenon  which  in  its  essential  features  reminds  J
us  of  the  mode  of  action  of  the  antitoxins.  I

The  opposite  hehavior,  however,  also  occurs,  namely,   that  the   1
localization  of  a  certain  substance  in  a  particular   tissue   becomes
possible  only   through   the   simultaneous   introduction    of    s    seeond
combination,  even  though  the  tatter  effects  no  union  whatever  with
the  first  combination.     Naturally  these  complicated  phenomena  caa    j
be  demonstrated  with  certainty  only  by  the  aid  of  vital  stainings.  foi    j
in  these  can  the  microscopical  distribution  be  positively  determined.    I
The  following  examples  are  the  result  of  this  method  of  investigation:

Bismarck  brown,  the  well-known  basic  azo  dye,  exhibits  a  certain
amount  of  neurotropy  manifested  especially  in  the  staining  of  the
gray  matter  of  the  brain.  This  affinity,  however,  is  insufficient  (o
give  rise  to  a  staining  of  the  peripheral  nerve  endings  in  a  frog,
particularly  a  staining  of  the  taste  bulbs.  If,  however,  a  frog  is
injected  with  a  mixture  of  methylene  blue  and  Bismarck  brown
it  will  be  found  that  the  terminal  apparatus  is  stained  a  mixed
shade.  The  blue  very  readily  loses  its  color  through  reduction,  and
in  a  preparation  mounted  on  a  slide  and  sealed  with  a  cover-glass
the  blue  color  can  be  seen  to  disappear  rapidly,  leaving  only  a  pure
brown  stain.

The  other  example  is  still  more  striking:    If  a  rabbit  is  infused
with  a  solution  of  methylene  blue,  one  always  finds  well-marked  stain-
ing of  the  pancreas,  due  especially  to  a  staining  of  the  granules  and
protoplasm  of  the  islands  of  I^ngerhans.     In  no  case  have  I  ob-      ]
served  a  staining  of  the  nerve  endings  under  these  conditions.     If.      I
however,  one  adds  certain  dyestuffs  of  the  triphenj'lmethane  series      |
to  the  fluid  infused,  dyes  which  in  themselves  do  not  stain  the  nerve
endings,  b  truly  beautiful  staining  of  the  nerve  apparatus  frequently
occurs.      In  these  and  other  similar  cases  I  believe  that    we   can
only  assume  that  the  favoring  substances  cause  a  modification  of  the
function  of  the  apparatus  in  question,  and  that  this  carries  with  it  a
change  in   the  "chemical   milieu"  defined  above,  and  so  in  the  ab-
sorbing power.     It  is  possible  that  similar  factors  also  play  a  certain
rfile  in  many  abnormal  actions  of  drugs,  especially  in  inherited  or
acquired  hypersensitiveness.


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION    426-


V.

The  question  now  arises  as  to  how  we  conceive  this  selection  of
the  tissues  to  occur.  It  is  very  probable  a  priori  that  we  are  dealing
with  chemical  affinities  in  the  widest  meaning  of  the  term.  We  must,
however,  discuss  in  detail  the  nature  of  these  affinities.  In  this,
I  must  emphasize,  we  are  dealing  primarily  with  substances  which,
like  the  various  natural  and  artificial  drugs,  are  foreign  to  the  body,
not  with  foodstuffs  capable  of  assimilation.  The  latter  will  be
treated  by  themselves  subsequently.

The  simplest  case  is  that  in  which  the  organism  is  injected  with
indifferent  substances,  neither  acid  nor  basic  in  character,  to  which,
corresponding  to  their  constitution,  we  can  ascribe  no  great  chemical
affinities,  but  which  nevertheless  exert  marked  and  often  highly
toxic  effects.  In  this  category  belong  especially  the  various  hydro-
carbons, e.g.  toluol,  benzol;  a  number  of  ketones,  such  as  acetophe-
non;  many  sulfones,  which  are  characterized  by  their  chemical  in-
difference; also  various  kinds  of  ethers,  alcohols,  and  a  large  number
of  other  narcotics.  The  best  opinion  seems  to  be  that  in  these
cases  no  direct  chemical  affinities  come  into  play  on  the  part  of  the
organism,  and  that  the  molecule  is  always  present  in  the  tissue
constituents  unchanged  and  chemically  uncombined.  That  is  to
say,  the  phenomenon  is  one  of  contact  action.  In  spite  of  this  it
can  readily  be  shown  that  all  these  compounds  possess  a  typical
localization  in  the  tissues,  the  cause  of  which  we  shall  soon  discuss.

First,  however,  I  should  like  to  say  a  few  words  concerning  the
historical  side  of  this  question.  The  idea  that  chemical  substances,
can  act  solely  through  contact  was  first  affirmed  many  years  ago,
thus  by  Buchheim  in  1859,  Schmiedeberg  in  1883,  Harnack  in  1883,
and  by  Geppert.  The  latter's  investigations  may  be  found  in  the
Zeitschrift  fiir  klin.  Medicin,  Vol.  XV,  and  deal  with  the  nature  of
prussic-acid  poisoning.  He  showed  that  in  this  highly  interesting
case  the  hydrocyanic  acid  acts  as  such.  He  explained  the  result  of
the  toxic  action  in  the  following  manner:

**  We  know  that  chemical  processes  are  retarded  simply  through  the
presence  of  minimal  amounts  of  prussic  acid.  Thus  iodic  acid  does
not  yield  up  its  oxygen  to  formic  acid  under  conditions  otherwise
favorable  if  even  a  minimal  amount  of  prussic  acid  is  present.  It
is  quite  natural,  I  suppose,  that  in  the  poisoned  organism,  highly


COI.LECTr:i>   STL-DIKS    I

oxidized  substances  {the  analogues  of  iodic  acid)  are  no  longer  able
to  yield  up  their  oxygen  to  oxidizabie  combinations  when  pnissie
acid  is  present.  {One  must  think  ot  these  highly  oxidized  substances
as  transmitters  or  carriers  of  oxygen.)  Prussic  acid  poisoning  la
therefore  an  internal  suffocation  of  the  organs."

This  discovery  of  contart  action  constituted  the  first  step  Inward
penetrating  the  mystery  of  the  action  ot  drugs.  This,  however,
afforded  no  explanation  as  to  why  the  substances  mentioned  ex-
hibited an  elective  action.  That  was  because  the  link  was  mifeiog
which,  according  to  modern  views,  is  absolutely  indispensable,  namely
the  connection  between  action  and  distribution  in  the  tissues.  I
think  I  am  justified  in  claiming  to  be  the  first  to  recognize  the  right
path,  for  in  1S87,  in  my  article  on  "  The  Therapeutic  Significance
of  the  Substituting  Sulphuric  Acid  Group"  {Therap.  Monatshefte.
March,  18S7),  I  demonstrated  that  neurotropic  stains  are  deprived
of  this  property  on  the  addition  of  the  snlfonic-acid  group.  Even  at
that  time  I  compared  the  localization  of  the  dyes  and  ot  the  alkaloids
in  the  brain  with  the  principle  of  the  shaking-out  procedure  devised
by  Stas-Otto,  expressing  myself  as  tollowa;

"The  principle  of  'shaking-out'  poisons  devised  by  Stas-Otto
depends  on  the  fact  that  basic  substances,  e.g.  alkaloids,  etc.,  are
generally  firmly  combined  in  acid  solutions,  and  hence  extracted
with  difficulty,  whereas  the  same  substances  can  readily  be  shaken
out  ot  alkaline  solutions.  Acid  substances,  of  course,  exhibit  exactly
the  opposite  behavior:  they  are  held  back  by  alkaline  media,  but
readily  given  up  by  acid  media.  If  we  apply  these  experiences  to
the  question  under  discussion  we  can  readily  understand  why  basic
dyes  (which  are  not  held  back  by  the  blood  through  any  chemical
affinities)  are  especially  laid  hold  ot  by  the  brain,  whereas  the  acid
dyes  and  the  sulfonic  acids  (which  are  bound  by  alkalies  of  the  blood
to  form  salts,  and  are  thus  anchored,  as  it  were)  show  exactly  the
opposite  behavior."

Besides  this  1  showed  that  fat  tissue  behaves  like  the  brain,
for  a  large  part  of  the  substances  takeji  up  by  the  brain  are  taken
up  also  by  the  fat  tissue.  In  1891  this  question  received  a  fresh
impetus,  for  Hotmeister,  Pohl,  and  abo  Spiro,  called  attention  to
the  significance  of  loose  combinations  which  could  readily  be  dis-
sociated. Thus  in  1S9I  Pohl  showed  that  the  ability  ot  the  red
blood-celb  to  take  up  chloroform,  a  fact  which  Schmiedeborg  had
demonstrated  in  1867,  was  due  to  the  cholesterin  and  lecithin  which


CFIEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.  427

the  cells  contain  Both  substances  can  be  shaken  out  with  chloro-
form. He  al!=o  referred  the  union  of  chloroform  in  the  brain  to
similar  fat-like  bodies  in  that  organ,  as  1  have  done  for  the  color-
ing matter  of  the  alkaloids.  A  basis  was  thus  secured  from  which  to
sludy  the  Action  of  the  above-mentioned  substances  in  the  brain.
These  substances,  it  will  be  seen,  are  most  ail  readily  soluble  in  fats
and  fat-like  bodies,  corresponding  to  their  physico-chemical  nature,'

The  conditions,  however,  were  far  more  complex  in  the  large
number  of  bodies  which,  like  many  medicinal  substances  {e.g.,  the
antipyretics),  and  the  most  varied  basic  substances  (among  these  the
alkaloids),  phenols,  aldehydes,  and  many  others,  in  contrast  to  the
indifferent  bodies,  do  not  seem  incapable  of  combining  synthetically
with  the  tissues.  In  numerous  articles  Low  assumes  that  most  of  the
bodies  in  question  are  able  to  unite  synthetically  with  constituents
of  the  cell  or  with  the  living  protoplasm.  It  is  obvious  that  we  must
assume  the  protoplasm  to  contain  many  difTerent  kinds  of  atomic
groups  possessing  very  strong  affinities,  and  it  was  certainly  very
plausible  when  Low  ascribed  a  leading  rSle  in  the  phenomena  of
poisoning,  to  groups  so  well  able  to  act.  His  experiments  and  re-
searches lead  him  to  conclude  that  in  the  cell  it  is  particularly  alde-
hyde groups  or  labile  amido  groups  which  play  this  anchoring  or
grasping  rflle.  According  to  Low  all  substances  which  can  combine
with  these  two  radicals  are  poisons  for  the  protoplasm;  the  greater
the  affinity  the  stronger  the  poisonous  action.

Against  this  view  of  a  substituting  action  of  the  poisons  a  large
number  of  easily  verified  facts  can  be  brought  forward.  If  benzalde-
hyde  and  anilin  (or  phenyl hydrazin,  etc.)  are  mixed,  the  two  sub-
stances will  condense  to  form  a  new  substance,  benzylidenanilin,
water  separating  at  the  same  time.     This  benzylidenanilin  is  a  single

'  ll  IS  impossible  to  do  more  ilian  refer  lo  ihe  great,  advances  made  nine*"
my  address,  especially  thiougb  llie  lutturs  of  tluiiH  Meyer  and  Overton.  In
three  studies  on  the  theory  of  alcoliol  narcoaifl  (Archiv  f  exiwnm.  Palhologie
1899-1901).  Meyer  baa  shown  in  the  most  eiact  maimer  lor  a  larRe  number
of  chemical  eubstitnces  that  tbe  mode  of  action  of  the  in  difTerent  narcotics
ta  not  deoenctent  on  their  other  chetnical  properties  but  is  governed  exclu-
sively by  the  fwrtition  coefficient  which  determines  their  distribution  among
water  and  certain  iat-Iike  subatances  (brain  and  nerve  fat).  H  Overton  came
to  (he  same  conclusion  regarding  the  causal  relation  between  solubility  in  lat
and  narcotic  action.  Uia  m vest igat ions,  which  have  been  gathered  together  in
a  work  entitled  "Studien  iiber  die  Narkose,"  Jena,  1901.  dealt  eapecially  with
vegetable  cells  and  small  animalt  preoent  in  the  Suid.


J


42S


COLLECTTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY


body  which  does  not  give  up  either  anilin  or  benzaldehyde  to  indif-
ferent solvents.  It  requires  chemical  splitting  in  order  to  form  the
two  original  substances.

In  this  way  the  question  can  very  readily  be  decided  whether  or
not  a  certain  substance  is  anchored  to  a  cell  synthetically,  for  the
material  in  question  need  simply  be  treated  with  indifferent  solvents
possessing  strong  extractive  properties  (alcohol,  ether,  etc.).  If
animals  are  injected  with  the  most  varied  poisons,  alkaloids,  phenols,
anilin,  dimethylparaphenylendiamin,  antipyrin,  thallin,  etc.,  and  if
one  waits  until  the  distribution  is  completed  (which  usually  occurs
in  a  moment),  it  is  easy  to  extract  the  unchanged  poison  by  means
of  suitable  methods  of  extraction,  and,  provided  the  substance  is  easily
detected,  like  thallin  or  dimethylparaphenylendiamin,  to  discover  it  in
the  tissues  by  means  of  staining  reactions.  Naturally  these  experi-
ments are  carried  out  most  strikingly  with  dyestuffs,  for  in  these  the
extractive  decolorization  of  the  methylene-blue  brain  cortex  or  of  the
fuchsin  kidney  can  very  easily  be  followed.

The  experiments  with  dyestuffs  furnish  still  another  argument
against  a  process  of  substitution.  In  the  basic  dyes  when  one  or
several  amido  groups  are  replaced  by  aldedyde  radicals  a  change  in
color  often  takes  place.  Thus  by  means  of  aldehyde,  fuchsin  red
is  made  to  yield  violet  dyes.  In  accordance  with  Low's  theory  one
would  have  been  led  to  suppose  that  when  suitable  dyestuffs  were
employed  a  change  of  color  due  to  substitution  should  occur  in  some
case  or  other  and  in  some  organ  or  other.  In  spite  of  experiments
specially  devised  for  the  purpose  1  have  never  observed  this  to  occur»
either  with  dyestuffs  which,  like  those  mentioned  above,  unite  with
aldehyde,  or  with  certain  basic  dyes  (e.g.,  the  azonium  base  which
Kehrmann  produces  from  safranin)  which  take  up  amido  radicals
of  the  most  varied  kinds  and  cause  an  intensification  and  change  of
the  color  characteristics.

Many  other  reasons  can  be  adduced  which  speak  against  the
correctness  of  Low's  theory.  I  may  merely  mention  the  transitory
character  of  the  action,  a  point  which  is  so  often  noted,  especially  in
the  alkaloids;  furthermore,  in  the  case  of  many  drugs,  the  rapid
elimination,  which  argues  against  a  firm  synthetic  combination;
another  fact,  one  which  may  perhaps  be  of  practical  importance,  is
this:  that  in  the  construction  of  new  therapeutic  substances  efforts
were  directed  particularly  to  the  elimination  (by  appropriate  sub-
stitution) of  groups  which  could  effect  syntheses.     This  is  the  case,


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.      429

for  example,  with  phenacetin,  in  which  by  the  introduction  of  the
methyl  radical  and  of  the  acetyl  group  the  powerful  OH  and  NH2
groups  of  paramidophenol  are  occupied.

All  this  has  led  me  to  conclude  positively  that  Low's  theory  of
the  substituting  action  of  therapeutic  substances  is  untenable.

Vy  this  I  do  not  in  the  least  wish  to  say  that  groups  capable  of
reacting,  such  as  Low  presupposes  to  exist  in  the  living  protoplasms,
cannot  occur  there.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that
condensation  phenomena  are  not  produced  merely  by  the  presence
of  two  substances  capable  of  condensing,  but  that  the  combining
affinity  must  usually  first  be  increased  through  appropriate  means,
such  as  increase  of  temperature,  the  addition  of  substances  abstract-
ing water,  etc.  Even  in  the  practice  of  the  synthetic  chemist,  who
allows  the  substances  to  act  on  one  another  either  directly  or  in  con-
centrated solutions,  such  direct  condensations  are  not  especially  fre-
quent. The  number  of  these,  however,  is  still  more  limits  if  the
synthesis  is  to  occur  under  conditions  corresponding  to  those  in  the
living  organism,  i.e.  in  dilute  solutions,  at  low  temperature  and  in
the  absence  of  suitable  auxiliary  substances.  Dimethylamidoben-
zaldehyde  unites  with  indol,  for  example,  even  in  dilute  solutions,
at  room  temperature,  forming  a  red  dye,  but  only  when  the  solution
contains  small  amounts  of  f  ee  mineral  acid.  If  this  is  absent,  or  if
the  solution  is  even  faintly  alkaline,  no  combination  of  any  kind
occurs.

VI.

These  considerations  lead  at  once  to  the  view  that  in  certain
cases  apparently  it  still  is  possible  to  effect  a  substitution  within  the
organism  by  the  introduction  of  chemical  substances.  In  order  to
accomplish  such  a  synthesis  the  selection  of  suitable  substances  will
be  prerequisite,  and  these  substances  must  be  of  such  a  chemical
constitution  that  they  can  exert  chemical  influences  of  the  most
powerful  kind.  I  have  made  extensive  experiments  with  many
hundreds  of  different  combinations,  and  in  all  of  these  I  have  only
discovered  one  substance  to  which  I  am  inclined  to  ascribe  such
a  substituting  action  on  protoplasm.  This  substance,  vinylamin,
discovered  by  Gabriel  and  described  by  him  in  a  masterly  manner,
is  formed  by  abstracting  bromine  from  bromethylamine  by  means  of
potassium.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY,


Bro  methyl  amine  =


CH3


NHs


+  HBr»


Since  then,  however,  Marckwald  has  positively  shown  (1900-
1901)  that  this  substance  cannot,  as  was  at  first  supposed,  coDtain  a
double  bond  (ethylene  combination),  for  it  does  not  reduce  per-
manganate at  ordinary  temperature  nor  take  up  bromine.  It  can
therefore  only  possess  the  constitution  of  a  dimethylenimin;

I
CHj'


r./


To  view  of  this  a  complete  analogy  exists  between  the  ethylenimja
and  the  ethylenoxid:

I     >o

In  conformity  with  Bayer's  tension  theory  we  must  ascribe  ao
extraordinary  tension  to  the  three-sided  ring  cont^ned  in  the  di-
methylenimin. This  manifests  itself  also  in  the  fact  that  this  sub-
stance shows  a  marked  tendency,  through  the  addition  of  acid  radicals
and  the  breaking  of  the  ring,  to  paas  over  into  a  substituted  etbyl-
amin  of  the  chain  series.  Thus,  as  Gabriel  showed,  HCl  is  added  witb
the  formation  of  chlorethyJamin,  and  sulphurous  acid  with  the  forma-
tion of  taurin.  These  reactions  proceed  with  great  energy,  as  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  even  in  dilute  watery  solutions  of  the  freshly
prepared  hydrochloride  an  alkaline  reaction  develops  within  a  few
minutes,  due  to  the  formation  of  free  chlorethylamin  which  reacts
alkaline.

Ethylenoxid  behaves  in  an  analogous  manner.  This  is  showD
in  surprising  fashion  by  the  fact  that  this  neutral  body  precipitates
magnesia  out  of  chlormagnesium,  iron  oxide  out  of  iron  chloride,
entirely  after  the  manner  of  free  alkalies.  In  doing  so  it  adds  the
acid  radical  and  becomes  transformed  into  chlorethyl alcohol.

These  two  substances,  ethylenimin  and  ethylenoxid,  are  highly
toxic  combinations  as  has  been  shown  by  the  researches  of  Levaditi
and  myself.     The  pathological   changes  excited  by  dimethylenimin


'  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  BomewhaC  luodifyiiig  tbe  le:
in  acuirdaRce  witb  tbe  positive  advance  of  our  knonriedge,
the  labors  of  Marckwald.


t  of  ihia  chapter
rhich  we  awB  to


J


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION      431

are  especially  interesting.  Adnainistered  to  a  great  variety  of  ani
mals  (mouse,  rabbit,  dog,  goat,  guinea-pig,  rat)  in  doses  which  cause
death  after  1^  to  2  days  or  more,  this  substance  causes  total  necrosis
of  the  kidney  papilla.  In  the  rabbit  Levaditi  found,  besides  this,
marked  changes  extending  from  the  pelvis  of  the  ureter  to  the  urethra,
and  consisting  of  necrosis  of  the  lining  epithelium,  hemorrhages,  and
oedema.     (Archives  internat.  de  pharmacodynamie,  Vol.  VIII,  1901.)

Every  one  who  has  learned  to  know  these  changes — changes
absolutely  unique  in  pathology— will  be  forced  to  the  assumption
that  this  localization  is  dependent  on  a  direct  attack  of  the  vinylamin
on  the  affected  epithelia,  an  ethyl  amido  group  entering  the  proto-
plasmic molecule.  This  assumption  is  supported  by  the  fact  hat
only  the  active  three-sided  ring  is  able  to  produce  this  phenomenon,
not  the  ethylene  combination  (CH2=^CH2),  furthermore,  the  fact  that
neurin  (trimethylvinylammonium  hydroxid)  which  can  be  obtained  by
an  exhaustive  methylation  of  the  dimethylenimin,  acts  in  an  entirely
different  manner.  That  we  are  dealing  with  a  typical  ethylene  com-
bination is  shown  by  the  behavior  toward  bromine  and  permanganate
of  potash.

It  has,  of  course,  long  been  known  that  neurin  is  a  highly  toxic
substance.  Aside  from  its  clinical  toxicological  mode  of  action  it
is  characterized  by  an  exceedingly  evanescent  action  in  contrast  to
dimethylenimin.  The  toxic  phenomena  develop  rapidly  and  dis-
appea.  equally  so  without  leaving  behind  any  permanent  injuries,
especially  destruction  of  the  papillse.  In  contrast  to  this,  vinylamin
is  characterized  by  a  slowly  developing  action,  which  in  small  doses
may  show  several  hours'  incubation  period  and  leaves  the  organism
permanently  damaged.  I  have  compared  this  action  with  that  of
several  other  compounds  which  I  have  studied;  thus  camphylamin,
which  according  to  Duden  has  the  composition

^C-NHa


CgHuv

allylamin  with  a  double  bond  (ethylene  radical):

CH


CH


COLLECTED  STtmiES  IN  IMMUNITY.


and  propargylatnin.


which  containB  the  acetylen  group,
C-H

1!


Atl  of  these  substances  were  found  to  possess  the  evanescent
general  symploms  together  with  an  absence  of  permanent  organic
injuries.  Hence  I  believe  that  the  chemical  avidity  of  the  double
and  triple  combinations  ia  insufficient  to  effect  substitutive  reac-
tions with  the  protoplasm.     I  am  strengthened  in  this  view  by  the

CH
fact  that,  pnissic  acid,  which  owing  to  its  threefold  combination  |||

N
can  be  classed  with  the  most  active  substances  known  to  chemistry,
is  nevertheless  not  anchored  in  the  animal  body,  as  can  be  seen  from
Geppert's  findings  already  referred  to.

If  we  consider  that  substances  which  poMtesa  double  or  triple
bonds  are  usually  much  more  poisonous  than  the  corresponding
saturated  combinations,'  and  if  we  bear  the  above  considerations  in
mind,  we  shall  ascribe  this  increased  toxicity  not  to  a  combining
capacity  but  to  the  fact  that  the  unsaturated  groups  possess  auxotozie
properties,  i.e..  that  they  are  able  to  increase  the  toxicity  when  they
enter  into  complexes  which  in  themselves  already  possess  certain
toxic  properties.

1  must  emphasize  tlie  fact  that  all  observations  thus  far  niade
are  only  to  be  applied  to  organic  substances  foreign  to  the  body
We  must,  however,  assume  that  all  substances  which  enter  into  the
construction  of  the  protoplasm  are  chemically  fixed  by  the  proto-
plasm. A  distinction  has  always  been  made  between  substances
capable  of  assimilation,  which  serve  the  nutrition  and  enter  into  a
permanent  combination  with  the  protoplasm,  and  substances  foreign
to  the  body.  No  one  believes  that  quinine  and  similar  substances
are  assimilated,  i.e.,  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  protoplasm.
The  foodstuffs,  however,  are  bound  in  the  cell,  and  this  union  must
be  regarded  as  a  chemical  one     The  sugar  molecule  cannot  be  ah

'  Neurin    is    tweuty    tiuiCH   as    loiic    us   tboUn    (trimelbyletbylammoaiuni
hydroxide);    allylalcohol  fifty  limes  more  toxic  than  piopyl  alcoliol.    cl    n
Low.  Natiirlicbes  Syaletn  der  Giflwirkiingen  1S93,  page  OS.


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION      433

«

stracted  from  the  cells  with  water;  it  must  first  be  split  off  by  means
of  acids  in  order  to  set  it  free.  Such  a  chemical  union,  however,  just
as  every  synthesis,  presupposes  the  presence  of  two  combining  groups
of  maximal  chemical  affinity  which  are  fitted  to  one  another.  Those
groups  in  the  cell  which  anchor  foodstuffs  I  term  "side-chains"  or
'* receptors;"  the  combining  group  of  the  food  molecule  the  "hap-
tophore  group."  Hence  I  assume  that  the  living  protoplasm  pos-
sesses a  large  number  of  such  **side-chians"  and  that  these  in  virtue
of  their  chemical  constitution  are  able  to  anchor  the  greatest  variety
of  foodstuffs.     In  this  way  the  cell's  metabolism  is  made  possible.

This  view  of  the  constitution  of  the  protoplasmic  molecule  has
made  it  possible  to  get  a  much  clearer  insight  into  the  action  of  the
toxins  and  into  the  hitherto  mysterious  phenomenon,  the  formation
of  antibodies.  I  assume  that  the  toxins,  just  like  the  food  mole-
cules, possess  a  particular  haptophore  group,  which,  by  fitting  into
the  receptor  of  the  cell,  gives  rise  to  the  poisonous  action.  Putting
this  receptor  out  of  action  causes  a  formation  of  new  receptors  to
replace  it,  and  these  are  finally  thrust  off  into  the  blood.  The  re-
ceptors thus  present  in  the  blood  constitute  the  antitoxin.  This
theory,  known  as  the  *'side-chain  theory/'  has  proven  its  worth  in
the  hands  of  numerous  investigators,  for  by  its  means  the  manifold
reactions  of  immunity  are  all  led  back  to  the  simplest  processes  of
cellular  life.^

Hence  I  assume  the  presence  of  a  haptophore  group  only  in  such
combinations  which,  like  the  foodstuffs,  enter  into  the  substance  of  the
protoplasm,  or  which,  like  the  large  number  of  poisonous  and  non-poison-
ous metabolic  products  of  living  cells,  effect  a  union  similar  to  that  of  the
foodstuffs.

The  marked  difference  between  the  two  classes  of  substances
becomes  plainly  evident  by  the  fact  that  only  those  substances  possess-
ing haptophore  groups  are  able  to  excite  the  production  of  antibodies
through  immunization.  And  despite  the  most  painstaking  efforts
neither  other  investigators  nor  I  have  ever  succeeded  in  producing
any  appreciable  production  of  antibody  with  alkaloids,  glucosides,
or  drugs  of  well-known  chemical  constitution.

'  I  content  myself  here  with  these  brief  remarks  and  refer  the  reader  to
my  more  recent  detailed  articles:  1.  On  Immunity,  etc.,  Croonian  Lecture,
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Soc,  Vol.  66,  1900.  2.  Schlussbetrachtungen  zur
Ansemie,  in  Nothnagel's  Handbuch,  Vol.  VIII,  1901,  pages  655  et  seq.  3  Die
Schiitzstoffe  des  Blutes,  page  364  of  this  volume.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


VII.

In  the  case  of  the  chemieally  defined  poisons,  drugs,  and  dyes
discussed  above,  incorporation  into  the  protoplasmic  molecule  does
not,  barring  a  few  exceptions,  Lake  place  by  means  of  synthesis.
Since,  however,  almost  (he  greater  part  ot  all  substances  foreign  to  ihe
body  exhibit  a  typical  selective  action  in  the  tissueo,  il  becomes  neces-
sary to  study  the  reasons  for  this  action.  Here  again  we  shall  do  best
to  begm  with  a  consideralion  of  the  phenomena  which  takes  place
in  staining  reactions.  A  cotton  fibre  placed  in  a  dilution  of  picric
acid  ot  one  to  a  million  takes  up  the  dye,  becoming  intensely  stained.
Methylene  blue  introduced  intra  vitam  into  the  organisnri  is  taken
up  by  the  nerve  endings.  In  [loisoning  by  alkaloids  certain  nerve
centres  may  react  sjiecifieally  and  alone.  All  of  these  phenomena
are  obviously  analogous  in  their  nature.  It  seems  net^essary,  theieiore,
to  discuss  briefly  the  views  held  concerning  the  nature  of  the  stairung
process.  The  purely  mechanical  conception  which  refers  it  all  to
physical  processes,  such  as  surface  attraction  and  absorption,  cuo
probably  be  discarded  for  the  staining  of  substances  in  general.  This
leaves  only  two  other  explanations,  either  of  which  may  be  the  cor-
rect one  for  certain  cases.

The  first  of  these,  maintained  particularly  by  Knecht,  proceeds
from  the  assumption  that  certain  constituents  of  the  fibre  substance
form  with  the  dye  insoluble  salt-like  combinations  usually  termed
laky  combinations.  This  conception  is  supported  by  ihe  fact  that  by
treatment  with  alkalies  an  acid  can  be  obtained — lanuginic  acid
derived  from  wool,  and  nucleic  acid  from  nuclear  substances — whieb
possesses  the  property  of  precipitating  the  salts  of  basic  dyestu&
even  out  of  very  dilute  solutions.  Analogous  conditions  are  found
to  a  great  extent  in  vital  atainings.  1  need  only  remind  Ihe  reader
of  the  investigations  of  Pfeifler.  These  show  that  in  the  vital  staining
of  plant-cells  one  can  frequently  observe  that  the  staining  is  due  to
conspicuous  granules  of  the  almost  in^^luble  tannate  of  methylene
blue.  Naturally  in  the  higher  animals  secretion  substances  present
in  tlie  cells  and  constituting  precipitants  which  form  laky  combina-
tions can  play  a  part  in  localization.

The  second  theorj-,  one  which  associates  the  staining  process
with  the  phenomenon  of  solid  solutions,  we  owe  to  the  researches
of  O.  N.  Witt.    This  investigator  starts  with  the  fact  that  silk  dyed


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION       435-

with  rhodamin  exhibits  a  beautiful  fluorescence.  Rhodamin  itself,
however,  shows  fluorescence  only  when  in  solution;  when  in  the  dry
state,  even  in  the  finest  possible  form,  it  merely  shows  a  pure  red'
color.  Because  of  this  fluorescence  Witt  assumes  that  the  dye  forms
a  homogeneous  mixture  with  the  fibres  of  the  silk,  i.e.,  it  is  in  the-
form  of  a  solution.  Since  the  fibre,  however,  is  a  solid  substance
this  solution  must  be  what  Van't  Hoff  terms  a  "solid  solution.*'  We
know  that  the  same  dye  often  produces  different  tints  in  various  kinds^
of  fibres.  This  is  analogous  to  the  fact  that  the  same  substance
often  dissolves  in  different  solvents  in  entirely-  different  tints,  as  ia
the  case,  for  example,  with  iodine.  Witt  therefore  believes  that
the  process  of  staining  proceeds  exactly  the  same  as  the  distribution
of  a  substance  in  two  different  solvents.  Thus,  if  we  dissolve  anilin
in  water,  we  find  that  we  can  shake  all  the  anilin  out  with  ether,,
because  the  solvent  power  of  the  ether  is  greater  than  that  of  water,  in
the  staining  process  such  a  vast  difference  in  solvent  power  shows
itself  by  the  fact  that  the  materials  introduced  entirely  exhaust  the
staining-bath.  If,  however,  the  difference  in  solvent  powers  is  less
than  this,  e.g.  in  the  combination  water,  ether  and  resorcin,  we  shall
find  that  the  resorcin  is  distributed  between  both  fluids  in  accordance
with  a  law  of  distribution  which  can  be  figured  out  mathematically
for  every  case.  In  dyeing  this  type  corresponds  to  the  dyes  which  are
said  to  "take"  poorly.  In  these  the  staining-bath  does  not  become
exhausted  under  ordinary  conditions.  Exhaustion  can  be  effected
only  through  the  addition  of  certain  substances  which  limit  solution
(salt  dyes,  etc.).

In  the  introductory  chapter  I  have  already  mentioned  that  all
neurotropic  and  lipotropic  substances  lose  the  property  to  stain  brain
substance  and  fat  by  the  introduction  of  the  sulfonic  acid  radical.
If  these  substances  are  examined  in  a  test-tube  it  is  found  that  this
substitution  has  caused  them  to  lose  also  the  solubility  in  ether  or
in  fats.  Thus,  although  flavanilin  is  easily  taken  up  by  ether  from
an  alkaline  solution,  not  a  trace  of  flavanilinsulfonic  acid  is  taken  up.
Another  interesting  case  may  be  mentioned,  one  which  concerns
staining  with  neutral  red.     This  has  the  following  formula:


NH2  N  N(CH3)


2


\/\/


\x


Y


CH,  N


/\y


436


aSLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY


This  substance  has  the  property  of  staining  the  granules  of  celb
most  intensely,  and  the  same  holds  true  oi  a.  number  of  derivatives,
e.g.  violet  dimethyl  neutral  red,  in  which  the  two  hydrogens  of  the
second  amido  group  are  replaced  by  two  methyl  groups;  further,
also,  the  golden-red  diamidophenazin:

NHa  N  N{CHa)3

I        I         I       I

CH3  N

1\

I    OH
CaHs

In  contrast  to  this,  however,  the  combination  in  which  one  of  the
central  amin  radicals  contains  an  ethyl  gioup  which  gives  to  the
group  the  character  of  an  ammonium  base,  is  absolutely  unable  to
effect  the  staining.  All  phenaain  derivatives  which  stain  granules  can
be  completely  shaken  out  of  weak  alkaline  solutions  by  means  of
ether,  whereas  not  even  a  trace  of  the  ammonium  base  belonging
to  the  safranin  series  is  thus  taken  up  by  the  ether

A  very  intimate  connection,  however,  exists  between  solubility  in
the  test-tube  and  ability  to  be  absorbed  in  the  organism,  a  connection
which  1  observed  as  long  as  fifteen  years  ago.  Hence  we  must  assume
that. certain  fat-like  substJincea  of  the  nervous  system  as  well  as  the
fat  oi  fat  cells  possess  a  high  solvent  power  by  means  of  which  these
substances  are  anchored  or  stored  up  in  the  tissue  in  question,  just
as  the  alkaloids  are  taken  up  by  the  ether  in  the  Slas-Otto  pro-
cedure.'

If  we  bear  in  mind  not  only  the  extraordinary  multiplicity  of
substances  foreign  to  the  body,  but  also  the  varying  chemistry  of
the  tissues  which  make  up  the  organism,  we  shall  not  evjiect  that
a   single   principle   can   be    rigidly  applied    to    the  phe


'  Tbia  behavior  baa  been  studied  espec^mlly  by  OvertoD.  He  termB  ibe
substances  of  the  brain  wliich  ser\e  as  extracting  agents  "Upoida"  Chitl
among  these  are  choleaterin  and  lecithin  Among  Ilie  alk&loida  Overtoa  dia-
tinguiBhes  feebly  basic  and  more  sl.rongly  basic  Kubstancea,  Tbe  loriiier  can  be
shaken  oiit^tor  example,  (lie  indifferent  narcotiCJd;  nticreas  the  more  sltvngljr
basic  unite  with  constituents  of  the  cell  tu  lorm  salt-like  cumbmationa  which
are  very  easily  diissociaied,  .According  to  Overton's  conception  therefore
Knecht'a  explaoation  would  apply  at  one  tinie  and  Witt's  at  another


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.      437

selective  action.  For  a  large  number  of  substances  which  localize
in  fat  or  fat-like  bodies  during  life,  it  will  probably  be  difficult  to  prove
whether  a  pure  shaking-out  process  occurs  or  a  formation  of  but
slightly  soluble  salts.

Furthermore,  both  processes  may  occur  toegther,  as  Knecht  as-
sumes in  dyeing,  the  lake-forming  components  being  contained  in
the  tissues  in  the  intimate  molecular  mixture  characteristic  of  solid
solutions.  In  that  case  the  resulting  selective  action  will  be  due
to  a  combination  of  salt  formation  and  solid  solution.  In  many
instances,  however,  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  decide  whether
one  is  dealing  with  solid  solution  or  salt  or  double-salt  formation,
especially  since  chemistry  often  finds  it  impossible  to  decide  this
question  in  the  case  of  pure  bodies.  This  is  seen,  for  example,  in  the
study  of  mixed  crystals  which  are  looked  upon  mostly  as  crystalline
solutions.^

In  any  case  we  see  that  even  without  the  intervention  of  a  chemic-
synthetic  union  the  conditions  necessary  for  a  selective  storage  of  a
substance  in  the  organism  are  present  and  are  sufficient  both  in
extent  and  in  variety .^  That  these  conditions  in  the  case  of  the
salt-like  combinations  are  essentially  chemical  in  nature  is  self-evident;
in  the  case  of  the  solid  solution  the  enormous  mass  of  evidence  which
I  have  merely  touched  makes  this  extremely  probable.  If  we  regard
the  principles  governing  distribution  in  the  organism  from  these
standpoints  we  shall  no  longer  be  surprised  that  in  the  localization

'  If  two  combinations  of  somewhat  similar  chemical  constitution  (for  ex-
ample, benzole  and  pyridin;  stilben,  benzylidenanilin,  and  azobenzole;  fluoren
and  diphenylenoxid)  form  mixed  crystals  with  each  other,  one  can  readily
comprehend  this  in  view  of  their  close  chemical  relationship,  and  can  ascribe
it  to  "isomorphogenous"  groups.  Frequently,  however,  substances  crystallize
together  which  exhibit  the  greatest  divergence  in  the  configuration  of  their
molecules,  as,  for  example,  phenol  and  urea,  chloroform  and  salicylid,  triphenyl-
methan  and  benzol.  The  crystalline  fiery-colored  combinations  which  picric
acid  is  able  to  effect  with  a  large  number  of  hydrocarbons  are  especially  im-
portant. Certain  investigations  concerning  the  basic  properties  of  oxygen
(Baeyer)  and  of  carbon  (Kehrman  and  Baeyer)  seem  to  show  that  such  crys-
tallizations, as,  for  instance,  of  ferrohydrocyanic  acid  with  ether,  etc.,  are  anal-
ogous of  salt  formation.

*  I  must  here  refer  the  reader  to  the  extremely  interesting  investigations
of  Spiro  (Uber  physikalische  und  physiologische  Selection,  Habilitationsschrift,
Strassburg  1897).  In  these,  although  starting  from  entirely  different  stand-
points *be  author  reaches  many  of  the  views  held  by  me.  At  the  time  of  my
address  I  was  unaware  of  this  study,  as  it  ib  not  to  be  had  in  the  bookshops.


■438


COLLECTED  STITDrES  IN  IMMtTNITY


of  substances  foreigu  to  the  lx>dy  synthetic  processes  play  practirally
no  r6Ie  whatever.  If  we  take  methylene  blue  as  an  example,  we  see
.at  once  that  we  ean  easily  find  a  large  number  of  different  duids
which  are  able  to  shake  it  out.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  of  a
large  number  of  acids,  like  picric  acid,  phoaphomolybdic  acid,  hyper-
sulphuric  acid,  which  are  able  to  precipitate  the  methylene  blue  ia
insoluble  form  even  out  of  very  dilute  solutions.  This  dyestuff,  how-
ever, is  practically  useless  for  synthetic  processes;  all  the  efforts  of
the  chemists  to  introduce  other  groups  into  the  completed  molecules
(with  one  exception,  nitro-methylene  blue)  have  absolutely  failed.
When  we  stop  to  consider  that  in  such  chemical  procedures  the
strongest  possible  agents  can  be  used,  sulphuric  acid,  high  tempera-
tures, etc.,  we  shall  at  once  see  that  methylene  blue  cannot  at  all  be
synthetically  bound  in  the  oi^anism.  The  extensive  distribution  of
methylene  blue,  however,  is  very  easily  explained  by  the  plentiful
opportunities  offered  for  localization.

Synthetic  processes,  such  as  occur  in  the  absorption  of  foodstiifTs,
in  assimilation,  and  in  the  growth  of  living  matter,  are  cnnnerted
with  the  existence  of  certain  chemical  groups,  the  "receptors."
These  receptors  are  able  to  synthesize  with  fitting  haptophore  groups
of  the  foodstuffs  or  of  the  toxins,  the  two  groups  fitting  spccificaHy
to  each  other  (like  lock  and  key:  E.  Fischer).  The  eagerness  with
which  the  living  protoplasm  lays  hold  of  the  foodstiifT  which  it  re-
quires is  in  marked  contrast  to  the  manner  in  which  it  resists  taking
up  substances  foreign  to  itself.  This  was  observed  e^'en  in  the  l)egin-
ning  of  histology,  for  at  that  lime  it  was  regarded  as  an  axiom  that
living  cells  could  not  possibly  he  stained.  Gerlach,  for  example,
had  shown  that  an  am»rba  does  not  take  up  any  coloring  matter  from
a  solution  of  carmine,  whereas  it  stains  immediately  when  it  is  dead.
Since  then,  to  be  sure,  largely  through  my  efforts,  we  have  come  to
know  a  number  of  important  vital  stains  (neutral  red,  methylene
blue,  brilliant  eresyl  blue),  but  closer  analysis  of  these  phenomena
have  shown  that  that  which  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  living  cell
by  the  various  dyes  is  not  the  functionating  protoplasm  but  its
lifeless  (paraplastic)  surrounding  medium  and  the  granules,  etc.,
present  therein.     In  this  point  I  agree  entirely  with  Galeotti.


^


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION       439


VIII.

'^Tiat  practical  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  these  considera-
tionsr  We  see  that  drugs,  such  as  the  majority  of  narcotics — in
fact  the  large  number  of  neurotropic  and  lipotropic  substances — be-
come localized  through  a  shaking-out  process.  It  follows  from  what
has  already  been  said  that  only  such  substances  can  be  anchored  at  any
particular  part  of  the  organism  which  fit  into  the  molecule  of  the
recipient  combination  as  a  piece  of  mosaic  fits  into  a  certain  pat-
tern. Such  configurations,  however,  are  not  confined  to  a  single
substance,  but  usually  include  a  large  group  of  related  substances.
In  this  connection  the  investigations  which  Einhorn  ^  and  I  made
concerning  the  action  of  cocaine  are  most  important.

Cocaine  is  a  derivative  of  ecgonin,  whose  molecule  contains  two
grou[)s  differing  in  function:  a  hydroxyl  group,  which  combines  with
acid  radicals,  and  a  carboxyl  group,  which  forms  esters  with  alcohol
radicals.  All  derivatives  of  ecgonin  in  which  both  groups  are  thus
occupied  represent  bodies  of  the  cocaine  series.  Thus  in  the  cocaine
ordinarily  used  in  medicine  the  acid  radical  is  that  of  benzoic  acid,
the  ester  former  is  a  methyl  group.  By  means  of  the  methods  of
modern  chemistry  it  has  been  possible  to  introduce  the  greatest  variety
of  radicals  into  ecgonin,  leading  to  the  formation  of  a  large  number
of  homologous  substances.  It  was  soon  found  that  the  substitution
of  other  alcohol  radicals,  such  as  ethyl,  propyl,  etc.,  for  the  methyl
radical  did  not  cause  the  least  change  in  the  physiological  effects
of  the  cocaine,  as  Falk  proved.  On  the  other  hand,  the  acid  radical
is  of  prime  importance  for  the  anaesthetic  action  of  the  cocaine.  Pouls-
son,  Liebreich,  and  myself  studied  the  various  cocaines  with  other
acid  radicals  (cinnamyl  cocaine,  phenacetyl  cocaine,  valeryl  cocaine,
phthalyl  cocaine)  and  found  only  one,  the  phenylacetic  acid  derivative,
which  possessed  even  feeble  anaesthetic  properties.  As  a  result  of
these  toxicological  experiences  one  could  have  assumed  that  this
benzoyl  cocaine  was  in  every  way  unlike  all  other  acid  derivatives.
But  this  is  not  the  case,  for  I  was  able  to  show  that  so  far  as  another
toxic  action  is  concerned  all  of  the  various  cocaines  show  the  same


^  Einhorn  is  one  of  the  best  authorities  on  alkaloids  known  to  me.  The
studies  referred  to,  appear  in  the  Deutsche  med.  Wochensch.  1890,  No.  32,  and  in
Berichte  der  deutschen  chem.  Gesellschaft  1894,  Vol.  27,  page  1870.


440  CULLECTEU   STIUJIKS   IN    IMMl'NITY.

behavior,  namely,  in  mice  they  ail  produce  a  peculiar  foam-like  degeo-
eratioB  of  the  liver-cells  which  I  have  observed  only  in  substances
belnnging  to  this  series.  From  this  it  follows  that  all  bodies  of  the
cocaine  series  are  alike  so  far  as  the  liver  is  concerned.  CoDsiderini
that  the  substances  which  precipitate  and  dissolve  these  bodies  are
the  same  and  that  the  liver  findings  are  identical,  we  may  perhaps
assume  that  all  cocaines  are  taken  up  by  the  liver  in  the  same  way
and  therefore  probably  also  by  the  other  parenchyma.  And  since
the  benzoyl  derivative  is  the  only  one  which  possesses  an33sthctic
action  we  shall  have  to  assume  that  the  rest  of  the  molecule  is  only
the  carrier  which  brings  the  benzoic  acid  radical  to  the  proper  place,
(The  anaesthesiophore  character  of  this  group  had  already  been  made
very  probable  by  the  earlier  investgationa  of  Filehne.)  Let  us  go
back  to  our  illustration  of  the  mosaic  in  order  to  get  this  idea  clearly
before  ua.  In  order  for  a  piece  to  help  complete  a  given  figure  it  is
first  necessary  that  it  possess  a  particular  jorm,  but  in  order  that  the
pattern  be  really  completed  the  piece  must  also  possess  certain  material
properties,  such  as  hardness,  color,  lustre,  etc.  It  will  be  one  of  tlie
problems  of  the  future  to  extend  our  knowledge  concerning  the  active
toxophore  groups.

The  first  fundamental  experiments  in  this  direction  were  made
by  Ladenburg,  who  showed  that  the  two  substances  obtained  on
splitting  atropin,  namely,  tropin  and  tropic  acid,  could  readily  be
recombined  and  the  atropin  molecule  thus  be  reconstructed.  As  a
result  of  this  demonstration  that  atropin  represents  an  acid  ester
of  tropin  it  was  possible  to  produce  a  number  of  homologous  combina-
tions, Ladenburg'a  "tropeins,"  e.g.,  benzyltropein,  salicyJtropein.
phenylglycoltropein  (homatropin).  A  comparative  study  of  the  these
substances  showed  that  for  mydriatic  purposes  aromatic  oxyacids
were  the  most  favorable — and  esiwcially  those  m  which  the  hydroxyl
is  in  aliphatic  combination,  as  in  tropic  acid  and  phenylgly colic  acid.

In  cocaine,  Einhom  and  I  attempted  to  determine  the  function
of  the  benzoyl  group  by  introducing  various  side-chains.  It  waa
found  that  the  introduction  of  a  nitro  group  in  the  meta  position  had
a  marked  influence  on  the  anesthetizing  property  of  cocaine  without
preventing  the  injurious  action  on  parenchyma  described  above.  The
introduction  of  a  hydroxyl  group  in  the  same  place  acted  still  more
strongly  in  this  direction,  for  the  aniEsthetizing  property  bad  dis-
appeared, the  toxic  action  on  the  liver  decreased.  Meta-amido  cocaine
waa  entirely  inert.


J


CHEMICAL  CONSTITUTION  AND  PHARMACOLOGICAL  ACTION.      441

What  was  extremely  interesting  was  the  fact  that  by  the  intro-
duction of  suitable  radicals  into  this  inert  amido  cocaine  the  alka-
loidal  action  could  be  restored.  Thus  when  acetyl  and  benzoyl
groups  are  introduced  into  amido  cocaine,  cocaines  are  formed  which,
although  they  are  not  anaesthetic,  again  possess  this  property  of
acting  on  the  liver.  It  is  especially  interesting,  however,  that  the
cocaine  urethane  obtained  by  the  action  of  chlorcarbonic  acid  on
amido  cocaine  again  acts  ansesthetically,  in  fact  much  more  so  than
the  original  cocaine.  That  is  to  say,  if  we  nitrify  cocaine,  reduce  it
to  amido  cocaine,  and  finally  condense  it  to  a  urethane,  we  find  that
the  anajsthesiophore  group  is  first  diminished  in  power,  then  its
action  is  entirely  lost,  and  finally  heightened.  We  already  know  the
function  of  the  toxophoie  group  in  a  number  of  alkaloids,  in  atropin
for  a  single  group,  in  strychnine  for  two.  If  only  we  had  a  deeper
insight  into  this  function  we  might  hope  by  means  of  substitutive
action  on  the  toxophore  groups  (such  as  Einhorn  and  I  have  car-
ried out  on  the  benzoic  acid  radical  of  cocaine)  to  modify  the  action
of  the  alkaloids  to  suit  our  purpose.

In  the  synthetic  field  of  pharmacology,  however,  a  knowledge  of
the  groupings  on  which  the  selective  distribution  in  the  organs  depends
would  appear  to  be  far  more  important.  In  the  case  of  foodstuffs
and  toxins  I  assume  that  the  union  is  effected  by  a  single  definite
group,  the  '*haptophore  "  group.  Substances  foreign  to  the  body,
as  already  explained,  lack  such  a  single  group  and  the  laws  of  dis-
tribution in  the  organism  are  dependent  on  the  combined  action  of
the  separate  components.  In  their  distribution,  therefore,  the  entire
constitution  of  the  substance  is  the  deciding  factor.  This  we  have  seen
to  be  true  with  substances  belonging  to  one  group.  Within  this
group  type,  as  we  have  described  it  in  detail  with  the  cocaine  series,
modifications  of  the  separate  components  can  then  be  made  within
wide  limits.  Starting  from  this  point  of  view  we  obtain  a  new  method
of  synthetic-chemical  pharmacology.  If  one  is  desirous  of  studying
organ  therapy  in  this  sense  it  will  be  necessary  first  to  hunt  up
bodies  which  possess  a  particular  affinity  for  a  certain  organ.
Having  found  such  bodies  one  can  then  use  them,  so  to  speak,  as  a
carrier  by  which  to  bring  therapeutically  active  groups  to  the  organ
in  question.  It  is  self-evident  that  in  the  selection  of  these  groups
one  is  bound  by  definite  limits;  so  also  is  the  fact  that  all  substituting
groups  which  themselves  influence  the  distributive  character  (e.g.
acid  radicals)  must  be  avoided.     All  these  are  problems  which  ex-


442  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

tend  far  beyond  the  powers  of  single  individuals  and  make  U
desirable  that  chemists  and  pharmacologists  work  together  in  some
definite  plan.  That  is  one  reason  why  I  have  gone  into  such  detail
x;oncerning  my  views  on  the  connection  between  constitution,  dis-
tribution in  the  organs,  and  pharmacological  action.  1  shall  indeed  be
happy  if  these  views,  the  gradual  development  of  ten  years  of  study,
will  advance  the  study  of  pharmacology.

Translator's  Note. — See  also  the  recently  published  study  by  Bechboki
and  Ehrlich  on  the  relation  of  chemical  constitution  to  disinfecting  power.
.(Zeitschrift  fur  physiol.  Chemie,  Vol.  XL VII,  Noe.  2  and  3,  1906.)


XXXV.   A  STUDY  OF  THE  SUBSTANCES  WHICH

ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.'

BY

Dr.  Preston  Kyes.  Dr   Hans  Sachs.

Associate    in    Anatomy.    University  of  Assistant  at  the  Royal  Institute
Chicago,  Fellow  of  the  Rockefeller  for  Experimental  Therapy,

Institute  for  Medical  Research.  Frankfurt-on-Main.

I.  Concerning  the  Activation  of  Cobra  Venom  by  Means  of

Compiements.

In  a  previous  study  ^  one  of  us  has  shown  that  cobra  venom  is
activated  not -only  by^-ewtain  active  sera  but  afaa  by  lecithin  and
certain  complement-like,  substances  of  the  red  blood-cells  called
**endocomplements."  This,  of  course,  harmonizes  with  the  ambo-
ceptor_nature  oi  the  poison  which  had  been  demonstrated  by  Flexner
and  Xoguchi .3  In  view  of  the  wide  distribution  of  lecithin  in  the
organs  and  tissues  it  seemed  advisable  to  penetrate  deeper  into  the
mechanism  of  cobra- venom  haemolysis,  especially  in  order  to  deter-
mine if  the  assumption  of  complements  and  endocomplements  is
not  superfluous  and  the  presence  of  lecithin  in  the  red  blood-cells
and  serum  sufficient  to  explain  the  complement  action.  It  is  true
that  certain  sera  whicb_activate  cobr.^  yenom.  lose  -this  property  when
they  are  Heated^  to  56°  C.  for  half  an  hour,  and  the  endocomplements
produced  by  dissolving  the  red  blood-cells'iri  water  are  inactivated
by  heating  to  62°  C.  Considering  the  great  ease  with  which  lecithin
combines  with  albuminous  bodies,  etc.,  it  was  possible  that  the
thermolability  of  the  activating  factors  was  simulated  by  a  com-
bination of  the  lecithin  with  other  substances.  An  important  fact
which  speaks  strongly  against  this  view,  however,  is  one  first  brought

*  Reprint  from  the  Berlin  kiin.  Wochensch.  1903,  Nois.  2  and  4

*  P.  Kyes.    See  page  291.

*  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  Snake  Venom  in  Relation  to  Usemolysis,  Bacterid
olysis,  and  Toxicity,  Journ.  of  Exp.  Medicine.  VoL  VI,  No.  3.  1902.

443


»


444  COLLECTKD  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITV

out  by  Calmette,'  namely,  that  almost  all  sera  after  being  heal
65"  C.  and  higher  usually  show  even  an  increased  activating  power
This  we  could  explain  only  by  ascribing  it  to  the  lecithin  set  free
through  heating  (Kyes,  I.e.)-  It  thus  appeared  that  heating  wasmort
likely  to  effect  a  splitting  off  than  a  combination  of  the  lecithin.

Our  further  studies  have  dhown,  however,  that  this  view  is  not
correct  in  all  cases.^

To  begin,  we  exaramed  the  complementing  proj)erties  of  senan,
choosing  for  our  analysis  the  combination  ox  blood  +  cobra  venom  +
guinea-pig  serum.  The  activating  property  of  the  fresh  guinea-pig
serum  was  destroyed  by  halt  an  hour's  heating  to  56°  C,  and  hewt
was  apparently  not  due  to  the  presence  of  lecithin,  but  to  some  other
complement-like  subatance.  Subsetjuent  investigations  have  CM-
firmed  us  in  this  opinion.  1~he  general  course  of  the  hxmolrsit
through  snake  venom  is  markedly  different  when  lecithin  ot  Genun
is  used  for  complementing.  Ijccithin  effects  rapid  solution;  with
large  amounts  of  cobra  venom  this  is  almost  instantaneous.  ^Vben
serum  is  used  as  complement  a  longer  or  shorter  period  of  incubatioo
is  observed,  such  us  we  are  accustomed  to  see  with  the  hsmoIvtJe
sera.  Furthermore,  ha-molysis  with  cobra  venom  +  lecithin  ocfUts
even  at  CC,  whereas  the  action  of  cobra  venom  +  serum  as  comple-
ment requires  a  greater  degree  of  heat.

That  the  activating  substance  of  the  serum  belongs  to  the  cbs
ot  complements  was  further  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  it  wis
destroyed  by  digestion  with  papain.  Following  the  method  of  Ehrlkl)
and  Sachs,^  in  order  to  digest  the  complement,  5  cc.  guinea-pig  eeruo
were  mixed  with  1  cc.  10%  solution  of  papain,  digested  for  li  hours
and  then  centrifuged.  The  decanted  fluid  was  used  to  activate  the
cobra  venom.  Table  I  shows  that  this  property  was  almost  com-
pletely lost.

The  serum  treated  with  papain  had  thus  almost  completely  \asl
its  activating  property,  whereas  a  solution  of  lecithin  similarly  treated
preserved  its  activating  property  unchanged.     (See  Table  II.)


'  CalmeUe,  Sut  Taction  bftnolytique  <lu  veniti  dc  cobra,  Compt  r«Dd  <k
I'Aouiemie  des  Sciences,  T.  IJ4,  No.  24,  1902-

'  We  are  much  indebted  to  Dra.  Lamb  and  Greig  foi  cobra  venom  kindt;
placed  at  ou[  dispoeiil

■  Ghrhch  and  Sachs,  The  Plurality  of  ComplemeDtB  in  Serum.  Bed.  U^  i
Woclienechr   1902,  .Noa   H  und  15


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA   VENOM.


445


TABLE  I


Amount  of
Serum.

cc.

1  cc  6%  Ox  Blood  +  0  02  cc.  1  %  Cobra
Venom  +  Guinea  pig  Serum.

(a)  Normal.

(6)  After  Previous

Treatment  with

Papain.

Amount  of  Bnmolyais.

0.5

0.35

0.25

0.15

0.1

0.075

complete

almost  complete
strong

moderate

almost  0
'*  0
•'  0
"      0

0

0

TABLE  II


Amount  of
Lecithin
Solution.

cc.

1  cc  5%  Ox  Blood  +  0.02  cc   1%  Cobra
Venom +0.025%  Lecithin

(a)   Native

ib)  After  Previous

Treatment  with

Papain.

Amount  of  Hemolysis

0.25

0.15

0.1

0.075

0.05

complete

trace
0

complete
« <

trace
0

In  like  manner  the  complementing  property  of  the  serum  is  de-
stroyed by  appropriate  digestion  with  hydrochloric  acid  and  with
soda  lye,  in  which  again  the  serum  differs  from  lecithin.

We  felt  that  the  discovery  of  agents  which  would  exert  an  inhibit-
ing effect  in  the  hemolytic  action  of  only  one  of  the  two  factors  (either
on  that  of  the  serum  or  of  the  lecithin)  would  be  most  valuable  for
a  positive  differentiation  of  serum  complement  and  lecithin.  We
therefore  next  immunized  rabbits  and  chickens  with  guinea-pig  serum,
seeking  in  that  way  to  produce  anticomplements.  By  the  natural
production  of  an  antibody  we  could  thus  prove  the  complement
nature  of  the  serum  activator.  These  experiments,  however,  en-
countered certain  difficulties,  for,  as  we  have  already  mentioned


rOLI.ErTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMl'MTV

normal  aera  exert  a  considerable  inhibition  on  cobra  venom  ha?molyais
when  serum  is  used  as  pomplement,  and  to  a  still  greater  degree  when
lecithin  is  used.  We  observed  no  essential  increase  in  the  protective
action  in  the  animals  treated  with  guinea-pig  serum.  We  therefore
next  sought  to  distinguish  anticomplement  and  antilecithin  action
in  normal  serum.

For  this  purpose  guinea-pig  serum  itself  seemed  best  suited;
inactivated  by  half  an  hour's  heating  to  56°  C.  it  exerts  a  marked
inhibitory  action  on  cobra  venom  +  lecitbin  haemolysis.  This  fact
by  itself,  however,  in  no  way  argues  against  the  identity  of  lecithin
and  the  complementing  substance  of  active  guinea-pig  serum.  One
could  assume,  for  instance,  that,  on  heating,  a  substance  is  formed
which  is  capable  of  combining  with  the  lecithin,  In  that  case  if  an
excess  of  the  substance  were  formed,  this  would  be  capable  of  com-
bining with  lecithin  subsequently  added.  This  would  explain  the
apparently  paradoxical  phenomenon  that  the  same  serum  when  fresh
exhibits  activating  properties,  but  when  heated  to  56°  C.  is  able  to
bind  lecithin.

We  therefore  investigated  the  property  of  active  fresh  guinea-
pig  serum  to  inhibit  the  action  of  lecithin  and  hoped  that  this  prop-  '
erty  would  still  be  manifested  in  dilutions  in  which  the  serum  was
no  longer  able  to  exert  any  activating  influence  on  cobra  venom.
As  a  matter  of  fact  we  suceeded  in  proving  that  guinea-pig  serum
still  exerts  an  inhibiting  influence  on  the  lecithin,  even  in  very  small
amounts  which  no  longer  activate.  This  is  shown  by  the  example
in  Table  III.

TABLE  in.
1  cc    6%  Ox  BuioD+OOOl  cc.  1%  CoRBA  Venom+0.075  cc.  0.025%


CThe  lecitbiD  aod  guinea-pig  sei
adding  the  ox  blood  and  cobra  vei
I


"'""""''■

0.5

complete

strong

0.1

trace

0.05

0

0.025

0.01

trace

0

complete

e  digested  lor  balf  an  hour  previous  ti


J


SUBSTANCES  WHICH   ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.  447

Under  these  circumstances,  of  course,  we  can  no  longer  regard
the  activating  factor  of  guinea-pig  serum  and  lecithin  as  being
identical.  If  lecithin  and  serum  complement  were  identical,  the
antilecithin  should  act  also  against  the  serum  complement.  In
guinea-pig  serum,  however,  as  is  shown  by  its  activating  power,  an
excess  over  any  such  inhibiting  substances  is  surely  present  and  this
excess,  of  course,  persists  even  in  quantities  of  the  serum  so  small
as  no  longer  to  lead  to  haemolysis.  A  serum  protection  can  there-
fore be  exerted  only  against  substances  which  are  different  from  the
activating  substance  of  the  serum.

Further  confirmation  of  this  difference  was  afforded  by  the  fact
that  we  succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  existence  of  antilecithin
and  an ti complement  components  in  normal  rabbit  serum  inactivated
by  heating  to  56®  C.  By  the  addition  of  lecithin  we  completely
neutralized  the  components  which  inhibit  lecithin.^  In  fact  we  added
so  much  that  there  was  a  slight  excess  of  free  lecithin.  Although  this
mixture  in  large  quantities  ^oas  itself  activating,  in  smaller  quantities
it  was  able  to  markedly  inhibit  hamolysis  with  cobra  venom  +  guinea-pig
serum.  The  anticomplement  component  of  the  rabbit  serum  had
been  unaffected  by  the  addition  of  lecithin,  as  can  be  seen  from  the
following  experiment:

20  cc.  rabbit  serum  are  mixed  with  180  cc.  absolute  alcohol,  the  resulting
precipitate  rapidly  filtered,  pressed  out,  and  dissolved  in  20  cc.  salt  solution
This  solution  protects  against  cobra  venom  haemolysis  not  only  with   lecithin
activation  but  also  with  that  of  guinea-pig  serum.

4  cc.  of  the  inhibiting  solution  are  digested  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour  with
2  cc.  of  a  0.17%  lecithin  solution.  In  large  amounts  this  mixture,  through  an
excess  of  lecithin,  activates  cobra  venom;  in  small  amounts  it  inhibits  the
activation  with  guinea-pig  serum      (See  Table  IV •)

Besides  this  we  have  discovered  that  cholesterin  markedly
inhibits,  or  even  entirely  prevents,  the  cobra-venom  hemolysis
brought  about  by  lecithin.  We  shall  return  to  this  point  later.  In
contrast  to  the  behavior  of  the  lecithin  we  find  that  the  serum  com-
plement is  practically  unaffected  by  cholesterin,  for  only  a  very
slight  inhibition  is  observed  even  with  large  amounts  of  choles-
terin, a  phenomenon  which  may  be  due  to  absorption.  Such  an
experiment  is  reproduced  in  Table  V.    The  solution  of  cholesterin

'  In  order  to  exclude  the  activating  action  of  rabbit  serum,  which  is  due  to
available  lecithin,  it  is  necessary  to  work  with  the  alcoholic  precipitate  obtained
from  rabbit  serum     This  contains  the  inhibiting  substances.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

was  made  by  mixing  1  cc,  of  a  hot,  saturated  solution  of  cholesterin
in  methyl  alcohol  with  9  cc.  hot  0.86%  salt  solution.  This  homo-
geneous suspension  of  cholesterin  served  as  stock  solution  for  the
experiments.

TABLE  IV
0.25  cc.  GuisEA-piG  Serfm  and  the    Ikhihiting  SoLDTroN   AHE   Digested

AT    37°    C.    POB    THREB-aUARTERS     OF     AN    HoVR.       THEREUPON    THE    Ol

Blood  +  0,01  I  %  Cobra  Venom  are  Added.


Soluliun.

CO.

A.  Nil tivB  Solution

B.  Bolulion  tif  the
Prw'lpiWlB  +
Lecillijn.

1.0

11.5

0  25

0.15

0.1

0  05

0.025

O.Ol

0

faint  trace
trace
little

moderate

Blrong

complete

complete

almost  complete
moderate

little
moderate

Btroiig

ainiost  complete

complete

rbelMtcrin
Solutiop.

Ox  BI<««i+a.tH  «.  1%  foljr.  VcBom

Activated  nilh  (be  Compkla

Snlv«.lDo„oI

(ol  Guin».plf
Sorum.

(61  Lecltbin.

0  5

0.25

0  1

0.05

0.025

0.01

0.005

0-0025

moderate
complete

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
complete

These  various  experiments  lead  us  to  believe  that  serum  comfie-
meni  and  lecilkin  are  two  entirely  distinct  substances.  On  the  other
hand  Ihe  complementing  properly  of  the  serum  for  cobra  venom
corresponds  so  well  with  the  other  complement  functions  of  the
sera  that  no  reason  at  present  exists  for  undertaking  a  separation.
In  conformity  with  this  correspondence  we  find  that  the  activating


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.  449

substance  is  absorbed  by  yeast.  In  the  same  connection  we  may
perhaps  mention  that  when  fresh  guinea-pig  serum  is  shaken  with
ether  it  loses  not  only  the  other  complementing  functions  but  also
that  for  cobra  poison.  If  guinea-pig  serum  which  has  been  heated
to  100°  C.  (and  which  therefore  owes  its  activating  property  to  the
lecithin  liberated  through  heat)  is  treated  with  ether  in  exactly  the
same  manner,  the  complementing  function  remains  unchanged.


11.  The  Lecithin  Content  of  the  Stromata  and  the  Activation  of  Cobra

Venom  Dependent  Thereon.

In  the  investigation  of  the  substances  in  the  red  blood-cell  termed
endocomplements  we  were  at  first  led  into  error  by  the  employ-
ment of  just  this  method  of  differentiation  dependent  on  the  de-
structibility  of  complements  by  means  of  ether.

For  these  experiments  we  used  the  combination  ox  blood  f  cobra
venom -h  solution  of  guinea-pig  blood.  The  latter  was  obtained  by
dissolving  sedimented  guinea-pig  blood  in  distilled  water.  The  solu-
tion was  made  up  to  three  times  the  original  volume  of  blood,  where-
upon NaCl  was  added  until  the  solution  contained  0.85%.  If  such
a  solution  is  shaken  with  highly  purified  ether  (1  volume  blood
solution +  10  volumes  ether)  and  a  sample  of  the  solution  (separated
by  means  of  a  separating-funnel)  is  tested  it  will  be  found  that  this
has  lost  its  power  to  activate  cobra  venom.  The  ethereal  residue
taken  up  in  salt  solution  also  exhibited  no  complementing  properties,
so  that  it  appeared  as  though  the  substance  termed  "endocomple-
ment "  was  destroyed  by  the  ether  just  as  were  the  serum  comple-
ments. This,  however,  is  not  the  case.  When  the  blood  solution
separates  after  shaking  with  ether  an  emulsified  stratum  is  formed
between  ether  and  blood  solution.  On  testing  that  part  of  the  blood
solution  which  contains  this  intermediary  stratum  the  entire  quantity
of  the  activating  substance  is  recovered.     (See  Table  VI.)

This  shows,  therefore,  that  the  activating  substance  had  not  been  de-
stroyed, but  that  it  had  escaped  our  observation,  owing  to  the  peculiar
behavior  of  the  emulsified  stratum.  It  is  well  known  that  such  emul-
sions take  up  minute  solid  particles  most  readily,  and  it  was  natural
therefore  to  assume  that  the  activator  contained  in  the  blood-cells
is  connected  with  their  stromata.  In  laky  blood  solutions  the  stro-
mata are  present  in  a  swollen  state;  hence  we  sought  to  separate
the  stromata  from  the  rest  of  the  hsemoglobin  solution.    With  guinea-


450


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


pig  blood  solutions  this  is  very  simple,  for  on  strongly  centrifuguii
the  solution  used  for  complementing,  especially  if  some  salt  is  added
the  fitromata  settle  out  very  well.  By  removing  the  supernatant
haemoglobin  solution  and  perhaps  once  more  washing  the  serliment
the  stromata  are  readily  isolated,  This  suspension  of  blorxl  stromata,
made  up  to  the  original  volume  with  salt  solution,  showed  itself
just  as  capable  of  activating  cobra  venom  as  was  the  original  blood
solution,  whereas  the  decanted  fluid  was  enlirely  inert.  Tkcfictuxiting
substance  oj  the  blood  soluiion  is  prenent  Iherefara  not  in  soluUonJwi
as  a  constituent  of  the  stroma  of  the  btood-cetls.     (See  Table  VII.)

TABLE  VI,


Ox  BlooH+OO

CO   1%  Cob™  Ve

norm- Blood  Solution

Blood  BolulioB,

la)  NwiVB

(t)  A(to

8bikmi»..h  Ether

'  k?:^'^Lt'^

1.0

0-5

0.25

0.10

0-05

0-025

0.01

complete

0
0
0

0
0

0

0
0
0
0

taint  trace
0

TABLE  Vn.

a  b,  ond  c

Ox  BLood+0  01  PC.  1%  Cobrs  V

™.

'" ''ix.a^"""'

Blood  .™p6lfoni.t.

(')  necaoied  Por-

1-0
0.5

complete

">".?'"•

0

0.25

°        H

■

0  1

0-05

0

0

^

This  threw  some  light  on  the  inactivation  of  the  blood  solution  at
62°  C,  a  fact  which  made  the  complement  character  of  the  acti-
vating substance  seem  exceedingly  probable.  In  contrast  to  the
native  blood  solution  we  find  that  the  suspension  of  stromata  remaios
unchanged  when  heated  to  62°  C.


SUBSTANCES  WHICH   ACTIVATE  COBRA   VENOM


451


The  activating  substance  itself  is  therefore  thermostable.  If,
however,  the  decanted  haemoglobin  solution  is  again  added  to  the  stro-
ma ta  and  this  mixture  heated  to  62®  C.  inactivation  will  again  ensue.
(See  Table  VIII.)

TABLE  VIII.


Amountfl  of

Ox  Blood  +0  01  cc   1%  Ck>bra  Venom  +

a,  6.  and  c.
cc.

(a)  Guinea  pig  Blood
Stromata  Suspennion.

(6)  The  Suspension
Heated  to  62«  C.

(c)  The  Suspensions
Decanted  Fluid  (Hspmo-
globin)  Heated  to  62<'C.

10
0  5
0  25
0.15
0  1
0.025

complete
<  (

trace
0

complete

<  <

<  t

strong

trace

0

0
0
0
0
0
0

From  this  it  appears  that  the  inactivation  of  the  native  blood
solution  depends  on  this:  that  on  heating  to  62°  C.  the  active  substance
combines  with  the  haemoglobin  in  such  fashion  that  it  is  no  longer
able  to  combine  with  the  cobra  amboceptor.  Hence  in  view  of  the
readiness  with  which  lecithin  combines  with  albuminous  substances,
etc.,  we  believe  that  the  activating  property  of  dissolved  blood-cells
which  we  previously  described  as  an  "endocomplement  action"  is
really  due  to  the  presence  of  lecithin  or  lecithin-like  substances  in  the
stroma.^

We  have  convinced  ourselves  of  the  correctness  of  this  assump-
tion also  by  the  fact  that  lecithin  is  bound  by  crystallized  horse
haemoglobin  by  heating  for  half  an  hour  to  62®  C.^  An  experiment
of  this  kind  is  reproduced  in  Table  IX.

A  solution  of  haemoglobin  heated  for  half  an  hour  to  62®  C.  is  also
able  to  inhibit  the  activating  property  of  lecithin  when  digested  with
this  for  half  an  hour  at  37®  C.

The  lecithin  character  of  the  activating  substance  present  in  the
red  blood-cells  is  confirmed  by  a  number  of  other  observations  which
deal  with  the  analogous  character  of  cobra-venom  haemolysis  on  the


I  We  were  able  to  completely  extract  the  activating  substance  from  the
stromata  suspensions  by  means  of  alcohol.  Besides  this,  in  activating  with
stromata  in  the  presence  of  excess  of  cobra  venom,  one  observes  an  inhibition
of  haemolysis  due  to  the  deflection  of  the  lecithin.

'  We  are  much  indebted  to  Prof.  Hiifner  of  Tubingen  for  this  hemoglobin.


452


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


addition  of  lecithin  and  of  blood  solution.    These  characteristics  are
as  follows:

1.  The  haemolytic  activity  at  0°.

2.  The  comparatively  rapid  course  of  haemolysis.

3.  The  marked  inhibitory  action  of  cholesterin.     (See  Table  X.)

TABLE  IX.


Amounts  of

the  Hffimoglo

bin-Lecithin

Solution.

cc.

Ox  Blood +  0.01  CO.  1%  Cobra  Venom +
Haemoglobin-  Lecithin  Solution.*

(a)  Native.

(6)  Heated  for  One-
half  Hour  to  62«  C.

1.0

0.75

0  5

0.35

0.25

0.15

complete

( t

little

trace

0

0
0
0
0
0
0

*  5  cc.  hsemoglobin  X  5  cc  0.0125%  lecithin  solution.


TABLE  X


AmountH  of

the  Cholentenn

Solution.

cc

1  cc  5%  Ox  Blood-l-0  01  cc    1%  Cobra
Venom  +

(a)  0.25  cc.  Solution

of  Guinea-pig

Blood.t

(6)  0.25  cc.  0  01%
Lecithin,  t

0.025
0.01
0.005
0.0025

0

trace

moderate

complete

0

0

0

complete

t  =" complete  .solvent  dose

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  these  three  points  guinea-pig  serum
exhibited  exactly  the  opposite  behavior,  a  fact  which  led  us  to  ascribe
its  activating  power  to  true  complements.

We  have  therefore  come  to  the  conclusion  that  solution  by  means
of  blood  solutions  is  only  a  property  of  the  lecithin  contained  in
the  blood-cell  stroma,  and  is  not  due  to  true  complements.  We
know  that  according  to  Ehrlich's^  conception  the  stroma ta  of  the
red  blood-cells  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  living  protoplasm.    In  this


*  Ehrlich,  Zur  Physiologie  und   Pathologie   der  Blutscheiben,  Charity   An*
nalen,  Vol.  X,  1885.


SUBSTANCES  WHICH   ACTIVATE  COBRA   VENOM.  453

respect  the  demonstration  of  lecithin  in  the  stroma  would  appear  to
be  of  special  interest,  for  just  this  substance  is  regarded  as  particu-
larly important  for  the  functions  of  the  protoplasm.^

A  further  problem,  to  be  sure,  is  whether  this  lecithin  exists  free
in  the  red  blood-cells.  We  have  a  number  of  reasons  for  believing
that  this  is  not  the  case.  It  was  first  shown  that  in  yolk  of  egg
only  a  small  part  of  the  lecithin  can  be  shaken  out  with  ether,  whereas
by  extracting  with  alcohol  the  entire  amount  can  be  obtained.^  The
reason  for  this  is  that  the  greater  part  of  the  lecithin  is  conjugated
with  the  vitellin  of  the  yolk.  This  combination  can  be  obtained
as  a  globulin-like  body  which  is  soluble  in  salt  solution  and  precipitates
on  dialyzing.^

The  lecithin  is  obtained  free,  however,  only  after  extraction  with
alcohol,  by  which  the  vitellin  also  changes  and  becomes  insoluble
in  salt  solutions.  In  demonstrating  the  presence  of  lecithin  by
means  of  cobra  venom  we  too  have  observed  that  the  serum  and  the
red  blood-cells  yield  no  lecithin  to  ether,  or  if  they  do  it  is  only  in
faint  traces.  On  the  other  hand,  the  active  power  of  the  alcoholic
extracts  at  once  led  to  the  recognition  of  the  presence  of  lecithin.

From  this  point  of  view  some  of  our  earlier  observations  can
easily  be  explained.  We  stated  that  solutions  of  certain  species
of  blood-cells  were  strongly  activating,  while  others  showed  this
property  to  a  far  less  degree  or  not  at  all.  The  alcoholic  extracts
of  all  species  of  blood,  however,  contain  nearly  the  same  amount  of
lecithin  (demonstrated  by  the  activation  of  the  cobra  venom).  This
apparent  contradiction  is  readily  explained  by  the  fact  that  in  the
different  species  of  blood  the  lecithin  is  conjugated  with  different
substances  of  the  stroma ta  and,  furthermore,  that  the  firmness  of
this  combination  varies  extensively.  Thus  in  goat  blood  the  union
is  so  firm  that  the  avidity  of  the  cobra  venom  does  not  suffice  to
separate  the  two  components;  the  consequence  is  that  there  is  no
activation  with  a  solution  of  goat  blood.     On  the  other  hand,  in

^  It  has  long  been  known  that  lecithin  is  a  constant  constituent  of  the
red  blood-cells;  for  many  species  of  blood-cells  this  content  has  even  been
worked  out  quantitatively.  Nothing,  however,  was  thus  far  known  concern-
ing the  localization  of  the  lecithin.

'iSee  Hoppe-Seyler's  Handbuch  der  physiologisch-  und  pathologisch-chem-
ischen  Analyse,  Seventh  Edition,  edited  by  H.  Thierf elder,  Berlin,  1903,
page  157.

*  Ibid.,  page  369.


454


COLLECTED  STtlDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


guinea-pig  blood,  for  example,  the  lecithin  ia  so  lotwely  combined
that  this  blood  can  be  used  for  activation.  Hence,  in  si^eaking  ol
the  lecithin  action  of  nnimal  tissues  or  juices,  we  refer  only  to  the
lecithin  which  is  /rcc  (available)  in  the  senae  just  described,  pait
or  all  of  the  lecithin  present  may  escape  detection  by  means  of  the
activation  of  cobra  venom.

Ilie  fact  that  relatively  slight  alterations  can  cause  the  rombioa-
tion  of  lecithin  to  be  either  looser  or  firmer  may  be  of  some  interest
in  another  direction.  We  have  seen  that  the  lecithin  of  many  species
of  sera  becomes  free  only  at  65°  C,  while  the  haemoglobin,  on  tbe  other
hand,  anchors  the  lecithin  at  62"  C.  It  is  possible  that  during  life
slight  variations  in  the  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  tissues
(variations  which  have  heretofore  been  undetected)  play  an  important
r6le  in  the  sense  that  they  properly  regulate  the  exchange  and  trans-
portation of  the  lecithin  so  im[Xirtant  for  the  vital  functions.  Dieu-
donn^'s'  researches  show  that  the  albuminous  bodies  with  which
the  lecithin  is  combined  (principally  in  the  form  of  lecithalbumin)
are  demonstrably  modified,  even  at  temjieratures  still  quite  distant
from  their  coagulation  point.  This  author  showed  that  B.  eoli,  for
example,  when  inoculated  into  a  serum  lactose  solution  causes  a
distinct  precipitation  even  at  45°  C,  while  this  does  not  occur  at
37°  C.  In  the  ease  of  serum  albumin,  therefore,  the  temperature  at
which  this  modification  takes  place  is  very  near  the  temiwrature
which  occurs  in  the  living  organism  under  pathological  conditions
In  view  of  this  and  of  the  evident  dependence  of  the  physiological
behavior  of  the  lecithin  on  the  integrity  of  the  albumin  molecule
one  is  tempted  to  see  n  cau.sal  relationship  between  febrile  processes
and  disturbances  in  lecithin  metabolism.


111.   The  Inhibitory  Action  ot  Choteitterln.

The  marked  inhibitory  action  which  many  sera  exert  on  hemolysis
with  cobra  venom  and  lecithin  was  described  some  time  ago  (Kyes.
I.  c.)  and  the  opinion  then  expressed  that  this  protective  action  of  the
serum  was  probably  not  due  to  a  single  substance  but  was  the  resultant
of  several  factors.  Evidently  we  are  here  dealing  with  certain  rela-
tions which  exist  between  serum  constituents  and  the  lecithin,  making


'  DJeudonnfi,  Ubcr  das  Verliallen    dea  Baci    toll   i
Wn  Ciweiss.  liyg.  Ituadsch   11X)2,  No.  18.


dcnatuiit-


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.  455

it  impossible  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  the  latter  by  means
of  cobra-venom  haemolysis.^

Having  thus  learaed  that  cholesterin  exerts  a  marked  inhibiting
effect  on  the  action  of  lecithin  we  shall  probably  not  err  if  we
assume  that  part  of  the  serum  protection  is  due  to  the  choles-
terin present  in  the  sera.  One  thing  which  agrees  perfectly  with
this  assumption  is  the  fact  that  often  this  protective  action  is  still
present  after  heating  the  serum  to  100°  C.

The  marked  inhibition  of  hsemolvsis  on  the  addition  of  choles-
terin,  an  inhibition  which  applies  also  to  the  haemolysis  produced
by  lecithin  alone  when  in  large  quantities,  points  to  an  mteresting
antagonism  between  lecithin  and  cholesterin,  to  which  a  few  words
may  be  devoted.^  In  this  case  the  cholesterin  probably  has  a  rela-
tion to  lecithin  which  is  similar  to  that  of  saponin  in  Ransom's  well-
known  experiments.^  In  both  cases  we  seem  to  be  dealing  with  the
effect  of  a  kind  of  solvent  affinity  between  cholesterin  on  the  one
hand  and  lecithin  and  saponin  on  the  other,  by  means  of  which
affinity  the  presence  of  cholesterin  within  the  blood-cells  gives  rise
to  toxic  action,  and  outside  of  the  erythrocytes  exerts  a  protective
action.  It  is  possible  that  the  protection  observed  by  us  in  haemolytic
test-tube  experiments  with  cholesterin  is  in  some  way  connected
with  the  protective  action  of  cholesterin  against  snake  venom  in  the
animal  body  described  by  Phisalix.*  Another  fact  may  be  men-
tioned in  this  connection,  namely,  that  the  haemolysis  of  washed


^  On  the  other  hand  the  specific  protection  exerted  by  Calmette's  snake-
venom  immune  serum  is  not  an  antileclthin  effect,  but,  as  was  to  be  expected,
one  depending  on  the  action  of  the  antibody  produced  by  immunization  (anti-
amboceptors)  on  the  amboceptors  of  snake  venom.  When  varying  amounts
of  lecithin  were  employed  the  protective  action  of  Calmette's  serum  remained
constant,  always  neutralizing  the  same  amount  of  cobra  venom

'  We  may  add  that,  like  Noguchi  (The  Antihsmolytic  Action  of  Blood  Sera,
Milk,  and  Cholesterin  upon  Agaricin,  Saponin,  and  Tetanolysin,  etc.,  Univ.  of
Penna.  Med.  Bulletin,  Vol.  XV,  No.  9,  1902).  we  observed  a  very  marked  choles-
term  protection  against  the  action  of  tetanolysin.  (0.00025  cc.  of  our  stock
solution,  which  certainly  contains  not  more  than  1%  cholesterin,  protects  against
the  complete  solvent  dose  of  tetanolysin  (0.05  cc.)*)  On  the  other  hand,  choles-
terin is  absolutely  without  effect  on  the  hsBmolyses  due  to  staphytolysin  and
arachnolysin.  In  connection  with  this  we  might  mention  the  fact  so  inter-
esting biologically,  that  even  so  indifferent  a  substance  as  neutral  olive-oil  dis-
solves the  red  blood-cells.    This  haemolysis  is  likewise  inhibited  by  cholesterin.

'  Ransom,  Saponin  und  sein  Gegengift.  Deut.  med.  Wochenscb.  1901

^Phisalix.  Compt.  rend  de  la  Soc  de  Biologie,  1897


436


CULLhCTKlJ  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


guinea-pig  blood-tells,  in  themselves  susceptible  to  cobra  venom
alone,  is  also  inhibited  by  fholesterin.  To  be  sure,  rather  large  quan-
titiea  ot  the  latter  are  required,  but  in  view  of  the  lecithin  character
of  the  substances  which  functionate  as  endoactivators,  this  is  to  be
expected.     (See  Table  XI.)

TABLE  XI


Amounta  ol  lim
ChaJcBtgnn  BdLu-

1  EC  B%  Guinea  pi«
Blood  xcouas  CO.
1%  fobw  V.Qom.

1.0
0.5
0.25
0.1

0.05
0.035

0

0

Uttle

marked

almost  complete
complete

On  the  other  hand,  as  already  remarked,  cholesterin  exerts  littie
or  no  protection  against  cobra-venom  hemolysis  when  senira  com-
plement is  used  for  activation.  This  agrees  entirely  with  the  nega-
tive findings  on  the  protective  action  of  choleslerin  recently  reported
by  Flexner  and  Noguchi  in  an  interesting  paper  on  the  amboceptor,
toxoids,  and  separate  constituents  of  snake  venom.'

The  apparent  deviations  are  probably  to  be  explained  merely  by
the  different  conditions  of  the  experiments,  for,  as  it  appears  to
us,  these  authors  made  their  experiments  only  on  unwashed  blood-
cells  or  by  the  addition  of  serum.  In  both  cases,  however,  one  is
deaUng  with  an  activation  with  complement,  against  which  we  aJso
failed  to  delect  any  marked  protection  with  cholesterin.


IV.   The   Quantitative   Relations   ExlstfnK  Between    Cobra  Venom
and  Lecithin.

So  far  as  the  mechanism  of  cobra-venom-lecithin  hsmolysis  is
concerned,  we  assume  that  the  lecithin  acts  after  the  manner  of
complements,  being  anchored  by  certain  definite  groups  of  the  poison
molecule.     This  has  previously  been  described  by  Kyes,  1.  c.

Cobra  venom  and  lecithin  accordingly  combine  just  like  am-
boceptor and  complement  in  serum  hsemoiysins,  and  it  was  there-
tore  to  be  expected  that  the  quantitative  relations  which  exist  be-

'  Mexner  and  Noguohi.  The  Constitution  ol  titiake  Venom  and  Snake  Sera,
Univ  ol  PenDa.  Med,  Bulletin,  Vol.  XV,  No  9,  1903.


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.


457


tween  amboceptor  and  complement  would  be  very  similar  in  this
case.  In  our  studies  in  haemolysis  due  to  cobra- venom-lecithin  we
have  therefore  been  able  to  observe  the  same  mutual  dependence
between  amount  of  amboceptor  present  and  the  complement  re-
quired which  the  researches  of  von  Dungern,^  Gruber/*  and  Morgen-
roth  and  Sachs  ^  showed  to  exist  in  their  experiments.  The  rela-
tion between  these  amounts  is  such  that  when  large  amounts  of
amboceptor  are  present,  smaller  doses  of  complement  suffice  for
haemolysis.

To  be  sure,  when  an  inordinately  large  amount  ot  cobra  venom
is  added  the  amount  of  lecithin  required  for  complete  solution  is
also  larger,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  by  Kyes.  This  is  evi-
dently explained  by  assuming  that  when  the  amount  of  amboceptor
is  excessive  the  distribution  of  the  lecithin  is  such  that  part  of  the
amboceptor  loaded  with  lecithin  is  deflected  and  does  not  come
into  action.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  cobra  venom  is  decreased^
results  will  be  obtained  which,  within  wide  limits,  agree  with  those
observed  by  Morgenroth  and  Sachs  (1.  c.)  with  serum  haemolysins-
The  more  cobra  venom  one  adds  the  less  lecithin  will  be  needed  to  effect
complete  hcsm^lysis,  and,  conversely,  in  adding  larger  amounts  oi
lecithin  the  minimal  complete  solvent  do^e  of  the  cobra  venom  is
constantly  decreased.    This  is  well  shown  by  Table  XII.


TABLE  XII.


A.

1  cc.  5%  Ox  Blood.

B.
1  cc   6%  Ox  Blood.

Amounts  of  the

1%  Solution  of

Cobra  Venom.

The  Amount  of  Leci-
thin Solution  (0.025%)
Necefl«ary  for  Com-
plete Solution.

Amounts  of  the  0  025%
Lecithin  Solution.

The  Amount  ot  Cobra
Venom  (1%)  Neces
sary  to  Effect  Com-
plete Solution

0.01
0  001
0.00025
0.0001
0.00001

0.035

0.05

0.075

0.1

0.5

0.3

0.06

0.03

0.00001

0.0001

0.005

From  these  experiments  we  see  that  the  quantitative  relations
which  exist  between  cobra  venom  and  lecithin  furnish  an  additional


*  von  Dungem,  page  36.

'  Gruber.  Wiener  klin.  Wochensch.  1902,  No.  15.

'  Morgenroth  and  Sachs,  pages  233  and  250.


4oS  COLLECTED  STLTJIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

argument  for  the  view  that  cobra  venom  and  lecithin
amboceptor  and  complement.


V.  The  Susceptibility  of  tbe  Red  Blood-cells.

These  observations  show  that  in  comparing  the  susceptibility  ol
the  various  species  of  blood  to  cobra  venom  the  limit  of  activity  of
the  venom  must  be  determined  with  the  optimum  iiuantity  of  lecithin.
The  values  thus  obtained  may  be  regarded,  so  to  speak,  as  the  '"abso-
lute susceptibility"  of  the  blood-cells.  In  Table  XIII  the  minimal
complete  solvent  dose  is  determined  for  several  species  of  blood  on
the  addition  of  an  abundant  quantity  of  lecithin  (0.2  cc.  of  a  0.025%
lecithin  solution).

TABLE  XIIL


'F-.-™

Amount  of  t«.^iihiD.

'*™V«tm^;'"'"

Guinea-pig, . . .

Ox

Rabbit

Man

0.2cc.ota0.025%8o!.

0.00000005
0  OOOOOOI
0.00000025
0  0000005
0.000001

If  we  compare  these  values  with  the  susceptibility  of  the  variotia
blood-cella  with  cobra  venom  alone  (see  Table  XIV)  we  shall  see
that  when  the  latter  is  used  the  amount  of  venom  necessary  for
complete  hEPmotysis  is  many  times  greater  than  when  a  sufficient
amount  of  lecithin  is  added.  Thus  the  absolute  susceptibility  of
guinea-pig  blood  against  cobra  venom  +  lecithin  is  500  times  greater
than  that  obtained  without  the  addition  of  lecithin.

This  shows  also  that  although  guinea-pig  blood  heads  the  list
in  cither  case  there  are  marked  deviations,  so  far  as  the  other  bloods
are  concerned,  from  the  results  obtained  on  tbe  addition  of  lecithin.
Ox  blood,  for  example,  which  is  not  at  all  susceptible  when  lecitbio
is  lacking,  is  more  susceptible  than  either  rabbit  or  human  btood
when  lecithin  is  present.  Yet  the  two  latter  species  of  blood  are
dissolved  even  without  the  addition  of  lecithin.

We  thought  it  would  be  especially  interesting  to  study  the  sus-
ceptibility of  human  blood-cells  to  cobra  venom  in  various  diseases.
In  the  few  cases  thus  far  observed  (several  healthy  persons,  tm-o  casa


SUBSTANCES  WHICH   ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.


459


of  diabetes,  one  of  pneumonia,  and  one  typhoid)  we  were  unable  to
discover  any  essential  difference  in  susceptibility.^

TABLE  XIV.
Susceptibility  of  Various  Species  of  Blood  to  Cobra  Venom  Alone


Species  of  Blood  (1  co.  5%
SuBpennion ).

Amount  of  Cobra
Venom  Reauired  for  Com-
plete Unmolysia.

Froflf

0.00001
0.000025
0.000025
0.00C05
0  00025
0.00025
0.00025
0.0005
0.001
0.001
not  susceptible

DoK

Guinea-Die

Man

Rat

Pig

*  'o

Mouse

Goose

Rabbit

Horse

Ox,  sheep,  goat

As  a  result  of  our  extensive  researches  we  must  continue  to
uphold  the  view  that  blood  species  are  clearly  divisible  into  those
directly  susceptible  to  cobra  venom  alone  and  those  not  susceptible
under  those  conditions.  This  follows  also  from  the  above  table.  In
this  respect  our  observations  are  at  variance  with  the  recent  state-
ments of  such  excellent  workers  asFlexner  and  Noguchi.  It  may
be  well  therefore  once  more  to  point  out  a  few  possibilities  by  which
this  difference  can  be  explained.  Flexner  and  Noguchi  observed
that,  in  general,  after  cbpious  washing,  the  blood-cells  were  not  dis-
solved by  cobra  venom,  or  at  least  were  only  partially  dissolved.
In  spite  of  repeated  washing  of  the  blood  we  were  unable  to  discover
any  decrease  in  susceptibility.

If  Flexner  and  Noguchi  insist  on  such  a  thorough  washing  (6-10
times)  it  appears  to  us  that  it  can  no  longer  be  a  question  of  removing
the  serum  complements.  The  small  quantities  of  serum  which  are
contained  in  the  0.05  cc.  blood  employed  in  each  tube  in  the  test-
tube  experiment  (1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension)  are  entirely  too  small,
according  to  our  experience,  to  exert  a  demonstrable  complement


Mt  is  possible  that  investigations  in  other  diseases  will  lead  to  positive
results.  We  are  not  in  a  position  to  apply  our  observations  to  more  extensive
clinical  material,  but  shall  be  glad  to  supply  cobra  venom  for  this  purpose
to  any  one  applying  for  the  same.


460


COIXECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY


action  after  one  or  two  washings     We  are  therefore  more  inclined
to  assume  that  the  insusceptibility  observed  by  Flexoer  and  Noguclj
is  due  to  a  washing  out  of  the  activating  substances  present  in  th»
blood-cell.     One  of  ua  has  already  reported  such  extraction  phenom-
ena  (Kycs,  1.  c);   we  have,  however,  been  unable  to  repeat  the  a-  '
penments.      It  is  possible,   as   has  already   been   stated,    that  tbe  '
divergent  results  are  due  to  minute  differeucea  in   the  experiment,
differences  which  for  the  present  at  least  cannot  be  analyzed.    It
is  also  possible  that  a  certain  degree  o(  racial  divergence  in  the  blood-
cells  of  animals  of  the  same  species  used  by  Flexner   and   NogucM  '
and  by  uh  gives  rise  to  what  at  present  is  an  inexplicable  differeoo,]
In  the  blood-cells  employed  by  u.'*  the  activating  substances  couldl
not  readily  be  washed  out.     This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  acti-l
vating  substances  are  so  firmly  bound  to  the  protoplasm  that  tbef  '
are  not  separated  even  in  preparing  the  stromata.

Attention  is  also  called  to  the  antagonism  which  is  so  oftes
observed  between  blood-cells  and  their  own  serum.  Tbis  has  already
been  pointed  out  by  Kyes.  Thus  rabbit  blood-cells  are  dissolved
by  cobra  venom,  and  this  action  is  intensihed  by  the  addition  o*
rabbit  blood-cells  which  have  been  made  laky.  In  spite
however,  the  active  serum  of  the  same  rabbit  inhibits  cobra-
hfemolysis  (see  Table  XV),  In  this  case,  therefore,  adherent  trac^
of  serum  cannot  possibly  effect  autoactivation  of  the  rabbit  blood-
cells.

TABLE  XV.


dition  0*  j

of   th».J

ra-vennml

:nt  trawa  I


,4"x^1^-

Inj.  5%  R.bbil  Blood*

Cobra  Veoon  Alone.

^%M^^.VniJ:^'^

Cobra  Vennm-fOJUM.
Ribliil-MoadScUu-

O-I

0.05

0.025

0.01

0.005

0-0025

almoBl  0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0

0

complelo

^^^^cept


There  is  another  point  of  considerable  interest  in  connection  wil
these  questions,  one  very  important  for  the  technique.  The  em
ceptibility  of  the  washed  blood-cells  can  readily  be  overlooked  i


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.


461


many  cases  owing  to  the  occurrence  of  a  marked  inhibition  of  haemolysis
due  to  the  presence  of  an  excessive  amount  of  cobra  venom.

Kyes  (1.  c  )  has  already  discussed  in  detail  the  fact  that  in  hae-
molysis with  cobra  venom  alone  a  phenomenon  can  occur  which  is
analogous  to  the  deflection  of  complement  described  by  M.  Neisser
and  Wechsberg.^  In  rabbit  blood  we  have  observed  extensive  indi-
vidual differences  so  far  as  this  deflecting  phenomenon  is  concerned.
We  have  often  found  animals  whose  blood-cells  remained  undissolved
in  the  presence  of  even  a  very  slight  excess  of  cobra  venom,  so  that
it  was  necessary  to  have  just  the  right  amount  of  venom  in  order
to  effect  haemolysis.     Table  XVI  shows  several  examples  of  this.


TABLE  XVI.


Amounts  of  1%

1  cc  5%  Rabbit  Blood.

Cobra  Venom

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

cc

I,

II.

III.

IV.

1.0

0

— _

_^

0.5

faint  trace

—

—

0  25

little

—

0   1

complete

0

trace

complete

0  075

almost  0

complete

—

1 1

0  05

0

moderate

marked

n

0.025

0

0

complete

f  (

0.01

0

0

trace

If

0  005

0

0

0

strong

0 . 0025

0

0

0

trace

0.001

0

0

0

almost  0

0  0005

0

0

0

0

The  marked  deflection  which  is  observed  in  the  blood  of  rabbits  I,
II,  III  is  evidently  caused  by  a  relatively  slight  amount  of  activating
substances  present  in  and  at  the  disposal  of  the  red  blood-cells.  On
the  other  hand  the  different  behavior  of  other  bloods,  as  in  rabbit  IV,
shows  how  the  amount  of  free  lecithin  contained  in  the  blood-cells
can  vary  from  case  to  case.  It  might  pay  to  examine  the  blood
of  different  rabbits  for  this  purpose.


See  page  120.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


VI.  A  Few  Cbemlcal  Considerations.

Finally,  wc  should  like  briefly  to  discuss  some  of  our  experiencw
with  the  power  possessed  by  certain  other  substances  to  activate
cobra  venom.  In  view  of  its  content  of  lecithin,  it  will  not  surprise
us  to  know  that  bile  activates  cobra  venom.  It  may  be  interesting,
however,  to  learn  that  goat  milk  acquires  activating  properties  only
when  it  ha.1  previnui^ly  been  heated  to  100*  C.  This  behavior  corre-
sponds entirely  to  that  of  certain  species  of  sera  whose  lecithin  does
not  become  available  until  after  they  have  been  heated  to  65-1(10°,
Among  chemical  substances  we  have  found  a  number  of  fatty  acids
and  their  soaps,  chloroform,  and  olive  oil  able  to  activate  to  a  cer-
tain degree.  All  these  substances  by  themselves,  however,  dissnh'e
the  blood-cella  to  a  greater  or  less  degree '  and  the  increase  of  this
action  is  so  slight  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  we  can  here  speak
of  pure  activating  phenomena.^

According  to  our  experiences  only  one  more  substance,  namely,
the  lecithin-like  cephalin,  possesses  marked  activating  properties.
(Cerebrin  does  not  possess  them.)  For  this  cephalin  we  are  indebted
to  Waldemar  Koch  of  Chicago,  who  made  it  from  sheep's  brain.
According  to  him,  it  is  a  dioxyatearylmonomethyl  lecithin.^  The
cephalin  (which  is  insoluble  in  alcohol)  and  the  lecithin  (which  is
soluble  in  alcohol),  both  made  by  Koch  from  sheep's  brains,  further-
more two  other  preparations  of  lecithin  (one  from  Riedel  in  Berlin,
the  other  kindly  placed  at  our  disposal  by  Dr.  Bergell),  all  these
manifested  a  hcemolytic  action  {if  at  all)  only  in  500-600  times  the
amount  sufficient  to  activate  the  cobra  venom.

A  preparation  of  lecithin  derived  from  leguminous  seeds,  for
we  are  indebted  to  Prof.  Schulze  of  Zurich,  showed  leas  dif-
ference between   activating   power   and  ha-molytic  action,  but  evea


'  It  ia  po)uiibte  that  the  coclostable  lieiniolysina  (solulile  in  a  Icofaol-etfaer)
of  the  orgnD  extracts  belong  in  the  same  class  with  these  siibstaaces  (see
Korscbun  and  Morgenrolh,  page  267)

'  It  must  slwayfi  lie  bnrne  in  mind  that  the  activating  property  of  tlieae  suh-
etanccB  may  possibly  only  be  an  indirect  one,  the  presence  of  the  subatanoe
sufficing  to  make  available  the  lecithin  always  prcisetit  in  the  blood-cella  in
combination.

'  W  Koch,  Zur  Kenntniss  des  !.«cithina.  Cepbalins  iind  Cerebrins
Gubstan)!,  Zeitsch.  I  physiol  Chemie,  Vol.  36,  Nos  2  and  3,  1903.


SUBSTANCES  WHICH   ACTIVATE  COBRA  VENOM.  463:

in  this  the  ratio  was  still  1:200.  A  lecithin  obtained  from  E.
Merck  behaved  similarly.  Nevertheless  all  of  these  preparations
were  exactly  equal  in  their  activating  power.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether
possibly  the  cholin  radical  or  the  fatty-acid  radical  represents  the
active  toxophore  group  of  the  combination  formed  by  the  union  of
the  lecithin  with  the  cobra  venom.  It  may  be  mentioned,  however,
that  neutralized  cholin  exerts  no  haemolytic  effect,  and  that  sinapin  ^
(the  sinapic  acid  ether  of  cholin),  despite  the  cholin  radical  which  it
contains,  possesses  no  activating  power.  We  are  therefore  inclined
to  believe  that  the  toxic  action  is  caused  by  the  fatty-acid  radical
in  the  lecithin  molecule.  This  also  agrees  with  the  haemolytic  action
observed  by  us  in  neutralized  stearylglycerophosphoric  acid  and  in
the  above-mentioned  fats  and  fatty  acids.  We  shall  report  on  further
researches  in  this  direction  at  a  subsequent  period.

In  conclusion  we  may  be  permitted  to  discuss  briefly  a  few  inci-
dental observations.  Among  these  is  the  fact  that  hydrochloric  acid
not  only  causes  no  destruction  or  weakening  of  the  cobra  venom,
but  even  exerts  a  marked  protective  action  on  the  same.  A  venom
solution  which  completely  loses  its  activity  by  heating  to  100°  C.
for  twenty  minutes  can  be  heated  for  half  an  hour  to  100°  C.  without
losing  its  haemolytic  property  if  it  contains  ^/\%n  HCl.  Not  until
the  poison  containing  the  acid  is  heated  for  two  hours  to  100°  C.
is  destruction  complete.  Possibly  the  protection  exerted  by  the  acid
may  indicate  the  basic  character  of  those  binding  groups  of  the
cobra-venom  molecule  which  are  here  concerned.  So  far  as  the
influence  of  other  agents  on  the  cobra  venom  is  concerned  we  shall
only  mention  that  all  procedures  which  prevent  the  action  of  the
cobra  venom  in  the  animal  body  -  (an  action  due  mainly  to  the
neurotoxic  components  of  the  poison  ^)  also  destroy  the  haemolytic
action  of  the  venom.  Examples  of  this  are  powerful  oxidizing  sub-
stances (potassium  permanganate,  chloride  of  lime,  chloride  of  gold,
soda  lye,  etc.).


*  For  this  we  are  indebted  to  Gebeimrath  Schmidt  in  Marburg.
^  See  especially  the  detailed  and  excellent  investigations  of  Calmette.  Annales
de  rinst.  Pasteur.  T.  VIII.  1894.
'  See  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  1.  c.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


1.  The  property  of  certain  sera  to  activate  cobra  venom,  a
erty  which  is  lost  by  heating  the  sera  to  56°  C,  depends  on  the  preseoce
ol  complements  in  the  restricted  sense,

2.  Tlie  activating  property  of  blood  solutions  depends  on  the
lecithin  contained  in  the  red  blood-cells;  this  also  gives  rise  to  the
susceptibility  of  the  blood-cells  against  cobra  venom  done.  The
lecithin  which  cornea  into  play  is  a  constituent  of  the  stroraata.

3.  The  tact  that  blood  solutions  are  inactivated  by  heating  to
62°  C.  is  due  to  the  combination  at  this  temperature  of  the  lecithiB
with  the  btemoglobin;  suspensions  of  blood  stromata  are  not  inacti-
vated at  this  temperature.

4.  Choiesterin  inhibits  to  a  high  degree  hipmolysis  by  means  oJ
cobra  venom  alone,  and  of  cobra- venom-lecithin.  When  serum
complements  are  used  for  activation,  choiesterin  exerts  little  or  no
protective  action,

5.  Choiesterin  does  not  inhibit  haemolysis  due  to  BtaphylolynB
and  arachnolysin,  but  very  markedly  inhibits  that  due  to  tetfr-
nolysin  and  to  ohve-oil.

6.  The  quantitative  relations  between  cobra  venom  and  lenthln
correspond  to  those  of  amboceptor  and  complement;  the  more  cohta
venom  present  the  less  lecithin  will  be  required  for  hsemolysis.  and
vice  versa,  A  deflection  of  lecithin  does  not  occur  unless  verv  large
amounts  of  cobra  venom  are  used.

7.  Most  species  of  blood  are  susceptible  even  to  oobra  venom
alone.  The  "absolute  susceptibility"  determined  with  the  optimum
addition  of  lecithin  may  be  many  times  that  obtained  without  tbe
addition  of  lecithin,

8.  Hydrochloric  acid  exerts  a  marked  protection  on  cobra  venom
agajnst  destruction  through  high  temperatures.  Potassium  wr-
manganate,  chloride  of  lime,  chloride  of  gold,  soda  lye  deatroy  cobn
venom  (experiment  with  blood -f- lecithin).

9.  Bile  activates  cobra  venom;  milk  (goat)  only  after  it  has  prc-
I       viously  been  heated  to  100°  C,

I  10.  Fatty  acid,  soaps,  chloroform,  and  neutral  fats  have  a  hsemo-

I      lytic  action.     The  haimolytic  action  is  somewhat  increased  on  tie
I      addition  of  cobra  venom.
I  11,   Lecithin  and  cephalin,  on  the  other  hand,  exert  a  hremolytic


SUBSTANCES  WHICH  ACTIVATE  COBRA   VENOM.  465

action  on  the  ordinary  species  of  blood  only,  if  at  all,  when  200  or
600  times  the  amount  is  used  which  suffices  for  activating  the  cobra
venom.

12.  In  the  poisonous  combination  formed  on  the  union  of  cobra
venom  with  lecithin  the  fatty-acid  radical  may,  with  a  certain  degree
of  probability,  be  regarded  as  the  active  group.


XXXVI.   THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAKE    VENOM
LECITHIDS.'


Special  interest  attaches  to  the  study  of  snake  venoms  be-
cause of  the  analogy  which  exists  between  their  peculiar  charactef
and  that  of  bacterial  toxins.  All  investigators  who  have  worked  ftiih
this  subject  have  been  struck  by  this  analogy,  and  Phisalix  -  has  dis-
cussed it  in  a  special  monograph.  The  analogy  between  snake  venonis
and  bacterial  toxins  consists,  above  all,  in  the  fact  that  neither  are
crystallizable,  that  their  constitution  is  unknown,  that  both  are
highly  virulent  specific  products  of  poison-formiDg  cells,  and  both
possess  the  power  to  excite  the  production  of  antibodies  in  the
organism.  This  last  fact  we  know  from  the  fundamental  researches
of  Calmette.3

A  further  analogy  between  snake  venoms  and  the  toxins  is  the
fact  that  the  poisonous  properties  of  both  are  destroyed  bv  heat,
and  that  the  non-toxic  substance  thus  formed  is  able  to  excite  the
production  of  antibodies  just  as  well  as  the  original  substance.  In
other  words,  in  both  poisons  there  is  a  formation  of  toxoid.  Snake
venom  has  accordingly  played  an  important  role  m  the  theoretical
doctrine  of  immunity.  Martin  and  Cherry,*  for  example,  by  their
well-known  filtration  experiment  were  able  to  prove  that  snake  venom
and  sjrecific  antitoxin  unite  to  form  a  new  non-poisonous  combination.
This  experiment  is  based  on  the  principles  first  formulated  by  Ehrlich

'  Reprint  from  the  Berliner  Win.  Wochensch.  1903,  Nos.  42  43.
'  Phiaatix,  Etude  compare  dea  toxines  microbiennes  et  dea  -venins,  L'Annfe
biologique  I,  1805,

■  Calniette,  Ann.  de  I'lnatitut  Pasteur   No.  S,  1804.

■  Martin  and  Cherry,  Proceeding  of  the  Royal  Society,  Vol.  LXIII.  1808-

466


i^^^^H


THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.  467

in  his  studies  on  ricin  and  antiricin,  and  the  results  are  entirely  similar
to  Ehrhch's.^

Still  another  important  analogy  between  snake  venoms  and  bac-
terial poisons  consists  in  their  plurality,  a  fact  which  has  been  demon-
strated for  a  number  of  poisons.  In  the  ordinary  well-defined  chem-
ical poisons  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  the  diverse  toxic  phenomena
as  due  to  the  action  of  one  and  the  same  substance  on  different  organs.
(In  poisoning  with  corrosive  sublimate,  for  example,  the  diverse
toxic  phenomena  which  are  produced  in  the  various  organs.)  The
toxins,  however,  have  to  a  large  extent  shown  a  different  behavior^
the  action  on  different  organs  being  ascribed  to  different  kinds  of
poisons,  which  frequently  possess  different  haptophore  groups.  The
possibility  of  correctly  and  sufficiently  analyzing  these  poisons  de-
pends in  a  large  measure  on  Ehrlich's  theory  of  the  combination  of
these  poisons.  In  this  way  it  has  been  shown  that  tetanus  toxin
consists  of  at  least  two  components,  tetanospasmin  and  tetanolysin,^
to  which,  according  to  Tizzoni,  a  third  poison  must  be  added,  one
which  gives  rise  to  the  cachexia.

In  snake  venom  the  conditions  are  entirely  similar,  the  different
effects  which  it  produces  in  the  animal  body  being  due  to  the  presence
of  different  poisons  with  different  haptophore  groups.  The  late
lamented  Myers  ^  showed  that  the  haemolytic  property  of  snake  venom
is  to  be  separated  from  its  neurotoxic  property;  and  recently  Flexner
and  Noguchi*  have  shown  that  the  oedematous  swellings  produced
by  injections  of  snake  venom  are  due  to  the  presence  of  a  third  toxic
component  acting  on  the  endothelium.

For  some  years  I  have  closely  studied  cobra  venom,  and  especially
that  constituent  of  the  same  which  causes  solution  of  the  red  blood-
cells.  Part  of  these  researches  were  conducted  conjointly  with  Dr.
H.  Sachs.^  I  was  able  to  confirm  the  interesting  observation  of
Flexner  and  Noguchi  ®  that  the  snake  venom,  as  such,  did  not  act
on  certain  blood-cells,  but  that  haemolysis  occurred  only  when  a  second
substance  is  present  which  acts  after  the  manner  of  a  complement.

'  Ehrlich,  Fortschritte  der  Medizin,  1897.

'  Ehrlich  in  Madsen's  paper.  Zeitschrift  f .  Hygiene,  Vol.  XXXII,  1899.

'  Myers,  Journal  of  Pathology  and  Bacteriology.  1900.  VI,  405.

*  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  Univ.  of  Penna.  Medical  Bulletin,  Vol.  XV,  No.  9^
1902.

*  Kyes,  see  page  291 ;  Kyes  and  Sachs,  see  page  443.

*  Flexner  and  Noguchi,  Journal  of  Exp.  Medicine,  Vol.  VI.  No.  3.  1902.


468


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


By  following  up  a  very  important  observation  made  by  CA-
mette,'  that  the  complemeniing  action  of  a  serum,  in  conlrasi  4
what  IS  seen  with  ordinary  complements,  is  still  preserved  after  heatinf
to  62°  C,  we  succeeded  in  discovering  what  this  complementing
was,  and  proved  that  lecithin  was  able  to  activate  the  cobia  venom
amboceptor.  Especially  were  we  able  to  show  that  the  di'
behavior  of  the  various  species  of  blood-cells  (some  of  them,  ox  blood,
goat  blood,  sheep  blood,  are  not  dissolved  by  cobra  venom  alone,
while  others,  such  as  guinea-pig  blood,  rabbit  blood,  human  blood,
dog  blood,  are  dissolved  imder  these  circumatancea)  is  due  exclusively
to  the  lecithin,  only  those  blood-cells  being  dissolved  in  which  Iht
lecithin  is  so  loosely  bound  that  it  is  available  for  the  activation  d
the  cobra -venom  amboceptor.^

An  exact  study  of  these  activating  phenomena  by  means  of  lecithii
seemed  to  us  to  be  of  the  highest  importance  for  one  of  the  fundamoicai
problems  of  immunity,  namely,  the  mode  of  action  of  coinplemenl&
Every  one  who  has  had  any  large  experience  with  the  activation  d
ordinary  hemolytic  amboceptors  by  means  of  complements,  ani
who  compares  this  activation  with  that  of  cobra  venom  by  means  of
lecithin,  will  be  surprised  at  the  complete  similarity  of  both  processes,
and  will  not  doubt  that  essentially  the  same  mechanism  must  contrcl
both.  For  some  years  the  schools  of  Bordet  and  Ehrlich  have  had
a  sharp  conflict  of  opinion  concerning  the  explanation  of  the  furnl*-'
mental  facts  observed  by  Ehrlich  and  Mnrgenroth,  that  the  ambocvptv
is  anchored  by  the  red  blood-cells,  thus  making  the  blood-cells  si
ceptible  to  the  action  of  the  complements.  For  numerous
which  arc  given  in  the  earlier  studies,  Ehrlich's  school  assumes  thil


'  Calmette,  Compt.  rend,  de  I'Acad.  lies  Sciences,  T.  13-J,  No.  24.  ]902.

'  Some  time  ago  we  confirmed  the  ol>8ervation8  of  Flexner  and  Nogiicb^
thai  liltiod-cellB  utiausceptible  to  cobra  venom  alone  can  be  activated  by  c«ruia
fresh  sera,  aod  that  this  activatibiilty  ta  then  loat  on  heating  the  sera  to  56°  C
In  conformity  with  these  autbots  we  assumed  that  the  cobra  venor
alao  be  activated  by  true  complements.  At  present,  bowever,  we  have
rather  skeptical  as  to  the  correctness  of  this  explanation.  We  cannot  at  t
dismiss  the  assumption  that  the  action  is  an  indirect  one,  the  action  o(
•eriim  cauaing  the  lecithin  combination  in  the  red  blood-celU  to  become  loo
eo  that  then  this  substance  can  exert  its  activating  power  on  the  amboceptoE
This  iind"  further  support  in  several  observations  which  we  have  m&de  o
the  favoring  influence  of  certain  indifferent  substances  (oils,  pure  fa  I  ty  acid
on  hiemolyais  with  cobra  amboceptor  In  these  cases  the  cause  of  the  sdl
tion  can  only  be  a  change  in  the  churucter  of  the  lecithin  combinalioa.


THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAICE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.  469

complement  and  aralwceptor  unite  to  form  a  new  poisonous  combina-  '

tion,  and  this  is  the  view  which  I  also  lake,  Bordet,  however,  even
in  his  latestatudy'  asumes  that  there  is  nodirect  affinity  between  com-  ,

plement  (alexin)  and  amboceptor,  but  "que  la  sensibilatrice  modifie
I'fl^ment  de  manifire  i  iui  faire  acqu^rir  le  pouvoir  de  fixer  directement
I'alexine  avec  beaucoup  d'^nergie."

The  Frankfurt  Institute  has  furnished  a  number  of  important  argu-
ments tor  the  direct  union  of  amboceptor  of  complement.  Because
of  the  lability  and  great  number  of  the  complements  as  well  as  the
impossibility  to  isolate  the  active  product  chemically  it  was  out  of  the
question  to  furnish  direct  chemical  proof  for  these  views.  Nor  is  there
in  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge  any  hope  that  this  problem
will  bo  solved  in  the  near  future.  For  this  reason  we  rejoiced  in  the
discovery  that  in  lecithin  we  had  found  a  substance  pHJssessing
com  plement -I  ike  properties,  and  which  because  of  its  chemical
behavior  would  serve  to  settle  this  dispute.  '

In  other  words,  it  was  to  be  seen  whether  or  not  the  cobra  am-
boceptor combined  directly  with  the  lecithin  to  form  a  new  hiemolytic  l
combination.  If  it  did  not  do  so,  it  would  help  sustain  Bordet'a
view  that  the  union  of  the  cobra  venom  amboceptor  serves  only  to
give  the  lecithin  access  to  the  blood-cell.  From  the  following  studies
it  will  be  seen  that  the  decision  which  we  had  been  led  to  expect
as  the  result  of  our  biological  experiments  is  confirmed  by  chemical
means.

One  thing  especially  argued  for  the  correctness  of  our  conception,
namely,  the  fact  that  it  is  possible  to  inhibit  the  cobra  venom
hiemolysis  by  employing  very  large  amounts  of  cobra  amboceptor.
In  that  case  susceptible  blood-cells  which  can  be  dissolved  by  a
certain  definite  amount  of  cobra  amboceptor  are  no  longer  dissolved
if  many  times  this  amount  is  employed.  This  corresponds  to  the
phenomenon  which  we  observe  in  certain  bactericidal  sera,  and
which  according  to  Neieser  and  Wechsberg  is  due  to  a  deflection  of
complement  through  an  excess  of  free  amboceptor.  The  result  is
comprehensible  only  on  the  assumption  of  a  direct  chemical  affinity
between  amboceptor  and  complement.  For  this  reason  we  felt  that
it  would  be  of  the  greatest  interest  to  gain  a  clearer  insight  through

'  Mode  d'aclion  et  engine  dea  aubatnncefl  actives,  des  e*rutns  prSventifa
et  des  adrums  antiloxiquea.       Rapport   pr£seDt£  par  Jp  Bordet  au  CoDgrte  de  ■

t tomographic.  1903.  J


470  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY

chemical  means  into  the  analogous  deflection  of  complement  observed
with  cobra  amboceptor.


I.  Preparation  ot  Cobra  Leclthlds.

Owing  to  the  tenacious  character  anil  the  slight  solubility  of  lecithia
in  water  it  was,  of  course,  impossible  to  ulteinpt  to  effect  the  dcsirBd
combination  by  direct  mixture  of  the  a<]ueou8  solution  of  eobn
venom  with  lecithin.  On  the  contrary  it  was  necessary  to  adopt  ■
common  chemical  procedure,  "shaking  out,"  whereby,  through  the
agency  of  an  appropriate  solvent,  the  lecithin  could  combine  wilh
the  cobra  venom.  After  a  number  of  trials  wo  found  the  best  solvent
for  this  purpose  to  be  chloroform.

In  our  experiments  we  employed  dried  cobra  venoms  which  bad
kindly  been  placed  at  our  disposal  by  Dr.  I.amb  and  Dr.  Grtig  ol
Bombay,  and  Prof.  Calmette  ot  Lille.  The  lecithin  used  was  the
so-called  "I>ecithol"  nf  Ricflel,  and  later  on  "Agfa-lecithin"  of  the
Actien-Gesellachaft  fiir  Anilin-Fabrication.  Both  of  these  proved  tO'
be  excellent.  Special  emphasis  must  be  laid  on  a  sufficient  purity
of  the  lecithin.  For  our  purposes  this  is  best  recognized  by  tfsting,
it  against  red  blood-cells.  0.5  ce.  of  a  1%  solution  of  the  ledthin;
should  not  dissolve  red  blood-cells.  If  the  contrary  is  the  case  the
lecithin  should  be  purified  by  precipitating  it  once  or  twice  witfc
ace  ton. 1

Forty  cc.  of  a  1%  solution  of  cobra  venom  in  a  85%  salt  eolutios
are  mixed  with  20  cc.  of  a  20%  solution  of  lecithin  in  chloroform.
The  mixture  is  placed  in  a  bottle  holding  about  100  cc.  and  thor !
oughly  shaken  tor  two  hours  in  a  shaking  apparatus.  Thereupon
the  mixture  is  centrifuged  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour  in  an  elecinc
centrifuge  making  3600  revolutions  per  minute.  If  the  procedure'
has  been  successful  the  chloroform  layer  must  then  be  distinctly
separated  from  the  watery  portion,  only  a  very  slight  compact,'
cloudy,  intermediate  layer  being  present.  It  the  lecithin  is  not '
fiufBciently  pure  this  separation  will  not  take  place.  The  watery
portion  is  separated  from  the  chloroform  layer  by  carefully  pipetting
off   the   former.     The    chloroform    layer,    usually    measuring    about


'We  were  iilao  able  lo  activate  cobra  amhooeploi  with  a  broiii-|pcit]>i|)
n'hicb  Dr.  B«rKell  kindly  placed  at  our  disposal.  This  preparation  proved  torn
active  than  kcichin  but  it  evidently  posaesscs  the  power  to  unite  wUb  oobi*
amboceptor  to  form  a  iecithid.


THE  ISOLATION   OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.  471

19  cc,  is  then  mixed  with  five  times  its  volume  of  chemically  pure
€thcr  which  has  been  distilled  over  sodium.  A  precipitate  forms
consisting  of  the  desired  cobra  venom  lecithid,  while  the  lecithin
remains  dissolved  in  the  ether.

Precipitate  and  fluid  are  separated  by  means  of  the  centrifuge,
the  original  volume  of  ether  again  added,  shaken,  and  the  mixture
once  more  centrifuged  This  is  repeated  at  least  ten  to  twenty  times
in  order  to  remove  any  adherent  lecithin.  The  substance  thus  ob-
laincd  IS  the  cobra  venom  lecithid.

The  product  can  be  kept  for  a  long  time  under  ether,  apparently
undergoing  little  or  no  change;  or  it  can  be  carefully  dried,  through
which,  however,  it  suffers  some  change,  affecting  especially  its  solu-
bility but  not  its  action.  The  yield  of  dry  substance  is  quite  large,
1  grm.  of  dry  cobra  venom  yielding  about  5  grms.  dry  lecithid.^

After  having  worked  out  the  best  method  for  obtaining  the  cobra
lecithid  it  was  next  necessary  to  determine  by  biological  means
whether  the  product  isolated  by  us  showed  itself  through  its  specific
action  to  be  the  cobra-amboceptor-lecithin  combination  sought  for.
That  this  was  actually  the  case  could  be  proven  in  two  ways,
namely :

1.  By  showing  that  the  extracted  watery  fluid  has  lost  its  haemo-
lytic  property,  and

2.  By  showing  that  this  property  is  now  present  in  the  chloroform-
lecithin  solutions  (see  Table  I).

So  far  as  the  behavior  of  the  aqueous  solution  is  concerned  it  can
actually  be  shown  that  the  single  treatment  with  chloroform-lecithin
removes  all  but  traces  of  the  haemolytic  power,  and  that  a  repetition
of  the  procedure  suffices  to  remove  all  of  the  hemolytic  agent  from
the  watery  solution  Corresponding  to  this  we  find  that  the  haemo-
lytic  power  of  the  watery  solution  has  been  transferred  completely
to  the  chloroform-lecithin  portion,  a  fact  which  shows  that  the  leci-
thin has  united  with  the  cobra  venom  (Table  I).


'  If  one  has  but  very  little  of  the  primary  substance  at  one's  disposal  another
method  of  prepanng  the  lecithid  can  be  tried,  one  which  will  answer  at  least
for  preliminary  examinations.  1  cc.  of  a  4%  aqueous  solution  of  cobra  venom
is  mixed  with  1  cc  ot  a  20%  solution  of  lecithin  in  methyl  alcohol,  the  mixture
is  kept  in  an  incubator  for  several  hours  and  frequently  shaken;  then  10  cc.
absolute  ethyl  alcohol  are  added  and  the  precipitated  albuminoids  separated
by  filtration.  On  precipitating  the  clear  filtrate  with  ether,  one  obtains  the
lecithid.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


1  CO.  5%  Ox  Bu)OD+0.2  cc.  0  1%  Lecitbw.

B

B

c

&)b™  Veoon.

Cobn  Lecitlud

Native  0.001  ^„

8h!il™0™

^^^^^i

te.ai°;fK:-

cc.

(Coatr^olJ.""

Chloroionn
Lecithm

-£L

.„„_,.

1.0
0.75
0.5

com^plete

complete

nU

completa

<■

0,35

0,25

0.15

0,1

ftlraost  com  p.

0.075

marked

0.05

little

almost  oompleta

0  035

trace

almost  com  p.

0  025

almost,  oil

moderate

httle

0  01

nil

little

0  0075

trace

BlmoBi  nil

0.005

almost  nil

nil

0.0035

nil

0.0025

0  0015

"

—

••

Number  of  aorvent

doses    reckoned    on

the  total  original  vol-

ume o(  40  cc

268,000  to

267,000

800

0.0

266.000  to
267.000

Percentage  of  hEemoly-

ainsineuehHolulion.

100%

0.003%

0.0%

100%

The  asaunoption  that  the  cobra  amboceptor  is  extracted  by  chloro-
form alone  is  refuted  by  control  teste.

The  neurotoxic  action  of  the  native  poison  ia  entirely  absent  in
the  cobra  lecithid.  Relatively  large  quantities  of  the  lecithid  in
aqueous  solution  can  be  injected  subcutaneously  into  animals  with-
out producing  constitutional  symptoms.  For  example,  an  amount
of  lecithid  which  sufficea  to  destroy  200  cc.  mouse  blood  can  be
injected  into  mice  weighing  15  grms.  without  causing  any  further
symptoms  than  infiltration  at  the  site  of  injection.  In  like  mann^
rabbits  can  be  injected  subcutaneously  with  10  cc.  of  a  1%  solution
of  the  lecithid  without  causing  any  constitutional  symptoms.  In  thia
case,  however,  the  local  reaction  ia  extensive,  the  infiltrated  area
often  including  a  considerable  portion  of  the  abdominal  surface.


J


THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.


473


According  to  this,  therefore,  the  second  constituent  of  cobra
venom  does  not  pass  into  the  chloroform-lecithin.  In  this  reaped,
however,  we  have  been  able  to  demonstrate  that  the  watery  portion
which  has  practically  been  freed  from  the  ha^moyltic  amboceptor  still
possesses  its  toxic  properties  in  animal  experiments.  (See  Table  II.)
The  essential  difference  between  the  hamotoxin  and  the  neurotoxin,
first  pointed  out  by  Myers,  is  thus  confirmed  by  direct  chemical
means.


Comparative  Tbbt  op
Venom   (a)  Bbfohe  ^


3  Nbohotoxic  Action  o»  a
I  (b)  AfTER  Shaking  the  <
ra  Chlohoform-Lbcithin.


0.01ft  Venom.

(a)  Native   Venom.

tfr)  E.t™=tecl  Venom.

0.5
0,35
0  25
0.15
0  12
0  1

t  after  2  hours
t     '•     2^0"™

I  ::  ^!  ::

t    '■    30-40  hours
living

'

aft«r  1  hour

"     1)  hours

■•       ihour

"     8  hours

■'     30-40  hours
living

II.  The  Properties  of  Cobra  Leclthids.

In  the  description  of  cobra  lecithid  we  shall  do  beat  to  keep  to
the  product  obtained  by  the  method  above  described,  the  last  traces
of  lecithin  having  been  removed  from  the  ethereal  precipitate  by
repeated  washing  with  ether,  and  the  main  portion  of  the  ether  in
turn  removed  by  pressing  the  precipitate  between  two  folds  of  filter-
paper.

This  primary  product  is  insoluble  in  aceton  and  ether,  but  soluble
in  chloroform,  in  alcohol  (cold),  and  in  toluol  (on  heating).  The
solutions  in  chloroform  and  in  alcohol  are  precipitated  by  the  addi-
tion of  ether  and  aceton.  When  stiil  moist  with  ether  it  dissolves
very  readily  in  water,  a  point  of  some  importance.  Even  if  the
ether  which  the  product  contains  is  rapidly  evaporated  by  means
of  a  current  of  air  and  the  product  then  dissolved  in  water  an  abso-
lutely clear,  light-yellow  solution  will  be  obtained.

These  facts  show  that  the  primary  product  is  absolutely  different
from  the  two  substances  from  which  it  was  derived,  cobra  ambo-
ceptor and  lecithin.     It  differs  from  lecithin  particularly  in  its  insolu-


474  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMX7NITY

bility  in  ether  and  its  ready  solubility  in  water;  from  cobra  venom
amboceptor  in  itH  fiolubility  in  the  above-mentioned  organic  solvenu.
alcohol,  chloroform,  toluol.  Cobra  venom  does  not  give  up  even  x
trace  of  cobra  amboceptor  to  these  solvents.

It  has  been  found  that  the  watery  solution  of  the  primary  coIks
lecithid  obtained  from  cobra  venom  and  lecithin,  as  described  ttbo\"e,
undergoes  spontaneous  modification  which  leads  to  the  formation
of  an  insoluble  substance.  If  the  watery  solution  is  allowed  to  stand
at  room  temperature  it  gradually  becomes  cloudy,  and  in  the  course
of  a  few  hours  a  whitish  precipitate  is  formed.  On  removing  this  pre-
ciliitate,  either  by  filtration  or  by  centrifuge,  a  precipitate  will  again
form  in  the  clear  fluid.  The  sediment  Ls  microcrystalline,  white,  trans-
parent, and  very  refractile.

It  can  easily  be  shown  that  this  sediment  is  nothing  but  a  modified
form  of  the  lecithid,  for  after  thoroughly  washing  the  precipitate
which  has  been  separated  by  the  centrifuge,  it  will  lie  found  thai
this  still  exerts  its  full  ha;molytic  action.  In  accordance  with  this,
the  original  solution  of  the  primary  product  shows  a  proportionate
loss  of  power.  In  one  experiment  which  we  followed  rather  elosclr
we  found  that  in  course  of  time  about  two-thirds  of  the  lecithid  had
separated  out  in  solid  form,  while  one-third  was  stil!  left  in  solution.
The  aecondani  lecithid  produced  in  this  way  is,  as  already  stated.
almost  insoluble  in  cold  water;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  readily  soluble
in  warm  water,  although  it  again  separates  on  cooling.  This  Ix-
havior  constitutes  the  chief  difference  between  the  primary  and  the
secondary  lecithid;  the  behavior  of  the  two  substances  toward  the
above-mentioned  organic  solvent  is  identical.

Owing  toitscharacter  the  secondary  lecithid  is  particularly  adapted
for  chemical  investigations,  and  one  of  the  foremost  authorities  has
already  commenced  work  on  this  substance.  Some  imiiortant  results
which  have  already  been  obtained  will  be  mentioned  later  on.  For
the  present  we  shall  merely  mention  that  the  product  gives  no  biuret
reaction  even  when  in  concentrated  solutions.  We  are  reserving  for
future  study  the  chemical  study  of  the  above  lecithids,  as  well  as  the
investigation  of  the  neurotoxin  obtained  in  purified  form  by  means
of  the  method  above  described.

The  formation  of  the  secondary  lecithid  also  occurs  if  the  ethereal
precipitate  is  dried  at  incubator  temperature.  It  is  then  easy  to  see
that  such  a  product  has  more  or  less  completely  lost  its  solubility  in
water,  especially  if  it  has  remained  in  the  thermostat  for  several  days.


THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.  475

In  its  properties  the  insoluble  portion  corresponds  entirely  with  the
secondary  lecithid  precipitate  from  aqueous  solutions.  To  obtain
the  secondary  lecithid  as  a  pure  product,  however,  the  method  first
mentioned  seems  preferable,  namely,  that  which  starts  with  the  aque-
oas  solution  of  the  primary  substance ,  the  result  seems  to  be  a  lighter-
colored  product.

It  is  natural  that  this  lecithid  when  finished  differs  in  its  action
in  many  ways  from  the  cobra  amboceptor.  It  can  readily  be  under-
stood that  the  cobra  lecithid  acts  on  the  blood-cells  of  all  the  species
thus  far  examined,  no  matter  whether  these  cells  possess  available
lecithin  or  not.  One  fact  of  considerable  interest  has  been  discov-
ered, namely,  that  the  absolute  quantity  of  lecithid  necessary  for
hirmolysis  is  the  same  for  the  blood -cells  of  different  species.  We
found  that  an  amount  of  lecithid  which  corresponded  to  about  0.003
mj^.  dry  cobra  venom  was  able  to  dissolve  1  cc.  of  a  6%  suspension
of  blood -cells  of  different  species  (guinea-pig,  rabbit,  man,  ox).  This
quantity,  we  may  add,  corresponds  to  the  amount  of  cobra  venom
which  causes  solution  of  the  blood-cells  in  the  ordinary  test  when  a
large  excess  of  lecithin  is  present.

An  observation  which  is  also  of  considerable  interest  is  a  com-
parison of  the  time  necessary  for  the  action  of  the  cobra  lecithid  and
the  amboceptor,  with  and  without  the  addition  of  lecithin.  In  our
previous  papers  we  pointed  out  that  when  cobra  venom  is  allowed
to  act  on  susceptible  blood-cells,  solution  occurs  after  a  considerable
period  of  incubation,  so  that  in  case  a  minimal  quantity  is  employed
12  to  18  hours  (two  hours  at  37°,  then  at  8°)  elapse  before  complete
solution  is  effected.  Even  if  a  suitable  excess  of  cobra  venom  and
the  most  susceptible  species  of  blood  are  employed,  at  least  10  to
30  minutes  will  usually  elapse  before  solution  is  completed.  Similar
differences  are  observed  if,  as  previously  described,  we  allow  cobra
venom  and  lecithin  to  act  on  unsusceptible  blood-cells.  In
that  case,  again,  with  minimal  quantities  of  lecithin  and  ambo-
ceptor 6  to  18  hours  are  necessary  to  effect  solution;  this  time
is  decreased  if  large  excesses  are  employed,  but  solution  is  never
instantaneous.

In  contrast  to  this  a  marked  decrease  in  the  period  of  incubation
is  observed  if  the  finished  lecithid  is  used,  solution  being  instantaneous
on  the  employment  of  cencentrated  solutions.  The  shortening  in
the  time  necessary  for  solution  becomes  particularly  marked  when
small  doses  of  the  lecithid  are  used,  solution  commencing  at  once


476


COLLECTED  STUDIES  !N  IMMUNITY


and  bDing  completed  within  !5  to  20  minutes.     In  other  words,  Ihe
increase  lo  the  rapidity  of  the  prot-ess  is  about  twenty-fold.

This  behavior  is  sigaificant,  for  it  shows  that  in  this  case  the  period
of  incubation  is  due  not  to  a  slow  action  of  the  anchored  toxophore
group  (lecithin),  but  exclusively  to  the  slow  development  of  the  real
toxic  agent,  the  lecithid.  The  difference  in  the  time  of  action  in  the
case  of  small  and  large  doses  is  in  accordance  with  the  well-known
law  that  the  reaction  (in  this  case  the  union  of  cobra  ambocepUir
and  lecithin)  proceeds  more  rapidly  in  concentrated  solutions  tbaa
in  weak  ones,

TABLE  IIL


I  oa.  5%  Ox  Blood

AlDDUDI*  Ol

^b^«'u''B.rf™i.'t'"^

Solution  ■

""bliu^ltSn?™?"'

Doana  wilh  the  Addi-

L«ilhid.Kbaui

tion  oi  Ledithin.

Do«i.

1)  SolVBDl  OoKS

0.1

0

0

0

0  075

0

0

0

0.05

0

0

o

0  035

0

0

0

0  025

0

0

0

0015

0

almoBt  0

0  01

0

trace

0  0075

0

little

Utile

0  005

almost  0

moderate

moderate

0.0035

irace

marked

marked

0  0025

little

almost  complete

almost  compJel*
complete

0  0015

iMjmplela

0  001

marked

0  00075

0  0005

0  00035

0  00025

almost  complete

0  00015

complete

"

A  third  difference  between  cobra  amboceptor  and  the  finished
lecithid  is  seen  in  the  behavior  toward  high  temperature.  The  aqueous
solution  both  of  the  primary  and  the  secondary  cobra  lecithid  is
far  more  stable  than  solutions  of  the  amboceptor  alone.  The  former
can  be  heated  to  100°  C.  for  six  hours  without  any  particular  loss  in
power,  while  the  amboceptor  of  cobra  venom  loses  its  action  if  heated
to  100°  C.  for  only  thirty  minutes.    Obviously  this  is  to  be  explaioed


J


THE  ISOLATION   OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.  477

by  assuming  that  the  combination  has  become  firmer  by  the  entrance
into  it  of  the  lecithin  molecule.

There  is  a  fourth  pomt  of  difference,  the  behavior  toward  the
snake-venom  serum  discovered  by  Calmette.  The  finished  lecithid
is  affected  far  less  by  this  serum  than  is  the  cobra  amboceptor.  We
shall  discuss  this  in  a  later  article.

In  contrast  to  these  differences  the  behavior  of  cobra  lecithid  and
cobra  amboceptor  -f  lecithin  toward  cholesterin  is  similar.  We  have
already  mentioned  that  cholesterin  possesses  the  power  to  inhibit
the  haemolysis  by  means  of  cobra  venom.  The  same  is  true  in
haemolysis  by  means  of  the  finished  lecithid,  although  quantitatively
to  a  less  degree.     (See  Table  III  opposite.)

IV.  The  Leclthlds  of  Several  Other  Potoons.

Naturally  it  was  of  considerable  interest  to  see  whether  this
peculiar  formation  of  lecithid  (thus  far  without  parallel  in  chemistry)
was  confined  to  cobra  venom,  or  extended  also  to  other  poisons.  The
following  poisons,  which  we  owe  to  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  Lamb,  Prof.
Calmette,  Dr.  Kinyoun,  Dr.  Dowson,  and  Prof.  Kitasato,  have  there-
fore been  studied  by  us  for  this  purpose:

1.  Bothrops  lanceolcUus;

2.  Daboia  Rvssellii;

3.  Naja  haye;

4.  Kerait;

6.  Bungarus  fasciatus;

6.  Trimeresurus  anamalensis  (Hill  viper) ;

7.  Trimeresurus  Rivkivxirvus  (Japan) ;

8.  Crotalus  adamantus.

In  a  subsequent  article  we  shall  discuss  the  behavior  of  these
poisons  toward  different  species  of  blood-cells.  For  the  present,  how-
ever, we  may  say  that  all  of  these  poisons,  on  the  addition  of  suffi-
cient lecithin,  dissolve  the  blood-cells  examined  by  us,  namely,  those
of  man,  guinea-pig,  rabbit,  ox.  With  the  exception  of  two  poisons
(Bothrops  lanceolatus  and  Trimeresurus  anamalensis)  the  absolute
quantity  of  poison  necessary  to  effect  solution,  an  excess  of  lecithin
being  present,  is  about  the  same  for  all  species  of  blood  examined;
0.003  grm.  are  sufficient  to  dissolve  1  cc.  of  a  5%  suspension.    The


47S  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

Botlirops  poison  is  ten  times  weaker,  and  that  of  Trimcresitnu  anavia-
Itnsis  twenty-five  times.  This  observation  made  the  formation  of
a  lecitliid  seem  probable.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  easy,  by  means
of  the  method  above  described,  to  prepare  a  solid  lecithid  which
contained  the  entire  hiemoiytic  power  of  the  poisons.*  Hence  we
believe  that  in  general  ail  hjemolytic  snake  venoms  are  of  the  -un-
Ixiceptor  type  and  [wssess  a  leeithinophile  group,  the  occupation  of
which  by  lecithin  gives  rise  to  the  hemolytic  action.  In  fact  it
seems  ^  though  in  the  last  analysis  the  factor  which  determines  the
type  of  the  hiemoiytic  action  of  snake  venom  was  principally  this
lecithinophilc  group.

A  fact  which  goes  to  support  this  view  ia  the  observation  that
several  of  the  poisons  examined  by  us  probably  differ  in  their  hapto-
phore  group,  which  unites  with  the  receptor  of  the  blood-cellB.  Thus
f-amb^  has  shown  that  the  Daboia  amboceptor,  unlike  the  cobra
amboceptor,  is  not  inhibited  in  its  action  by  Calmette's  serum.  The
same  ia  true  for  Bothrops,  Crolalus,  and  Trimeresurits  Rivkiuanu*.
whereas  the  poisons  of  Bungarus  and  .VajVi  haye  are  aimilar  to  the
cobra  venom  so  far  as  their  behavior  toward  the  serum  is  concerned.

It  is  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  the  differences  in  the  various
types  of  poison  are  only  differences  in  the  haptophorc  group,  white
the  characteristic  lecithinophilc  group  is  identical  in  all  cases.

It  was  important  to  see  whether  in  animals  other  than  snaks
poisons  are  present  which  are  capable  of  forming  lecithids.  We
therefore  next  studied  the  poison  nf  the  scorpion,  choosing  thi»
because  Calmette  ^  had  already  shown  that  the  acute  fatal  action
of  scorpion  poison  could  be  inhibited  by  the  snake-venom  serum,
a  fact  indicating  a  certain  analogy  between  the  toxic  components
of  scorpion  poison  and  snake  venom.*  We  were  able  to  determine
that  the  scorpion  poison  by  itself  exerts  only  a  slight  hosmolylic
action  on  guinea-pig  blood-cells,  leaving  other  species  of  blood-cells
unaffected.     On   the  addition   of   lecithin,   however,   it  exerts   con-

'  In  conformity  with  its  weaker  action  Bothropi  poison  fields  only  a  l«ntb
the  lecitbid  obtained  Erom  the  other  poisons,  and  Ibe  poison  of  Trimtrt»%Bru»
anamoltTtrnt  aniy  one  twenty-fitth.

■  Lamb,  Scientific  MemoirH.  Medical  and  Sanitary  Depts.,  Govt,  of  India,
1903,  No.  3.

'  Calmette,  Ann.  de  I'lnstit.  Pasteur,  189.'i,  No.  4.

'  For  this  scorpion  poison  we  are  much  indebwd  to  Prof.  Treub.  Director  o(
the  Botanical  Garden  in  Buiteniorg.


THE  ISOLATION  OF  SNAKE  VENOM  LECITHIDS.


479


siderable  solvent  action  on  all  the  different  species  of  blood  examined
by  us.  Its  action  is  about  one  twentieth  as  strong  as  that  of  cobra
venom.     (See  Table  IV.)

TABLE  IV.
Action  op  Scorpion  Poison  wfth  and  without  the  Addhion  of  LscrrHiN..


AmouDtB  of  the  0.2%

1  CO-  5%  (

Ox  Blood.

Solution  of
Scorpion  Poison

cc.

+  0  2oc.0.1%

Control  without

Lecithin.

Lecithin.

1.0

complete

0

0.75

0

0.5

0

0  35

0

0  25

0

0.15

0

0.1

0

0  075

0

0.05

0

0  035

0

0  025

0

0.015

almost  complete

0

0  01

moderate

0

0.0075

little

0

0  005

trace

0

0.0035

ti

0

0  0025

faint  trace

0

0.0015

0

0

Corresponding  to  this  behavior  we  succeeded  in  actually  pro-
ducing a  typical  lecithid  from  scorpion  poison  by  following  the  usual
procedure.  1

All  this  leads  us  to  the  view  that  the  essential  character  of  the
hacmolytic  cobra  venom  is  due  not  to  the  haptophore  group,  but
finally  to  the  lecithin  anchored  by  the  blood-cells  by  means  of  a
lecithinophile  amboceptor.  Now  we  know  that  lecithin  is  present
in  every  red  blood-cell,  and  this  seems  apparently  to  contradict  the
fact  determined  by  us  experimentally  that  the  lecithin  is  the  cause
of  haemolysis.  This  contradiction,  however,  is  merely  apparent,
for  we    need  only  assume  that  by  the   aid  of   the  cobra  venom


'  It  is  probable  that  the  poison  of  a  fish,  Trackinus  draco  (see  Briot,  Journ.
de  Physiol,  et  de  Pathol.  g6n.  1003,  No.  2),  is  also  capable  of  forming  a  lecithid;
at  least  a  statement  of  Briot  speaks  in  favor  of  this,  namely,  that  the  hsemolytia
agent  in  the  Trachinus  poison  can  be  activated  by  a  serum  which  has  been
heated  to  more  than  60^  C.


480  CX)LLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

the  lecithin  is  brought  into  proximity  with  cell  constituents  other
than  those  normally  in  its  proximity.  In  other  words,  we  are  dealing
with  the  deleterious  action  of  a  vitally  important  substance  which
has  been  forced  into  the  torong  place.  This  conclusion  is  made  plain
if  we  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  in  the  blood-cells  primarily  suscep-
tible to  cobra  amboceptor,  the  hsemolytic  action  depends  not  on  the
addition  of  new  lecithin,  but  on  a  transposition  of  the  lecithin  pre*
formed  in  the  cell,  due  to  the  anchoring  of  the  cobra  amboceptor.


XXXVII.    THE  CONSTITUENTS   OF  DIPHTHERIA

TOXIN.*

By  Paul  Ehrlich.

The  Festschrift,  published  at  the  opening  of  the  Serum  Institute
in  Copenhagen,  contains  a  study  by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen^  which
deals  mainly  with  the  neutralization  phenomena  of  toxin  and  anti-
toxin. We  must  all  rejoice  that  Madsen  has  succeeded  in  interest-
ing so  excellent  a  physical  chemist  in  this  question,  especially  as  I
had  tried  unsuccessfully  for  years  to  secure  the  interest  of  physical
chemists  in  Germany.  In  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge
we  shall  for  the  present  have  to  give  up  our  attempts  to  isolate  the
toxins  in  pure  form.  For  the  same  reason  also  in  the  analysis  of  the
relations  between  toxin  and  antitoxin  we  cannot  conform  to  the
ordinary  methods  of  the  chemist  working  with  the  balance.  On  the
other  hand,  the  study  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  is  of  too  great  practical
importance  for  us  to  wait  idly  for  years  or  decades  until  chemistry
is  so  far  advanced.  We  must,  therefore,  content  ourselves  with  the
slight  means  at  our  disposal,  applying  these,  however,  in  all  direc-
tions in  order  to  gain  as  great  an  insight  into  this  complicated
subject  as  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  permits.  I  had  ap-
plied myself  to  this  problem  for  years  and  come  to  the  conclusion
that  the  only  way  to  approach  it  was  by  an  exact  quantitative  study
of  the  neutralization  phenomena.  Particularly  in  partial  neutraliza-
tion I  believed  I  had  found  a  method  by  which  we  could  gain  an
insight  into  the  most  intricate  constitution  of  the  toxins.  To  my
regret  high  authorities  pronounced  this  method  as  incorrect  and  of
no  avail.     I  am  all  the  more  pleased,  therefore,  to  see  that  so  high


*  Reprint  from  the  Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.  1903,  Nos.  35-37.

'  S.  Arrhenius  and  Th.  Madsen,  Physical  Chemistry  applied  to  Toxins  and
Antitoxins,  Festkrift  ved  indvielsen  af  Statens  Serum  Institute,  Kopenhagen,
1902.     (This  is  to  be  had  in  English  text,  Kopenhagen,  1902.)

481


4S2  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

&a  authority  as  Arrhcnius  recognizes  my  method  as  correct  in  prin-
ciple aad  proceeds  along  the  same  lines.

The  study  of  .\rrhenius  and  Madsen  deals  principally  witK  tetano-
lysin,  the  hspmolytic  poison  discovered  by  me  in  tetanus  toxin.  Telaoo-
lysin  and  tetanospasmin  differ  from  each  other  in  their  baptupboie
groups,  as  a  result  of  which  each  possesses  a  particular  antitxxJy
in  the  tetanus  serum  of  the  market.  Madsen  studied  this  letano-
lysin  in  my  Institute,  and  found  that  when  it  is  gradually  nentrahzcd
with  increasing  amounts  of  antitoxin,  the  same  definite  amounts  of
antitoxin  first  added  neutralize  far  more  poison  than  subsequent
additions.  Because  of  this  and  also  because  of  other  reasons  (atten-
uation, phenomena  during  neutralization)  Madsen  concluded  thU
several  poisons  of  different  affinities  were  present.

On  taking  up  these  studies  in  tetanolysin  Arrhenius  and  Madges
obtained  practically  the  same  results,  and  these  authors  succeeded
in  constructing  a  formula  for  the  action  of  an ti tetanolysin  on  telanfv  _
lysin  which  conforms  to   the  law  of  Guldljerg-Waa^e.      Ba^ed  oo  I
this  they  next  attempted  to  determine  similar  relations  in   the  rase  I
of  very  simple  blood  poisons.     This  had  already  been  done  by  Danyat,  ■
but  the  method  was  open  to  criticism.     Arrhenius  and  Madsen  i-Uoee
a  weak  base  and  an  acid  (ammonia  and  boric  acid)  as  haimolysin
and  antihffmolysin.     It  was  found  that  in  these  the  neutralizaliMi  .
phenomenon  is  very  similar  to  that  of  tetanolysin  and   antih'sin,  I
from  which  they  concluded  that  in  the  neutralization  of  toxins  and!
antitoxins  we  are  dealing  with  reactions  between  simple  substa,nc<il
of  weak  affinities.

In  this  connection  they  express  themselves  as  follows:  "The
last-mentioned  curve  gives  a  fairly  accurate  picture  of  the  neutralixa-
tion  of  ammonia  with  boric  acid.  In  the  investigation  of  ammonifc
aa  haemolysin  a  spectrum  analogous  to  that  of  toxin  or  tetanolysin
(Fig. 3)  could  have  been  constructed;  the  following  conclusion  could
al.so  perhaps  have  been  drawn:  One  part  of  boric  acid  (antitoxin)
added  to  ammonia  neutralizes  6f)%  of  this  base;  if  two  parts  ate
added  it  neutralizes  fi6.7%;  if  three  parts.  75%;  and  four  partSi
809(,.  From  this  it  follows  that  since  the  respective  amounts  3(^
16.7,  8.3,  and  5%  are  each  time  neutralized  by  the  same  amount
of  boric  acid,  the  amount  first  neutralized  is  three  times  as  toxic
the  amount  next  neutrahzed,  this  again  twice  as  toxic  as  the  nexl
after  it,  which  in  its  turn  is  one  and  one-half  times  as  toxic  as  tlM
following,  etc.     In  other  words,  ammonia  is  not  a  simple  subetani


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  483

but  consists  of  several  constituents  of  different  toxicity  (and  these
toxicities  bear  a  simple  reciprocal  relation  to  each  other).  Of  these
constituents  the  toxin  possessing  the  highest  chemical  affinity  is
neutralized  first.

A  similar  conclusion  has  actually  been  drawn  in  the  case  of  toxin ;
the  toxin  first  neutraUzed  (the  strongest)  has  been  called  prototoxin,
the  next  deuterotoxin,  the  next  tritotoxin,  etc.  The  final  very
weak  toxins  are  called  toxones."

The  findings  of  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  are  thus  seen  to  be  directly
opposed  to  my  statement  that  diphtheria  poison  is  composed  of
several  constituents.  In  view  of  the  exceeding  importance  of  the
subject  I  cannot  avoid  entering  the  discussion  and  state  the  reasons
which  cause  me  to  maintain  my  views  absolutely  and  without  any
modification.^

The  new  views  of  the  authors  in  question  will  doubtless  lead  many
to  wonder  how  1  could  err  in  so  simple  a  matter  and  employ  compli-
cated theories  when  the  simplest  conceptions  of  chemistry  would  have
sufficed.  It  must  seem  strange  that  I,  who  have  followed  this  sub-
ject for  years  and  have  busied  myself  especially  with  chemical  studies,
should  have  failed  to  discover  this  very  ready  explanation.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  however,  I  too  began  with  the  conception,  now  held
by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen,  that  in  the  union  of  toxin  and  antitoxin
we  were  dealing  with  a  phenomenon  of  incomplete  neutralization.  A
more  thorough  analysis  of  diphtheria  poison  (my  publications  refer
only  to  this  poison)  compelled  me,  however,  to  adopt  more  complex
explanations.

At  the  very  outset  of  my  investigations  I  discovered  that  tetano-
lysin  and  its  antitoxin  possess  weak  affinities,  and  1  devised  the  tech-

*  G ruber,  whose  experiments  especially  devised  to  refute  my  theory  1  was
able  to  show  were  incorrect,  has  employed  the  opportunity  to  side  with
Arrhenius  and  Madsen,  and  to  announce  that  their  observations  ''will  give
this  entire  spook  of  side-chain  theory  its  quietus."  No  one  who  knows  any-
thing about  this  subject  needs  be  told  that  the  question  as  to  whether  diph-
theria poison  is  made  up  of  one  or  more  substances  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
side-chain  theory.  When  1  formulated  this  theory  1  too  believed  the  diph-
theria poison  to  be  a  simple  substance,  and  when  subsequently  1  felt  compelled
to  differentiate  several  components  in  the  poison  1  always  emphasized  that
the  separate  components  differed  only  in  their  toxophore  group  and  were
similar  so  far  as  the  haptophore  groups  were  concerned,  the  groups  which  give
rise  to  antitoxin  formation  (see  my  reply  to  Gruber  in  Miinch.  mcd.  Wochenschr
1903,  Nos.  33  and  34).


4S4


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY


niqueof  my  experiments  accordingly.  At  that  time  I  stated  in  conner-
tion  with  this  tetanoiysin  that  the  union  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  pro-
ceeds more  slowly  in  dilute  solutions  than  in  concentrated,  and  tW
the  process  is  hastened  by  heat.  How  feeble  the  combining  affinilicB
of  tetanus  toxin  and  antitoxin  are  can  be  seen  from  the  following
experiment  devised  over  eight  years  ago:  If  a  given,  not  very  con-
centrated, mixture  of  serum  and  toxin  is  allowed  to  stand  for  two
hours  it  will  be  found  that  the  action  of  the  serum  is  forty  time  u
great  as  when  the  mixture  is  employed  immediately.  Whelher  the
optimum  of  neutralization  is  thus  reached  is  difficult  to  say.  The
determination  of  the  exact  limits  fails  because  of  the  fact  that  tin
poison  rapidly  decomposes  in  watery  solutions,  especially  if  these
be  dilute.  One  constantly  faces  either  of  two  difficulties:  insuf^rient
union  on  the  one  hand  and  decomposition  of  the  [wison  on  the  other,'
With  diphtheria  poison,  on  the  other  hand,  the  affinity  of  tlie
toxin  for  the  antitoxin  is  much  greater.  As  is  well  known,  these
substances  unite  so  rapidly  that  even  the  time  for  combination
prescribed  in  the  test — fifteen  minutes — is  still  unnecessarily  long.
Hence,  even  if  I  admit  that  the  union  of  tetanoiysio  and  antilj'^an
is  comparable  to  the  neutralization  of  a  weak  base  by  a  weak  acid,.
I  shall  in  the  following  pages  show  that  the  affinity  of  diphtheria.
toxin  and  antitoxin  is  very  great,  comparable  perhaps  to  that  l>etw«B.'
a  strong  add  and  base.  In  accordance  with  this  also  I  am  convincrd'
that  the  neutralization  of  diphtheria  toxin  by  antitoxin  proceeds  in
the  form  of  a  straight  line  and  not  in  that  of  a  curve.  This,  then,'
constitutes  my  first  objection  to  the  general  deductions  drawn  by
Arrhenius  and  Madsen  from  their  particular  findings.  Just  as  it  i>  <
impossible  to  apply  the  results  of  the  neutralization  of  boric  acid  ftcd  j
ammonia  to  every  combination  of  acid  and  base,  so  it  is  impossiUc  I
to  apply  the  experiences  with  tetanolysin  to  the  doctrine  of  tonus  I
ia  general.^  t


'  Wben,  then,  years  ago,  in  apite  o(  these  unfavorable  conditions,  I  propooej
the  study  of  tetanolysin  to  Thorvald  Mndsen,  Ihia  was  but  a  niakediift  nrtrt  J
sitat«d  by  the  lack,  at  that  lime,  of  suitable  hicniolyslnK.  At  present  a  numtMH
of  Buch  Bub.'jtances  are  availablo.  xuch  aa  arachnolysin  and  Miiuke  venom.  llbMO
are  very  stable  and  far  better  suited  for  exact  determlDation  since  the  factdfl
ot  decompoaition  is  absent.  ^l

'  1  should  like  to  mention  that  recently  Dr.  Kyes  has  discovered  that  ia
snake  venom  alNo  the  neutralization  with  antitoxin  proceeds  with  high  afGnitJM  '
and  in  a  straiight  line.  ~ '


THB  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  485

If,  therefore,  the  affinity  between  diphtheria  toxin  and  antitoxin
is  so  great,  we  shall  have  to  ascribe  the  irr^ular  course  of  the  neutraliza-
tion process  to  other  factors  thai2  those  assumed  by  Arrhenius  and
Madsen.


Diphtheria  Toxins.

In  order  to  understand  what  follows  it  will  be  necessary  to  speak
of  some  of  the  main  principles  of  toxin-^antitoxin  analysis.  As  is
well  known  diphtheria  toxin  is  the  bouillon  fluid  in  which  the  diph-
theria bacilli  have  grown,  and  to  which  they  have  given  up  their
toxic  secretory  products.  In  order  to  determine  the  toxicity  we
make  use  of  guinea-pigs.  The  lethal  dose  (L.  D.)  is  that  amount
of  poison  which  will  surely  kill  a  guinea-pig  weighing  250  grammes
on  the  fourth  day.  In  order  to  determine  the  relations  between  toxin
and  antitoxin  it  is  best  to  start  from  the  serum  because  this  can  be
preserved  constant  by  means  of  the  methods  deVised  by  me  (vacuum,
drying).  This  dry  serum  also  serves  as  the  standard  for  the  officia
titration.  The  immune  unit  (I.  E.  =  Immunitats  Einheit)  is,  of  course,
an  arbitrary  quantity  which  originated  by  terming  that  amount  of
antitoxin  a  unit  which  just  neutralized  100  L.  D.  of  a  poison  that
happened  to  be  available  at  the  time,  so  that  the  mixture  when  injected
did  not  produce  even  the  slightest  trace  of  illness  (either  general  or
local  reaction).

If  one  mixes  one  immune  unit  of  serum  with  graduated  amounts
of  poison,  two  limits  may  be  obtained.  One  of  these  is  termed
limit  zero  (Lo)»  ai^d  corresponds  to  the  quantity  of  poison  which  is
completely  neutralized  by  1  I.  E.  The  other  is  limit  death  (Lf)  and
corresfX)nds  to  that  quantity  of  poison  which  on  the  addition  of  1  I.  E'
is  so  far  neutralized  that  only  just  one  L.  D.  remains.  Of  these  two
limits  the  Lt  is  very  easily  and  accurately  determined  so  that  it
serves  as  a  measure  in  testing  the  potency 'of  the  diphtheria  serum.
This  limit  signifies  nothing  more  than  that  of  x  L.  D.  present,  1  I.  E.
neutralized  x— 1  L.  D.,  so  that  just  1  L.  D.  remains  free  and  leads
to  the  death  of  the  guinea-pig  in  four  days.

A  priori  one  might  have  expected  that  the  number  of  lethal  doses
which  are  neutralized  by  1  I.  E.  is  always  the  same  in  poisons  from
different  sources.  The  only  difference  which  one  would  have  ex-
pected would  be  that  in  different  poison  solutions,  the  volume  in


4S6  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

which  a  given  number  of  L.  D.  were  contained  would  vary  from  ease
to  case,  depending  on  the  varying  quantity  of  poison  produced  by

the  bacilli.

Closer  investigations,  however,  showed  that  in  reality  the  con-
ditions are  entirely  different,  the  number  of  L.  D,  contained  in  Lt
varying  enormously  in  different  toxic  bouillons.  In  poisons  w
have  been  analyzed  the  figures  have  fJuctuated  between  15  and  160.
Since  it  had  been  shown,  especially  by  myelf,  that  the  neutraliKation
of  toxin -antitoxin  rests  on  a  chemical  basis,  this  result  could  only
be  explained  by  assuming  that  the  diphtheria  bouillon,  in  addition
to  the  toxins,  contained  other  non-toxic  substances  which  were  ablr
to  combine  with  antitoxin  just  like  the  diphtheria  toxin.  I  deemed
it  to  be  of  the  highest  importance  to  clear  up  this  mystery  experi-
mentally, and  therefore  subjected  a  number  of  different  poisons  (some
freshly  derived,  others  precipitated  with  ammonium  sulphate,  and
still  others  which  had  been  kept  for  a  long  time)  to  comparaliv
analyses.  In  the  course  of  these  it  was  found  that  the  non-toxic
Bubstanees,  which  still  jwssess  combining  proi^erties,  increase  as  [be
toxic  bouillon  ages,  and  1  therefore  studied  these  changes  in  the
poisons  genetically  at  various  stages.

I  emphasize  this  part  of  my  method  because  the  casual  remark
by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  '  that  my  results  were  derived  majnlv  from
a  study  of  decomposed  poisons  might  readily  be  misconstrued  and
give  one  the  impression  that  in  my  investigations  I  had  not  been  espt-
eially  careful.  I  may  at  once  add,  however,  that  my  most  valuable
results  were  obtained  by  studying  the  course  of  this  deconiposttio
but  this,  nf  course,  corresponds  entirely  with  the  methods  of  chet
istry.  It  is  impossible  to  gain  an  insight  into  the  constitution  of
highly  complex  combinations  by  means  of  an  analysis  which  leads
only  to  the  compact  formula.  This  can  only  be  gained  by  the
careful  decomimaition  of  the  substance  to  be  studied.  Whatever
knowledge  we  possess  regarding  the  constitution  of  sugars,  uric  acid
derivatives,  alkaloids,  etc..*is  due  mainly  to  the  decompositions  intel-
ligently carried  out,  and  a  careful  study  of  their  products.  Of  couts«
the  decomiKJsition  must  not  give  rise  to  secondary  reactiona  whiefa
could  obscure  the  results;  this  might  be  the  case  if  strong  acids  or  a.
high  temjierature  were  employed.  The  decomposition  must  be
quantitative  and  of  moderate  intensity.  The  following  obserra-
tions  will  show  that  this  is  especially  the  case  in  the  sjmntaneotis


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  487

attenuation  of  the  toxins,  which  occurs  at  room  temperature  and
without  any  further  chemical  manipulation.^

//  has  been  found  that  the  bouillon  on  standing  can  preserve  its  neutral-
izing property  intact,  and  often  actually  does  so,  while  the  toxicity  is
considerably  decreased.  Observations  of  this  kind  have  been  made
by  myself  and  Madsen  for  diphtheria  poison,  by  Jacoby  for  ricin,
by  Myers  for  snake  venom,  and  recently  by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen
for  tetanus  poison.  This  phenomenon,  which  in  many  cases  is  quanti-
tative, is  most  readily  explained  by  assuming  that  the  poison  molecule
contains  two  functionating  groups.  One,  the  "haptophore  group,"
combines  with  the  antitoxin  and  in  the  animal  body  effects  the  com-
bination with  the  tissues;  this  group  is  quite  stable.  The  other,
the  "toxophore  group,"  effects  the  true  poisonous  action;  it  is  com-
paratively readily  destroyed.  In  my  opinion  the  transformation  of
toxin  into  toxoids  by  the  destruction  of  the  toxophore  group  is  the
key  to  a  correct  understanding  of  my  conception  of  antitoxic  im-
munity and  the  subject  of  toxins.^

If  we  see,  for  example,  that  in  spite  of  decreased  toxicity  the
constants  of  neutralization  Lf  and  Lq  remain  entirely  unchanged,
it  follows,  in  my  opinion,  that  two  important  deductions  can  be  made.
The  first  is  one  which  I  have  always  drawn,  namely,  that  in  normal
toxoid  formation  not  brought  about  by  chemical  additions,  the  num-
ber of  haptophore  groups  suffers  no  loss.  This  behavior,  however,
also  seems  to  indicate  that  in  toxoid  formation  the  affinity  of  the  hapto-
phore groups  for  the  antitoxin  is  in  no  way  changed.  I  may  be  per-
mitted to  elucidate  this  by  means  of  a  chemical  example.  Tetra-
methylammoniumhydroxid  is  a  very  strong  base  (like  KOH)  which
through  suitable   procedures  (heating,  etc.)  is  transformed  into  the

'  Obviously  these  poisons  can  also  be  attenuated  through  chemic  or  thermic
influences,  but  the  decomposition  in  that  case  takes  place  rapidly  and  with
destruction.  In  my  investigations,  therefore,  I  have  never  made  use  of  these
methods,  but  have  kept  to  the  moderate  changes  which  occur  spontaneously
in  the  toxic  bouillon  on  standing.

'  At  the  outset  of  the  modern  study  of  immunity,  von  Behring,  Aronson,
and  others  had  observed  that  an  active  immunity  could  be  brought  about
particularly  through  attenuated,  modified  poisons.  At  that  time,  however,
it  was  very  difficult  to  appreciate  these  relations,  and  so  in  the  year  1894  we
find  a  high  authority,  as  a  result  of  his  investigations,  denying  the  existence
of  modified  poisons,  although  he  had  previously  assumed  their  existence.  The
results,  which  had  been  obtained  with  immunization,  he  ascribed,  not  to  the
presence  of  modified  poisons,  but  exclusively  to  a  dilution  of  the  poison.


-t!S«  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

far  less  basic  trimetbylamin,  methyl  alcohol  being  split  off  in  the
process.  Let  ua  take  a  certain  definite  quantity  of  tetramethylam-
monium  hydroxid,  say  20  molecules,  and  determine  the  quantity
of  boric  acid  which  will  just  suffice  for  complete  neutralization,  u
shown  by  a  suitable  indicator.  On  changing  the  ammonium  base
into  the  tertiary  amin  {a  change  which  we  shall  assume  to  be  com-
plete) we  shall  find  that  a  larger  quantity  of  boric  acid  is  nercaaary
for  neutralizing  the  tertiary  amin.  In  other  words,  there  has  beeo
a  change  in  the  position  of  the  neutral  point,  although  the  niimtw
of  basic  radicals  remains  the  same.  This  necessarily  follows  from  llie
decrease  in  affinity  brought  about  by  the  transformation.

The  reverse  will  take  place  if  a  weak  base  is  transformed  into  »
stronger  one.  A  change  in  the  position  of  the  neutral  point  will  occur
even  if  the  transformation  is  only  a  partial  one,  i.e.,  does  not  affect
the  entire  number  of  molecules.  If,  however,  in  spite  of  an  extensive
formation  of  toxoid,  we  find  the  test  limits  unchanged,  we  can  only
conclude  that  any  considerable  change  in  affinity  has  not  occurred.
We  shall  subsequently  learn  of  anotht-r  fact,  which  affords  concluare
evidence  of  the  correctness  of  these  views.

Our  next  problem  will  be  to  study  the  influence  of  the  toxoids
on  the  neutralizing  process.  To  begin,  it  should  be  remarked  that
the  bacterial  poisons  with  which  we  are  dealing  are  not.  as  a  rule,
pure  poisons.  By  this,  of  course,  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  pure
poisons  can  occur.  If  the  toxophore  group  po.s.sesses  consideralde
resistance  :<■  llmt  it  is  not  affected  by  the  processes  used  in  its  pro-
duction (keeping  in  the  incubator  for  weeks,  etc.),  it  will  be  possible
to  obtain  poisons  which  contain  only  toxins  and  no  toxoids.  Such  a
result,  however,  can  probably  only  be  counted  on  in  a  small  number
of  isolated  cases,  and  is  not  obtained  aa  a  rule.  So  far  as  diphtheria
poison  is  concerned,  of  which  I  have  made  a  special  study.  I  have
never  yet.  among  a  large  number  of  specimens  examined,  found  a
single  one  free  from  toxoids.  In  estimating  the  degree  of  purity
one  proceeds  by  finding  in  various  poisons  how  many  fatal  doses
(I>,  D.)  are  neutralized  by  one  immune  unit  (I.  E.).  The  maximum
value  in  the  poisons  at  my  disposal  was  130,  but  Madsen  has  described
a  poison  in  which  the  Lt  dose  contained  160  L,  D.  But  even  this
poison,  as  I  shall  show  later,'  merely  approached  the  character  of  a  pure
poison.


>  It  is  especially  important  that  even  diphtheria  paisons  which  have


1


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  489^

Naturally  the  poisons  whose  toxophore  groups  are  very  labile
will  be  the  least  pure.  This  is  especially  true  in  tetanus  poison,
which  is  far  more  readily  destroyed  than  diphtheria  poison.  In  the
former,  several  hours'  standing  of  an  aqueous  solution  suffices  to  give
rise  to  toxoid  formation.  It  is  all  the  more  probable,  therefore,
that  the  toxin  produced  in  the  usual  manner  by  keeping  the  culture
in  the  incubator  for  eight  days  contains  a  considerable  admixture  of
toxoids.  In  the  precipitation  with  ammonium  sulphate  these  tox-
oids, of  course,  are  present  in  the  resulting  solid  product.

A  dry  poison  of  this  kind,  such  as  I  placed  at  Madsen's  disposal
for  his  experiments,  can,  of  course,  keep  for  a  long  time  unchanged
provided  it  is  carefully  preserved;  the  primary  content  of  toxoid,
however,  also  remains  unchanged.

For  this  reason  I  believe  that  the  assumption  of  Arrhenius  and
Madsen,  that  the  tetanus  poison  used  by  them  was  a  pure  poison,
since  it  did  not  change,  is  entirely  unwarranted.  It  is  even  possible
that  this  particular  specimen  contained  far  more  toxoids  than  the
old  toxin  solutions  which  I  had  employed.

In  pure  chemistry  in  carrying  out  exact  mathematical  determina-
tions it  is  a  general  principle  that  the  substance  be  either  absolutely
pure  or  at  least  that  its  degree  of  purity  be  exactly  determined  by
analysis.  In  determining  the  molecular  weight  of  an  element,  a  great
deal  of  preliminary  work  (recrystaJlization,  etc.)  is  required  in  order
to  obtain  the  original  material  as  pure  as  possible.  If  this  cannot
be  done,  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  or  ozone,
a  quantitative  study  requires  at  least  that  the  exact  percentage  of
pure  substance  contained  in  the  mixture  be  known.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  these  principles  should,  as  far  as  possible,  be
applied  to  the  study  of  toxins.  In  these  substances  also  one  should
know  the  degree  of  purity  before  attempting  any  exact  investigations.
But  just  in  this  domain,  where  it  is  impossible  to  isolate  the  substances,
this  task  is  uncommonly  difficult.  It  required  a  year's  most  tiresome
and  monotonous  labor  before  I  was  able,  by  means  of  very  exact  deter-
minations of  all  kinds  of  poisons,  to  approach  this  problem.     At  that

produced  in  a  very  short  time  (three  to  four  days  in  the  incubator)  are  not  free  from
toxoids.  In  one  such  poison  (No.  9  of  the  titration  series)  I  found  123  L.  D.
in  Lt.  I  was  therefore  greatly  pleased  recently  to  hear  from  Dr.  Louis  Martin,
who  has  had  such  wide  experiences  in  this  direction  at  the  Pasteur  Institute^
that  in  his  fresh  poisons  he  never  saw  the  figure  200  L.  D.  in  L^  reached.


490  COLLECTED  STUDIFiJ  IN  IMMUNITY

time  1  gained  the  impresBjon  that  a  pure  poison  must  oe  so  consti-
tilled  that  one  1.  E.  fully  neutralizes  exactly  200  L.  D.'  Later  on  1
shall  show  that  by  means  of  the  "speiitrum"  analysis  I  ha\e  sue-
ceede<i  in  verifying  this  figure.'''

The  discovery  of  this  number,  200,  led  me  to  represent  the  ro»
stilution  of  diphtheria  poison  by  means  of  a  "spectrum"  which  ■
divided  into  200  segments,  each  of  which  (-■orresiKjnds  to  a  tonn
toxoid,  or  toxon  eijuivalent.  This  scheme  is  not,  as  some  have  »
sumed,  a  mere  makeshift,  but  is  the  expression  of  knowledge  lal»»
ously  attained.  Thi^  graphic  reproduction  shows  at  a  glance  bov
much  toxin  or  toxoid  jf>  neutraliz(?d  by  each  wmbining  unit  of  aii>
toxin.  Such  a  reproduction  possesses  so  many  advantages  over  tk
curve  used  by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  that  1  shall  not  hesitate  a  momenl
in  retaining  the  s[>ectrum  method  for  diphtheria  jjoison.  By  ill
means  one  obtains  a  view  of  the  enlire  process  of  iieutralijatioo.*

It  may  be  well  at  this  point,  by  means  of  a  tiuitable  chemin)
illustration,  to  elucidate  the  influence  which  such  admixtures  of
toxoid  exert  in  the  titration  of  alkaloids.  In  doing  this  it  will  i»
best  to  proceed  on  the  following  assiunptions.  An  alkaloid  arts  iacrat-
lytically  when  in  the  form  of  free  base,  but  not  when  in  the  fatmd
&  salt.*  The  base  would  then  correspond  to  the  toxin.  The  an*
logue  of  the  toxoid  would  then  be  an  alkaloid  which  e.xerta  no  delfr
teriouu  action  either  as  such  or  in  the  form  of  a  salt.  The  antitoxift
■would  be  represented  by  any  acid,  e.g.,  hydrochloric  acid.  L'bdff
these  conditions  the  mixture  of  the  two  alkaloids  c«n  be  titrated  hifr
logically  (by  determining  the  hs'molytic  power  at  any  ix>int)  hy
means  of  an  acid  exactly  as  a  toxin  solution  containing  toxoid  by
means  of  its  antitoxin.

Let  us  assume  that  the  toxic  alkaloid  A  as  well  as  the  atoxic  i
possesses  so  strong  an  affinity  for  hydrochloric  acid  that  neutralize
tion  is  effectt^d  to  within  a  very  small  fraction.  A  solution  of  «  nmlt'
cules  .4  would  then  corresjwnd  to  the  pure  toxin,  while  mixtures  rf


'  It  is  self-evident  that  each  toxin-combining  unit  can   be  replaced  br
equivalent  amount  of  lesa  toxic  or  non-toxic  subBtances  poasei«Eing  combinia
properties  (toxones,  Ujxoids).

'The  poison  studied  by  Madsen,  tbereCore,  vbich  contained   160  L.  D.&
Lt.  corresponded  to  a  purity  of  four-fifths.

'  See  also  page  552.

*  This  is  probably  the  cose  with  soknin,  whose  hn-tnolytic  power  ia
by  the  addition  of  acid  sella  (Fohl)  or  ol  free  acids  (HMon,  Basbford).


J


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  491

A  and  5:  -+^  or  j+-^  represent  analogues  of  solutions  containing

Also  toxoids.  In  all  of  these  mixtures  the  end  point  of  neutralization
will  be  practically  constant.  If,  however,  the  affinities  of  A  and  B
for  hydrochloric  acid  are  not  exactly  equal  the  neutralization  will
pioceed  in  a  straight  line  only  if  we  are  dealing  with  the  pure  alkaloid.
In  ail  other  cases  it  will  follow  the  course  of  a  curve  whose  character,
of  course,  is  dependent  on  the  relative  amounts  of  the  two  com-
ponents.

This  problem  of  the  simultaneous  neutralization  of  two  alkaloids
has  been  studied  in  suitable  cases  by  J.  H.  Jellet.  Let  us  take  the
neutralization  of  quinine  and  codein  with  hydrochloric  acid,  in  which
the  coefficient  of  equilibrium  /iC  =  2.03.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity
I  have  assumed  this  to  be  2.0.  In  order,  furthermore,  to  have  the
conditions  as  simple  as  possible,  let  us  take  as  an  example  a  mixture
of  100  molecules  quinine  and  100  molecules  codein.  These  will  then
be  neutralized  by  200  molecules  hydrochloric  acid.  By  means  of
the  formula  devised  by  Jellet  one  next  determines  how  much  quinine
is  transformed  into  the  salt  by  each  successive  addition  of  one-tenth
the  entire  neutralizing  dose  (20  molecules  HCl).  It  will  be  found
that  the  first  tenth  neutralizes  13  and  the  last  tenth  7  molecules
of  quinine,  while  the  course  of  the  neutralization  of  the  quinine  is
itselt  entirely  uniform.  If  another  combination  is  taken,  in  which
the  second  alkaloid  possesses  a  weaker  affinity,  so  that  iiL  =  10,  it  can
easily  be  calculated  that  under  these  circumstances  the  first  tenth
hydrochloric  acid  neutralizes  17.8,  the  last  tenth  only  3  molecules
of  quinine.  On  representing  these  reactions  graphically  we  shall
obtam  curves  entirely  similar  to  those  representing  the  neutralization
of  a  weak  base  with  a  weak  acid,  and  it  would  probably  not  be  difficult
to  find  a  combination  of  alkaji  and  acid  whose  curve  corresponds  to
the  alkaloid  curve  mentioned.

Hence,  if  such  a  mixture  of  alkaloids  together  with  the  appro-
priate neutralizing  agent  (acid)  were  given  one  for  a  biological  titra-
tion, and  if,  furthermore  (to  make  the  analogy  with  toxin-antitoxin
determination  complete),  the  employment  of  any  additional  chemical
aids  was  barred,  the  neutralization  curve  obtained  under  such  stringent
conditions  could  easily  give  the  impression  that  one  were  dealing
only  with  the  neutralization  of  two  substances  possessing  weak  affini-
ties. Nevertheless,  even  under  these  hmitations,  it  is  possible  to
learn  the  true  conditions  if,  as  I  have  done,  one  does  not  confine  one's


492


COLLECTED  STUDIKH  L\  IMML'NITV.


►


self  to  a  single  mixture,  but  analyzes  a  great  many  different  mixiims
in  wljich  the  relation  of  toxin-alkaloid  and  toxoid-alkaloid  varies.'

It  is  all  the  more  eurprising  that  in  the  analysis  of  the  constitu-
tion of  jjoisons  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  have  not  studied  the  tjuestjon
from  this  point  of  view  because  they  do  not  at  all  neglect  the  exisl-
ence  of  toxoids.  Apparently  this  is  because  of  a  slight  misunder-
standing, for  these  authors  proceed  exclusively  on  the  assumption  thai
in  toxoids  one  is  dealing  with  protoxoids,  i.e.,  with  toxoids  wjiich
possess  a  higher  affinity  for  the  antito.xin  than  does  the  toxin.  In
fact,  one  can  easily  observe  that  the  formation  of  prototoxoids  affect*
the  end  point  of  the  titration  but  little.  This  I  had  predicted  in  my
first  study  on  the  evaluation  of  diphtheria  serum.  Let  lis  assume.
for  example,  that  a  mixture  of  1  equivalent  hydrochloric  acid  (proto-
toxoid)  and  3  equivalents  prussic  acid  (toxin)  is  neutralized  by  a
strong  base.  In  that  case  the  hydrochloric  add  will  be  neutraliaed
first,  after  which  the  neutralization  of  the  prussic  acid  will  procwd
very  much  the  same  as  though  only  prussic  acid  were  present.

We  must  now  see  whether  diphtheria  poisons,  such  as  I  have
investigated,  contain  other  toxoids  besides  prototoxoids.  The  ma-
terial at  hand  makes  the  decision  of  this  point  very  simple.  In  four
poisons  containing  a  prototoxoid  zone  (of  which  two  were  published
by  myself  and  two  by  Madscnj  I  have  calculated  the  relation  of  proto-
toxoid and  toxoid  to  toxin.  In  doing  this  1  have  regarded  exclusively
the  Lf  dose,  and  so  eliminated  the  toxons  which  would  otherwise  still
more  increase  the  toxoid  figure.

'  In  the  very  simple  example  of  two  BlkaloidH  just  mentioned  two  determina-
tions of  different  mixtures  would  permit  the  calculation.  In  my  opiiiion  do
definite  conclusions  as  I«  the  constants  of  the  toxin  can  bo  drawn  from  Uw
analysia  of  one  particular  toxin  containing  toxoid.  Arrhenius  und  Mnds«it
analyzed  two  different  tetanus  poiBona,  one  of  which  had  undergone  toxcnd
mod ilicB lions  through  years  ot  preservation  as  a  dry  substance,  while  the  olber
had  suffered  Himilai  niodifi  cat  ions  through  several  days'  stiuidint;  ol  the  solu-
tion. The  authors  calculated  from  their  experiments  that  in  the  one  case  tlie
constant  of  disaociation  had  been  increased  50%,  in  the  other  ten  tinice.  In
what  has  just  been  stated  this  calculation,  which  leaves  out  of  aecount
the  presence  of  toxoids,  cannot  be  regarded  as  conclusive.  The  divci^encv  o(
the  constants  could  easily  be  due  exclusively  to  the  presence  of  Toxoids  uid
these,  in  view  of  the  diHerent  methods  by  which  the  [>oiFons  wore  allcnimteid


could  lie  different  in  the  two  c
mation   of   diphtheria   loxine  1  an
remain  do  not  suffer  any  change  ii


I  may  also  add  that  in  the  toxoid  for
convinced  that  the  toxin  groups  which
tfaeir  affinity.


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN


493


Poison.

For  100  Parts  of  Toxin  there  are

Pro  to  toxoid.
Parts

Toxoid,
Parts.

A    Madsen
C     Madsen

IV  Ehrlich

V  Ehrlich  (4th  phase)

160
79
82
77

400

59

200

131

This  table  shows  that  the  four  poisons  contain  considerable  amounts
of  toxoids  in  addition  to  the  prototoxoids.  The  affinity  of  these
toxoids  is  more  or  less  small,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  curves  plotted
by  Madsen  and  myself.  From  this  it  follows  that  in  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  results  obtained  by  neutralizing  diphtheria  poison  due
attention  must  be  paid  to  the  decisive  influence  exerted  on  the  course
■of  the  partial  neutralization  by  the  toxoids  notoriously  present  in  such
considerable  amounts.  It  is  incorrect,  therefore,  to  refer  the  decreased
binding  of  antitoxin,  such  as  is  seen  in  the  tritotoxoid  zone,  to  the
boric  acid-ammonia  scheme.

It  will  be  well,  by  means  of  a  concrete  example,  to  study  some-
what more  in  detail  the  course  of  this  toxoid  formation.  For  this
purpose  I  shall  select  a  poison  which  I  have  already  described  in  my
publication  on  the  constitution  of  diphtheria  poison  ^  as  Poison  No.  5,
At  that  time  I  briefly  gave  the  spectrum  and  the  constants  based  on
the  investigations  which  I  and  my  friend  Donitz  had  carried  out.  In
this  poison  the  conditions  were  most  interesting  and  yet  extremely
simple:  The  Lq  dose  was  0.125  cc;  the  Lf  dose  0.25  cc,  that  is,  just
twice  as  much.  The  L.  D.  was  0.0025  cc.,so  that  the  I^o  dose  contained
exactly  50  L.  D.  and  the  Lf  dose  exactly  100  L.  D.  These  facts
caused  us  to  make  the  thorough  analysis.  This  poison,  as  is  so  often
the  case,  suffered  certain  transformations,  whereby  it  became  weaker.
These  changes  occurred  in  three  phases  characterized  by  the  formation
of  difi^erent  kinds  of  toxoids.  The  spectra  of  these  phases  are  as  fol-
lows (Fig.  1).

The  phases  in  which  the  content  of  toxin  shows  itself  are  I,  II,  and
IV;  phase  III,  which  deals  with  the  toxons,  will  be  considered  in  a
separate  chapter.

As  a  result  of  all  my  experiences  with  similar  poisons,  as  well  as


•  Deutsche  med.  Woehensch.  1898,  No.  38.


COLLECTED  STUniES  IN  IMMTJNITT,


frnra  a  dirert  tie  termination ,  it  follows  that  the  first  phase  must  h„^
represented  a  pure  liemitoxin  which  rearhed  exactly  to  100  (see  illi»
tration).     Accordingly  each  ^Jj^  1-  E,  (  =  1    combining    ur
sively  added  to  the  L  dose  takes  away  i  L.  D.  from  the  fatal  doas


■     170    1«    L»  -•


)   130   140   ISO    16Q    ITO    1


1[l

PhoGein

„

a*

JO

w

00

70

HI

K  100   no  m  130  i«  iw  leo   iro  i

«     IM   3

ID

Phase  IV

71

ai

^'""

y"  ■';7y  ■//'/■''^    '

1_

10     JO

0     in

:

:fl   1

*>      \-fii      (.«      I'll    31

contained  inLo.  anti  '^'i-''  »"  occurs  within  the  first  hundred
antitoxin  doses  added.  Amounts  of  antitoxin  beyond  this  have  no
further  influence  on  the  toxin  (death,  necrosis),  but  afTeet  only  the
toxon .

A  fact  to  which  I  attach  particular  significance  is  that  the  hetni-


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  495

toxin  reaches  just  up  to  the  100  limit  and  shows  no  trace  of  any

gradual  decline.     This  follows  from  the  determination  of  the  Lt  dose,

as  can  be  seen  from  the  following  analysis.

Given  a  poison  in  which,  in  the  Lq  dose,  the  hemitoxin  zone  reaches

exactly  to  100,  how  large  will  the  Lf  dose  be?     Lf,  i.e.,  the  amount

of  poison  which  on  the  addition  of  200  combining  units  still  leaves

1  L.  D.  free,  will  be  reached  when  200  equivalents  of  hemitoxin  are

present.      We  shall  therefore  have  to  multiply  the  Lq  dose  of  the

202
poison  by  — r  in  order  to  obtain  the  Lf  dose.     If  we  carry  out  this

multiplication  we  obtain  an  Lt  dose  of  0.253,  which  agrees  very  well
with  the  value  actually  found,  0.25  cc.

Thus  the  important  fact  is  demonstrated  that  in  this  case  the
neutralization  of  the  diphtheria  poison  by  antitoxin  proceeded  exactly
the  same  as  the  neutralization  of  a  strong  acid  by  a  strong  base.
Here  then  the  course  of  the  reaction  is  represented  by  a  straight  line
and  not  by  a  curve.

Further  evidence  for  the  view  that  in  this  poison  the  hemitoxin
extended  right  up  to  the  limit  100  is  furnished  by  phase  II.  Here
we  see  a  simultaneous  increase  of  the  Lt  dose  and  a  decrease  of  the
toxicity  manifesting  themselves  by  the  fact  that  the  L.  D.  increases
from  0.0025  to  0.003  cc,  so  that  the  number  of  L.  D.  contained  in  the
Lo  dose  has  decreased  from  50  to  42.

This  increase  cf  the  Lt  dose  amounted  to  about  0.26  cc.  and  from
it,  by  means  of  the  simple  calculation  already  mentioned,  it  can  be
shown  that  toxoid  formation  took  place  in  the  end  zone  of  the  toxin,
the  "tritotoxoid  zone,"  as  I  term  it.

Let  us  assume  that  the  end  zone  (which  before  as  well  as  after  the

second  phase  extended  to  100)  contains  a  toxoid  mixture  of  —  toxicity

instead  of  the  hemitoxin.     In  order  to  reach  the  Lt  dose  in  this

210  20*^

case  we  must  multiply  the  Lq  dose  by  ^tjti  and  not  by  ^-r^,  as  was

the  case  with  hemitoxin.     On  carrying  out  this  calculation,  Lq  being

nior:              ,0125X210     ^^^_     J
0.125,  we  get  rrrjr —  =  0.2625  =  Lt.

In  the  determination  made  at  that  time  I  actually  found  the  Lt
dose  to  be  0.26,  but  noted  "a  little  over.'*    That  the  tritotoxoid  zone

possessed  a  toxicity  of  —  was  shown  by  the  subsequent  analysis  by

means  of  partial  neutralization,  for  near  the  end,  a  zone  of  18-20


496  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

tritotoxid  of  exactly  —  toxicity  was  found.     It  should  be  emptu^iud

that  the  fatal  doses  which  disappeared  in  the  deterioration  were  found
in  the  form  of  toxoids  in  the  tritotoxoid  zone.

These  investigations  show  that  these  changes  arc  due  exclusiveiy  »
the  fact  that  a  part  of  the  toxin  has  become  transformed  into  toxoids;
in  fact  into  toxoids  which  arc  neutraUzed  after  the  main  portion  ot
the  toxin,  and  which,  therefore,  must  [wssess  less  affinity.  If  we  woe
to  represent  this  phase  by  means  of  a  curve  according  to  the  metlnd
of  Arrheniua  and  Madsen,  we  should  observe  a  marked  f]att«iuDf
of  the  curve  in  the  tritotoxoid  zone.  This,  however,  is  not  the  expfff-
aion  of  the  weak  affinity  of  the  diphtheria  toxin,  or  of  the  nciilraiut
tion  dependent  thereon.  It  is  to  be  ascribed  with  absolut<?  certainlj
solely  to  the  presence  of  toxoids  and  their  appearance  in  place  o/  tnxA
molecules  which  have  disapj^eared.

I  shall  discuss  phase  111  later,  merely  remarking  at  this  time  Ih*'
in  this  phase,  SO  out  of  100  parts  toxon  have  disappeared.  The  U
dose  of  0.125  cc.  now  contains  only  120  combining  units  instead!  of
the  200  units  (toxin  and  toxon)  originally  present.  Corresponding
to  this,  therefore,  the  I-o  dose,  which  must  contain  200  combining  units.
increases  from  0.125  cc.  to  0.21  cc.  In  thLs  third  phase  the  tona
zone  has  not  suffered  any  essential  change.  The  Lf  dose  has  aeoord-
ingly  remained  constant  at  0.26  cc.  Because  of  the  new  I^  dose
necessary  by  the  loss  of  toxon,  the  spectrum  representing  this  phM»
shows  a  much  wider  toxin  zone  than  the  previous  one.  The  toxii^
toxon  boundary  has  been  moved  from  100  to  166.

In  phase  IV,  I.f  remained  0.26  cc,  but  (ho  toxicity
the  L.  D.  increasing  gradually  from  0.003  cc.  to  0.004  ec.     During
course  of  these  changes  22  L.  T).  had  disappeared  from  the  l^  don
phase  III.

The  fate  of  these  22  L.  D.  is  made  plain  by  l!ie  spectrum  whtdt
I  constructed  at  that  lime.  In  this  1  found  an  extended  prototoxtuj
zone  which  included  the  first  40  combining  units  of  the  spectrum^
sufficient,  as  can  be  seen,  to  explain  the  loss  of  toxin  which  had  oc-
curred. I  desire  to  call  particular  attention  to  the  fact  that  no
of  combining  groups  had  occurred  despite  the  slight  increase  of  the
Lt  dose.'

■  A  superficittl  glance  might  lead  one  to  suppose  that  iho  fact  that  the  I4
doae  of  0.25  cc.  in  the  Brat  phase  had  become  inereaaed  to  a  little  over  0.28  «■


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  497

«

This  behavior  shows  that  on  standing  there  is  not,  for  example,
a  marked  destruction  of  the  poison,  but  merely  a  slight  chemical
change  affecting  only  the  toxophore  and  not  the  haptophore  group.
It  would  be  improper,  therefore,  to  speak  of  the  poison  "spoiling."

The  observations  on  the  origin  in  the  various  forms  of  toxoid  are
particularly  important.

In  the  first  phase  of  toxin  formation,  there  was  a  development
of  toxoids  of  weaker  affinity  for  the  antitoxin,  while  during  the  second
fitage,  toxoids  of  greater  affinity  developed.  Occupying  a  position
between  these  two  opposing  poison  modifications  is  the  hemitoxin
fraction,  and  this  has  remained  intact.  We  are  thus  really  forced  to
arrange  these  three  poison  constituents,  according  to  their  affinity,
as  prototoxoid,  deuterotoxoid,  and  tritotoxoid.  This  brings  me  to
the  crux  of  my  views  concerning  the  constitution  of  diphtheria  poison.

In  titrating  and  evaluating  the  diphtheria  antitoxic  serum  I  began
with  the  simplest  assumption,  namely,  that  the  poison  was  a  simple
uniform  substance.  In  the  formation  of  toxoids,  therefore,  I  con-
sidered three  possibilities:

1.  That  the  affinity  of  the  haptophore  becomes  increased;

2.  That  it  remains  the  same,  and

3.  That  it  decreases.

Which  of  these  possibilities  will  apply  in  any  given  case  will,  of
course,  depend  upon  the  stereochemical  circumstances,  especially
upon  how  far  one  functionating  group  is  removed  from  the  other.
If,  in  what  we  must  conceive  to  be  a  very  large  molecule,  these  groups
are  quite  far  apart,  it  may  be  assumed  a  priori  that  the  destruction  of
the  toxophore  group  will  probably  not  exert  a  marked  influence  on
the  haptophore  group.  In  other  words,  syntoxoids  will  be  formed.
If  the  two  groups  are  nearer  together  a  change  in  the  affinities,  either
positively  or  negatively,  can  readily  occur.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
the  possibihty  of  an  increase  or  decrease  of  affinity  as  a  result  of  this
transformation  into  inert  modifications  has  also  been  observed  in  con-
nection with  related  subjects.  Researches  conducted  by  myself  and
Sachs  have  shown  that  in  the  formation  cf  complementoid  the  hap-


was  the  expression  of  a  certain  loss  of  combining  groups.  This,  however,  is
merely  apparent;  in  the  second  phase  a  greater  excess  of  the  poison  (contaming,
as  it  does,  more  toxoid)  is  required  to  produce  death  than  is  the  case  with
the  hsemitoxin.  Bearing  this  consideration  in  mind  it  is  easy  to  convince
one's  self  that  not  a  single  one  of  the  combining  groups  present  has  been  lost
and  that  the  change  which  the  poison  has  undergone  was  a  quantitative  one.


tophore  group  suffers  a  decrease,  in  affinity.  Coraplementoida,  it  ffill
be  remembered,  result  from  the  destruction  of  the  zymotoxic  group,
the  analogue  of  the  toxophore  group.  Eisenl)erg  and  Volk  by  thoi
discovery  of  proagglutinoids  have  shown  that  in  the  fonuatioa  of
agglutinoidg  an  increase  in  affinity  can  take  place.

Hence  in  diphtheria  poison  the  possibility  had  to  be  considcted
that  similar  conditions  obtain  in  toxoid  transformation.  In  this  rase,
however,  it  wa.s  remarkable  that  this  toxoid  formation  did  not  aJwnys
follow  the  same  scheme,  the  jxiison,  of  course,  always  being  thought
of  as  a  simple  uniform  substance.  I  was  finally  able  to  solve  this
problem  in  the  following  manner.

My  earlier  investigations  bad  given  me  the  impression  that  1  1.  E
(immune  unit)  should  neutralize  20()  fatal  doses  of  a  pure  toxin,  rat
consisting  only  of  toxin  molecules  and  therefore  free  from  tosoiib.
I  am  quite  ready  to  admit  that  I  did  not  at  that  time  furnish  any
absolute  proof  for  this  view.  My  first  effort  was  therefore  directed
to  a  study  concerning  the  correctness  of  the  figure  200.  I  began  by
analyzing  a  large  number  of  different  toxms  in  the  hope  that  sooner
or  later  I  would  find  an  ideally  pure  to\in  I  have  already  Toat-
tinned  that  the  highest  purity  thub  far  obtamed,  a  toxin  obtoiixd
by  Madsen,  corresponds  to  only  four-fifths  piu-it^,  Lf  containing  IflB.
L,  D.  Nevertheless  by  means  of  the  method  of  neutralization  1  wis
able  to  find  poisons  which  fulfilled  my  requirements,  at  least  in  part.
This  was  the  case,  for  example,  in  my  Poison  No.  2  (see  spectrum,
Fig.  2).     In  this  the  Lq  doie  contained  84  L  D     The  first  third  of  the


'^

',    "t

1.    ^    ^    40    w    ^    ;.

i-M    laO    1

0    ISO  .160

i:0    130    190  t

»

Bjjectrum  was  taken  up  bya  zone  of  hemitoxin  not  quite  pure  i.e.  escb
combining  unit  added  I^-tt  I,  E. J  decreased  the  toxicity  by  about  i]
L.  D.  In  the  next  zone,  on  the  other  hand,  stretching  from  72  to  MS
each  combining  unit  took  away  exactly  1  L,  D.  The  spectrum  i
here  reproduced.  It  shows  the  zones  of  hemitoxin,  pure  toxin  triM
toxoid,  and  toxon  very  clearly.  '      ^


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  499

Madsen,  too,  has  described  a  poison  "C,"  the  constitution  of
which  is  very  interesting  because  pro  to  toxoid  and  pure  toxin  are
distinctly  marked  off  from  one  another.  During  the  phase  at  which
Madsen  examined  it  the  pure  toxin  zone  occupied  the  zone  50  to  100
of  the  spectrum.  Before  the  formation  of  tri  to  toxoid  this  zone  may,
however,  have  extended  to  150.

From  these  observations  we  see  that  for  certain  portions  of  the
spectrum  (which  lie  in  the  middle  and  not  at  the  commencement  ^)

it  has  been  possible  to  prove  that  -^r^  I.  E.  combines  with  exactly

1  L.  D.  This  argues  strongly  in  favor  of  the  correctness  of  my
assumed  figure  200.  In  these  zones  of  pure  toxin  only  toxin  molecules
are  neutralized  and  no  toxoids.

Although  it  is  rare  to  find  zones  of  pure  toxin  in  poisons  which  have
been  kept  some  time,  it  is  extremely  common,  or  even  constant,  to

find  in  these  older  poisons  zones  in  which  -^-^  I.  E.  neutralizes  exactly

J  L.  D.  Manifestly  under  these  conditions  equal  parts  of  toxin  and
toxoid  must  always  be  neutralized;  for  this  reason  I  have  termed
such  a  poison  a  hemitoxin.  The  following  scheme  represents  such  a
changed  poison:


Toxin:  Pure  Toxin


Toxoid:  Hemitoxin


Fio   3.


It  needs  no  further  explanation  to  show  that  in  this  hemitoxin
zone  the  affinity  of  toxin  and  toxoid  to  antitoxin  has  remained  un-
changed.

The  entire  process  of  toxoid  formation  takes  place  in  two  phases,
as  can  readily  be  seen  from  the  initial  zones  of  suitable  spectra  (see
Fig.  3).  The  pure  toxin  first  changes  into  hemitoxin;  in  the  second
phase,  however,  the  hemitoxin  changes  into  pure  toxoid,  especially
in  the  first  part  of  the  spectrum.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  following
scheme:

*  In  the  curve  of  ammonia-boric  acid  and  of  tetanolysm  the  maximum
combining  power  always  occupies  the  very  first  portions  of  the  curve.


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


IT


:   Hemitoxio   (Uec
toxoid).


I  :  Pure  Toxin


I  must  again  emphasize  that  this  sketch  of  the  decompositioft
of  the  poison  is  not  at  all  hypothetical,  but  merely  the  expresaon
of  the  facts  observed.  The  regular  course  in  two  phases  points  d-
rectly  to  the  fact  that  the  individual  toxins  are  not  simple  uniform
substances  but  are  composed  of  two  modifications  present  in  wjuil
amounts  in  the  toxin  solution  and  behaving  differently  on  decompn-
sition.  One,  the  more  unstable  of  the  two,  the  a-modifieation,  demni*
poses  rapidly  and  so  gives  rise  to  the  stage  of  hemitoxin.  The  subsr-
quent  destruction  of  the  more  stable  ^-modification  leads  to  pun
toxoid.  It  is,  of  course,  somewhat  remarkable  that  exactly  eqial
parts  of  two  toxin  modifications  should  develop  in  diphtheria  bouillon.
This  is  readily  understood,  however,  if  we  remember  that  E.  Tisehe
has  made  it  extremely  probable  that  the  active  groups  of  fermentt
(grou|)s  exhibiting  a  great  similarity  with  the  toxophore  group)  |*t-
eeaa  an  asymmetrical  constitution.  If  then  in  accordance  with  Ihw
we  assume  an  asymmetrical  constitution  of  the  toxophore  group,  lliew
will  he  nothing  remarkable  in  the  fact  that  the  diphtheria  bacilli
produce  both  asymmetrical  components  Bimulta,neously.  Nor  is  il
surprising  that  Iwth  are  jiroduced  in  equal  amounts  if  we  consider,
for  example,  that  optically  inactive  tartaric  acid  consists  of  eqtal
parts  of  dextro  and  Iievo  tartaric  acid.  If  optically  active  combjci
tions  (of  which  a  large  number  can  be  made  artificially)  are  prodiml
in  the  retort,  the  rule  holds  that  exactly  the  same  number  of  mok-
culoa  of  the  two  components  are  produced  by  the  reaction.

Ever  since  Pasteur  showed  that  in  the  fermentation  of  tartarii
acid  by  moulds  the  dextro  tartaric  acid  is  decomposed  first,  it  has
found  possible  to  demonstrate  a  similar  behavior  in  numerous  otUs
instances:  thusbv  the  aid  of  moulds. yeasts,  and  bacteria  it  was  foimJ
possible  to  isolate  ore  of  the  optically  active  com[)onent3  from  racenA


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN


501


T


combinations.  Looked  at  in  this  way  the  formation  of  hemitoxin  is
explained  in  very  simple  fashion.^

It  can  readily  be  shown  that  in  the  first  stage  of  toxoid  formation
which  leads  to  hemitoxin  no  change  in  aflinity  takes  place,  and  this
holds  true  also  for  all  the  toxoid  formation,  for  if  an  increase  in
affinity  occurred  there  could  be  no  hemitoxin  zone;  a  prototoxoid
zone  would  again  be  followed  by  a  zone  of  pure  toxin.  Conversely
if  there  were  a  decrease  in  affinity  a  zone  of  pure  toxin  would  precede
the  toxoid  portion.  The  following  scheme  will  serve  to  make  these
conditions  clear:

These  considerations
at  once  show  us  that  in
the  formation  of  toxoid
no  change  in  affinity  can
take  place.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  however,  the  pro-
totoxoid possesses  a  much
stronger,  and  the  trito-
toxoid  a  much  weaker,
affinity  than  the  toxin  or
hemitoxin  occupying  the
central    portion    of    the

spectrum.  This  we  saw  in  our  analysis  of  the  poison  mentioned
above.  We  must,  therefore,  conclude  that  this  difference  is  not
produced  by  the  formation  of  toxoid,  but  exists  in  the  toxic  bouil-
lon from  the  beginning,  the  initial  portion  of  toxin,  which  subse-
quently passes  over  into  prototoxoid,  already  possessing  a  higher
affinity  for  the  antitoxin.  The  poison  of  diphtheria,  for  example,
could  be  represented  by  the  following  rough  diagram,  in  which  the
degree  of  affinity  is  expressed  schematically  by  the  length  of  the  lines :


T


Pure  Toxin


Increased
Affinity


Decreased
Affinity


Affinity
Unchanged


Fio   6.


Erototoxin


Deuterotoxin
Pig.  6.


uxi

Tritotoxin


*  See  E.  Fischer.  Zeitschr.  f.  physiol.  Chemie,  Vol.  26.


502  COLLECTED  STUDIES  L\   IMMUNITY.

Certain  other  considerations  have  convinced  me  of  the  pluralitj-
of  the  toxins.  Chief  of  these  is  the  behavior  of  the  poisons  on  long
standing.  As  is  well  known,  poisons  freshly  produced  rapidly  deterio-
rate in  toxicity  until  a  point  is  reached  beyond  which  the  constanla
of  titration,  especially  Li,  remain  unchanged.  Such  "  ripened  "  poisons
are  made  use  of  in  the  official  testing  of  diphtheria  antitoxin,  and  we
have  therefore  had  abundant  opportunity  to  convince  ourseU-es  that
they  remain  constant.

From  the  standpoint  of  physical  chemistry  this  fact  (that  the
toxicity  after  a  time  becomes  constant)  could  perhaps  \ie  ascribed
to  an  equilibrium  Ijetween  toxin  and  toxoid.  Such  an  equilibrium,
however,  is  found  only  in  reversible  reactions,  i.e.,  in  chemical  proc-
esses, which  also  proceed  in  the  reverse  direction.  Toxoid  formation,
however,  is  not  a  reversible  reaction;  no  one  has  jet  disco^'ered  ei-en
a  suggestion  of  a  toxoid  passing  over  into  toxin.  Another  |x>iQt  which
speaks  against  a  condition  of  equilibrium  ia  the  fact  that  through
artificial  influences— heat,  chemicals — any  desired  proportion  of  toxin
and  toxoid  can  be  produced.  Only  one  other  explanation  therrfnre
remains,  namely,  that  various  toxins  are  present,  of  which  some  are
more  resistant,  others  less  so.

1  have  thus  presented  in  detail  the  reasons  which  led  me  to  assunie
the  existence  of  ■prejormtd  varieties  of  toxins.  As  a  result  of  my  «c-
periments  I  must  emphatically  deny  the  assumption  that  the  phr-
nomena  observed  by  me  in  diphtheria  poLson  are  only  the  cxpressiao
of  a  weak  affinity  between  diphtheria  to.xin  and  antitoxin.  I  have
demonstrated  that  the  observed  deviations  can  only  be  duo  to  the
admixture  of  toxoids  with  different  affinity,  and  have  further  made
it  probable  that  these  different  degrees  of  affinity  exist  preformed
in  the  toxin  and  do  not  arise  with  the  formation  of  toxoid.  It  must
however,  be  distinctly  understood  that  the  points  of  view  here  laid
down  are  not  applicable  to  the  relations  between  toxins  and  antitoxins
in  general.  They  apply  only  to  diphtheria  toxin  and  its  antitoxin.
The  important  researches  of  Arrhenius  and  Madeen  on  tetanolysin
show  that  neutralization  proceeds  in  an  entirely  different  fashion
when  the  two  components  possess  a  weak  affinity  for  one  another.
The  studies  of  these  authors  clearly  indicate  ihe  errors  in  tho  interpre-
tation of  neutralization  phenomena  when  dissociation  is  difiregarded,

My  results  were  obtained  by  the  long  and  tedious  experimental
method.  I  can  assure  the  reader  that  the  experimentji  upon  which
all  this  is  based,  experiments  carried  out  by  my  fellow  workers  (espe-


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  503

daily  Geh.-Rath  Donitz  and  Dr.  Morgenroth)  and  myself,  have  been
most  exact,  and  I  venture  to  say  that  in  medicine  but  few  investiga-
tions exist  which  have  been  carried  out  with  such  precision  and  on
such  abundant  material.

U.  Toxons.

Thus  far  we  have  dealt  only  with  the  true  toxin  portion  of  the
diphtheria  poison,  and  have  entirely  disregarded  another  constant
secretory  product  of  the  diphtheria  bacillus,  namely,  the  ioxons.  On
testmg  a  diphtheria  poison  and  determining  the  two  hmits,  Lq  and  L|,
we  should  expect  that  the  difference,  L|-L  =D,  would  correspond
exactly  to  one  lethal  dose,  provided  the  poison  were  a  simple  uniform
substance.  Thus  if  L  ,  for  example,  contains  a  lethal  doses  these,
according  to  our  definition  of  Lq,  will  exactly  be  neutralized  by
1  I.  E.  Assuming  that  the  two  substances  have  a  strong  affinity  for
each  other,  the  addition  of  one  L.  D.  would  suffice  to  transform  this
neutral  Lq  mixture  into  Lf,  i.e.,  Lf  should  contain  (a 4- 1)  L.  D.  and  the
difference,  D,  should  equal  1.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  it  was
found  that  with  the  exception  of  one  poison  examined  by  me,  the
difference  between  Lt  and  Lq  is  much  greater.  In  the  poisons  de-
scribed in  my  first  conmiunications  the  difference  D  ranged  from
5  to  50  L.  D.  At  first,  when  I  still  held  to  the  unitarian  conception,
I  had  interpreted  these  results  as  indicating  the  existence  of  a  toxin
derivative  of  very  Httle  toxicity  and  possessing  less  affinity  than  the
toxin.  For  this  reason  I  termed  the  derivative  "epitoxoid."  In  my
second  communication,  however,  I  abandoned  this  assumption,  and
stated  that  we  were  evidently  dealing  with  a  primary  secretory  prod-
uct of  the  diphtheria  bacilli — the  "toxon."  The  reasons  which  led
me  to  this  view  will  be  presented  in  a  moment.  The  toxon  possesses
the  same  haptophore  group  as  the  toxin,  but  a  weaker  affinity  for  the
antitoxin.  The  main  difference  is  in  the  toxophore  group,  for  even
when  given  in  large  doses  the  toxon  does  not  produce  death,  but  only
paralyses  which  develop  after  a  long  incubation  of  fourteen  days  or
more.^  ,  -.

Arrhenius  and  Madsen  have  doubted  particularly  the  existence  of

*  It  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  such  additional  or  "by-poisons"  with
a  long  period  of  incubation  are  not  hmited  to  diphtheria  bacilli.  According
to  the  observations  of  Sciavo  on  animals  infected  with  anthrax  it  is  highly
probable  that  anthrax  bacilli  also  produce  poisons  having  a  toxin-like  action.


504


COLLECTED  STLTJIES  l\  LMMUNITY


the  toxons.     According  to  them  the  long-drawn-out  toxon  zones
the  expression  of  the  incomplete  combination  of  toxin  and  antitoxin,
the  neutralization  of  which  they  bebeve  follows  the  ammonia-boric
acid  type.    There  are,  however,  a  number  of  weighty  reasons  wh/    ■
this  view  cannot  be  accepted.  I

It  was  but  natural  at  iirst  to  ascribe  the  toxon  stage  to  phenomena  I
such  as  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  now  have  in  ^iew.     It  had  already   '
been  noticed  by  others  that  often  a  considerable  interval  exists  be-
tween Lt  and  I^.      Ivnorr,  in  refernng  to  this,  had  spoken  of  "un-
neutralized  poison  residue,"    The  a^umption,  however,  that  we  are
here  dealing  with  the  result  of  an  mcomplete  neutralization  is  con-
troverted by  the  analysis  of  a  poison  which  I  encountered  during  ibe
course  of  my  investigations.     This  was  Poison  No,  10  (of  my  series),   ■
whose  Lq  and  L^  values  were  very  close  together.     L^  contained  27.»  I
and  Lf  29.2  L.  D.     Hence  D=  1.7  L.  D.,  which  is  a  close  approach  to   I
the  figure  demanded  by  a  simple  diphtheria  poison.  '

The  loUowing  conside rations  will  show  thuC  this  vaJue,  17  should  be  ecu-
reeled  so  as  lo  be  Blill  lower.  The  original  cakulalioos  were  based  on  my  earlKt
tksaumplion  that  toxics  and  toxoids  are  imiComily  mixed.  This  however  htf
been  superseded  by  the  spectrum  method  of  representing  the  neuirBlixation  of
poisons .  Experience  has  taught  ub  that  such  deteriorated  poisons  usiiaUj
oonsist  of  a  small  zone  of  hemitoxin  and  a  more  or  less  pronounced  zone  of
tritotoxin-toxoid,  in  which  at  a  rule  nine  toKOid  equivalents  fall  on  une  toxin
equivalent.  Several  times  1  have  observed  tritotoxm -toxoid  zones  containing
V„  toxin,  and  Madsen  also  has  deBcnt>ed  such  a  poison.  As  can  be  seen  fnnn
our  calculations  given  above,  the  theoretical  change  from  L.  to  Lt  is  iriflu«Dc«l
solely  by  the  tritotoxoid  zone.  If  we  therefore  assume  that  our  poison  po«-
sessed  a  tritoto  toxin -toxoid  portion  whose  strength  was  '/,,  (and  this  is  extt«melT
probable)  we  shull  find  that  by  a  little  calculation  that  the  poison  prohafalj
contained  no  toxon  whatever.  Very  likely  the  tritotoxoid  zone  reached  to  ■
the  end  (200)  of  the  spectrum.  On  the  assumption  of  a  '/,<  trilotoxin-toxoid.  |
if  we  multiply  L,  by  "°/„  we  shall  obtain  Lt'28.n  L.  D.  This  agrees  very  I
well  with  the  figures  obtamed  experimentally,  Lt  =  29.2  L.  D.  1

We  may  therefore  very  well  assume  that  we  were  dealing  with  »
poison  free  from  toxon  or  one  which  contained  only  very  small  tracea
of  toxon.

This  fact  is  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  theory  o(  Arrhenius  and
Madsen,  for  if  toxin  and  antitoxin  neutralized  each  other  like
ammonia  and  boric  acid,  all  poisons  should  show  a  long  zone  of  iti'
complete  neutralization.

The  independent  existence  of  the  toxons  is  further  corroborated
by  the  tact  that  the  toxon  zone  varies  enormously  in  different  sped-


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  505

mens  of  poison.  In  one  it  may  amount  to  about  one-fifth  of  the  toxin
portion,  in  another  I  have  seen  equal  parts  of  toxon  and  toxin.  Dreyer
and  Madsen  in  fact  have  recently  described  a  poison  which  contained
three  times  as  much  toxon  as  toxin.  According  to  our  present  ex-
periences, therefore,  the  amount  of  toxon  calculated  on  the  toxin  can
vary  from  0  per  cent  to  300  per  cent.  Hence  1  find  it  impossible  to
assume  that  we  are  dealing  with  neutralization  phenomena  such  as
are  observed  with  ammonia  and  boric  acid,  for  such  neutralizations
would  show  at  least  some  agreement.

This  still  left  undecided  whether  the  toxon  is  a  primary  bacillary
secretion  or  a  secondary  modification  of  the  toxin.  A  study  of  the
development  of  one  poison  finally  gave  me  the  clue  to  this.  This  was
poison  V,  whose  constitution  has  been  described  in  the  Deutsche
med.  Wochenschrift  1898.  It  will  be  recalled  that  this  poison  pos-
sessed the  following  limits  in  the  second  phase:

Lo=0.125;  Lt=0.26;  L.  D.=0.003.

During  the  course  of  three  weeks  Geheimrath  Donitz  made  con-
tinuous determinations  of  Lq  and  L^,  using  very  uniform  animal
material.  The  protocol  of  this  experiment  is  reproduced  in  full
because  the  precision  of  the  methods  will  thereby  also  be  exhibited
(see  table  on  page  506).

From  the  table  we  see  that  in  the  course  of  three  weeks  I^o  has
increased  from  0.15  to  0.20.  After  this  an  insignificant  increase
brought  this  to  0.21 ;  from  then  on  Lq  remained  constant.  During
this  time  the  L^  dose  (0.26)  had  suffered  no  change  whatever,  for  on
the  16th  of  July  a  mixture  of  0.25  poison -fl  1.  E.  killed  in  six  days
and  0.275 -fl  I.  E.  in  three  days.  Lf,  which  accordmg  to  our  defi-
nition is  the  mixture  that  will  just  kill  on  the  fifth  day,  must  have
been  about  midway  between  these  two  values,  a  little  over  0.26.
This  agrees  very  well  with  the  value  obtained  in  the  beginning.  To
repeat,  during  the  course  of  this  stage  Lf  has  remained  constant,
but  Lo  has  increased  considerably  (from  0.125  to  0.21).

This  fact  is  easily  explained.  The  toxin  portion  has  remained
absolutely  unchanged  in  its  end  zone,  as  can  at  once  be  seen  from
the  constancy  of  the  Lt  dose.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  toxon  por-
tion, which  is  expressed  by  the  difference  between  Lt  and  Lq,  80
toxon  equivalents  out  of  100  have  apparently  disappeared.  This
eliminates  the  possibility  of  a  transformation  of  toxin  into  toxon,
for  if  that  assumption  were  correct  one  would  expect  that  on  allow-


506                       COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY                ^^^|

ing  the  bouillon  to  stand,  the  toxin  zone  would  decrease  im^^S
toxon  zone  become  considerably  greater.     In  thia  case,  however,  wa
see  that  the  toxin  zone  remains  constant  while  the  toxon  zone  il
reduced  to  one-Efth.'

Determination  of  L,  Dose.

■OfPoiKOl

a«i.«.pi«,„™  I„i«c.d  .i,b  I  1,  E..V.rvin,A„ou..  o(  r.i^

..^.

July

..

2.

»

'

*

6

10

0.125
0.1275
0,13
0.14

0,15

0  1()

0,17
0.18
0.19

0,2

0,21.5

0,2:i

faint  trace

0
almost  0

slight  hut

distinct

just

neutral
slight  but
distinct

little

sl^hl

flight

cedema
oedema

almoit
□eutrsl

(cdema
mark«d

"Famt  truce,"  "slight,"  etc.  dcno to  the  degree  of  infiltralion.

It  is  difficult  to  say  a  priori  what  has  become  of  the  to.Yon  which
has  disappeared.     On  account  of  certain  facts  which  I  shall  mention
later,  1  have  assumed  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  the  formation
of  an  analogue  of  toxoid,  namely,  a  substance  which  I  term  "toxo-
noid."     I  conceive  this  to  be  a  toxon  in  which  the  toxophore  group
has  become  modified.

1  The  enliro  course  of  the  decompoEition.  in  whirh  from  day  to  day  we  could
observe  the  toxon  becoming  weaker  and  wealicr   speaks  against  the  poasibilllj
(in  itself  very  remote)  that  the  varying  composition  of  the  bouillon  is  respon-
cible  for  the  variation  in  the  numbet  of  toxons  in   the  individual  poisons,     la
the  poison  here  described  the  deoom position  has  taken  place  in  the  saine  bouiUoa
and  in  so  short  a  time  thai  very  great  alterations  in  the  bouillon  uppeu  MlH
excluded.                                                                                                   ^■fl

THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  507

Another  fundamental  difference,  one  which  in  my  opinion  argues
in  favor  of  the  individuality  of  toxin  and  toxon,  consists  in  the  differ-
ent action  of  the  two  constituents.  The  action  of  diphtheria  toxin,
as  is  well  known,  is  such  that  the  animals  die  with  symptoms  of
hydrothorax,  ascites,  congestion  of  thesuprarenals,  necl-osis  of  the  skin.
Somewhat  smaller  doses  kill  guinea-pigs  in  from  six  to  seven  days,
the  animals  showing  ulceration  and  extensive  necrosis.  Still  smaller
doses,  J,  i,  J,  i  L.  D.,  no  longer  produce  death,  but  regularly  cause
necroses  which  are  surrounded  by  an  extensive  area  of  total  loss  of
hair.  Small  fractions  of  the  fatal  dose  always  produce  emaciation
of  the  animals.  In  contrast  to  this,  the  toxon,  i.e.  a  serum-poison
mixture  in  which  only  the  toxin  fraction  is  completely  neutralized,
never  kills  animals  acutely,  even  in  high  doses.  The  inflammatory
properties  may  be  entirely  absent  in  small  doses,  while  in  large  doses
they  are  present  to  only  a  slight  degree.  The  oedema  disappears
■completely  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  there  are  no  necroses,  and
the  loss  of  hair,  if  it  occurs  at  all,  is  only  partial.  On  the  other  hand
the  paralyses  are  very  characteristic,  and  these  appear  at  any  time
between  the  fourteenth  and  twentieth  day,  depending  upon  the  dose,
usually  in  the  third  week.  Frequently  the  animals  do  not  show  even
a  trace  of  local  reaction  and  maintain  their  weight;  then  suddenly  they
are  attacked  with  the  paralyses  and  may  die  from  these  within  a  few
<iays.  I  have  never  seen  such  a  result  in  animals  inoculated  with  a
pure  diphtheria  poison.  Now  and  then  a  guinea-pig  was  observed
which  showed  these  paralytic  phenomena.  It  was  usually  one  that
had  received  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  L.  D.  Invariably  it
4show^ed  extensive  necroses,  was  generally  very  sick  from  the  beginning,
and  had  suffered  considerable  loss  of  weight.  In  view  of  the  slight
amount  of  toxon  which  1  found  in  these  poisons,  such  animals  were
evidently  supersensitive  to  the  toxon.

Dreyer  and  Madsen  have  succeeded  in  differentiating  toxin  and
toxon  qualitatively,  as  follows:  They  found  that  mixtures  of  a  diph-
theria poison  and  antitoxin  in  which  the  limit  of  complete  toxin
neutralization  was  nearly  approached,  exerted  only  toxon  effects
when  given  in  small  doses.  If,  however,  the  mixture  was  increased
tenfold,  death  was  brought  about  by  the  toxin.  This  is  readily
explained.  The  determination  of  toxon  by  means  of  1  1.  E.  natu-
rally cannot  be  absolutely  exact,  for  a  small  residue  of  toxin,  e.g.
i/io  L.  D.,  can  readily  escape  observation.  If,  however,  a  sufficiently
large  multiple  of  this  mixture,  e.g.  ten  times  the  original  quantity,  is


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY'

injected,  this  will  now  contain  '"/lo  L-  D.  unneutralizetl.  If  now  the
amount  of  antitoxin  was  also  somewhat  increased,  Dreyer  and  Mad-
sen  found  that  even  with  this  multiple  amount  only  toxon  effects
were  observed,  the  toxin  now  being  completely  neutralized  and  only
toxon  remaining  free.

Dreyer  and  Madsen  ^  thereupon  subjected  this  same  poison  to  s
thorough  study,  using  rabbits  for  the  purpose.  They  found  if  0.6  ce.
poison  was  mixed  with  1  I.  E.,  that  this  mixture,  which  represente
the  Lq  dose  for  guinea-pigs,  is  still  highly  toxic  for  rabbits.  In  ord»
to  render  this  dose  of  poison  completely  innocuous  tor  rabbits  it  ii

necessary  to  add  more  antitoxin,  in  this  case  ^-r^  I.  E.  The  state-
ments concerning  the  behavior  of  mixtures  between  these  two  limii*
are  also  of  considerable  importance.     A  mixture  of  0.6  cc.  poison-!-

x---r  I.  E.  injected  into  a  rabbit  causes  death  on  the  twenty-second

day   with   paralytic  sj-mptoms.     The  incubation   period    is  sixten

days.     Even  a  mixture  of  ^r—  I.  E.  with  the  same  amount  of  poison

caused  paralyses,  which  appeared  on  the  sixteenth  day  and  con-
tinued for  several  weeks.  This  behavior  is  so  important  for  our  vie*
concerning  the  existence  of  different  poisons  that  I  must  enter  t
little  more  fully  into  the  subject.     According  to  our  definition  of  ihf

'  200
possessing  a  considerable  excess  of  antitoxin,  are  absolutely
for  guinea-pigs  and  can  be  injected  in  any  quantity.  In  virtue  of
the  excess  of  antitoxin  such  mixtures  suffice  to  pn&sively  immuni*
the  animal  and  to  protect  it,  provided  suitable  doses  have  been  in*
jected,  against  diphtheria  poison  and  diphtheria  bacilli.  If  then
such  mixtures  are  still  toxic  for  rabbits  only  one  possibility  remains,
namely,  that  the  diphtheria  poison  in  question  contains  a  substance
which  ia  non-toxic  for  guinea-pigs  but  toxic  for  rabbits.  This  sub-
stance I  term  toxonoid.^

'  See  also  my  article  in  Mflnch.  med.  Wochensch.  1903,  Nos.  33,  34.

'  At  the  outBOl  of  my  jdvch Ligations  1  made  entirely  similar  ol>«ervstiatt
My  very  extensive  but  unpublished  studies  made  at  that  time  convinced  ow
that  this  property  is  not  common  lo  all  diphtheria  poieons,  for  I  al«a  (ami
some  in  which  the  I^  dose  was  ejiactly  the  same  in  rabbits  and  in  guinea-^)ip
This  fact  furthermore  refutes  the  assumption  that  the  phenomenon    ~        ~    *


L


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.  509

So  far  as  the  behavior  of  partially  neutralized  mixtures  is  con-
cerned, the  observations  of  these  authors  show  that  mixtures  which
exert  only  toxon  effects  on  guinea-pigs  produce  death  in  rabbits
with  symptoms  of  diphtheria  poisoning.  I  believe  that  all  these
phenomena  are  best  explained  by  the  assumption  that  there  are  at
least  three  different  varieties  of  poisons,  and  that  these  possess  differ-
ent affinities  and  different  actions.    These  poisons  are;

1.  Toxin,  possessing  the  highest  affinity,  kills  rabbits  and  guinea-
pigs  acutely,  but  is  more  toxic  for  the  former.

2.  Toxon,  killing  rabbits  acutely  and  guinea-pigs  with  symptoms
of  paralysis.

3.  Toxonoid,  producing  paralyses  in  rabbits,  non-toxic  for  guinea-
pigs.

The  fact  that  all  three  poisons  act  more  strongly  on  rabbits  than
on  guinea-pigs  is  explained  by  the  absolute  higher  susceptibility  of
the  former.

Dreyer  and  Madsen  have  recently  described  a  diphtheria  poison
in  which  toxoid  effects  could  be  demonstrated  even  on  the  injection
of  sublethal  doses  of  the  pure  poison.  This  behavior  is  at  once  imder-
stood  if  we  study  the  constants  of  this  poison  as  they  were  determined
by  these  authors,  for  whereas  in  the  other  poisons  examined  there
were  33  toxon  equivalents  to  167  toxin  equivalents  (toxon: toxin  =
1:5),  in  this  poison  the  proportion  was  just  the  reverse,  there  being
three  times  as  much  toxon  as  toxin.  No  wonder  therefore  that  with
the  toxon  fifteen  times  more  concentrated  even  sublethal  doses  of
the  pure  poison  should  suffice  to  make  toxon  effects  evident.

In  view  of  the  high  theoretical  significance  which  attaches  to  the
poison  described  by  Dreyer  and  Madsen,  I  cannot  refrain  from  giving
briefly  my  conception  of  its  constitution.  The  authors  have  repre-
sented the  poison  in  the  form  of  a  curve,  one  which  at  first  sight  seemed
rather  strange  to  me.  As  soon,  however,  as  I  transformed  their
graphic  representation  into  a  spectrum  by  the  aid  of  their  figures,
the  constitution  of  the  poison  was  found  to  agree  very  well  with
other  well-known  diphtheria  poisons.     The  only  difference  is  the  very


is  due  to  an  incomplete  neutralization,  such  as  Arrhenius  and  Madsen,  for  exam-
ple, have  demonstrated  in  the  case  of  boric  acid  and  ammonia,  and  in  the  union
of  tetanolysin  with  its  antitoxin.  If  that  were  the  case  one  would  expect  to
see  the  phenomenon  in  all  diphtheria  poisons  in  equal  degree,  and  this  is  not


the  case.


510  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

large  content  of  toxon.  The  spectrum,  which  corresponds  to  ihe
curve  obtained  by  the  authors,  is  here  reproduced  (Fig.  3.  Phase  II).

From  this  we  see  that  a  zone  of  hemttoxin  in  the  beginoing  of  the
spectrum  is  followed  by  a  zone  of  almost  pure  toxin,  and  this  in  tuni
by  a  zone  of  tri  to  toxin -toxoid.  Then  cornea  the  very  long  toxin
fraction.

To  one  employing  this  mode  of  representation,  such  a  spectnuo
not  only  pictures  the  present  constitution  of  the  poison  but  also
frequently  permits  him  to  reconstruct  its  previous  constitution.
In  this  case,  for  example,  it  was  possible  to  do  so  with  the  aid  of
several  statements  by  the  authors  concerning  earlier  and  later  stago.
According  to  these  figures  I  would  assume  that  in  the  first  phase
the  poison  contained  a  pure  toxin  in  the  initial  zone.  In  the  sewud
phase,  the  period  at  which  the  poison  was  studied  by  Dreyer  aiul
Madsen,  this  had  become  transformed  into  hemitoxin.  In  the  thiri
phase  it  may  become  pure  prototoxoid.  A  fourth  phase  n-ould  then
show  the  transformation  of  the  pure  toxin  in  the  above  spectra  into
hemitoxin  and  the  jmison  would  then  have  reached  the  point  which
we  have  so  frequently  observed  in  other  poisons.  The  spectra  of
these  various  phases  is  as  follows  (Fig.  7) :

I  shall  now  present  the  figures  which  Madsen  and  Dreyer  ol>-
tained  when  they  startetl  with  double  the  1^  dose  (0.1  cc.  poison).
In  the  first  phase,  their  statement  that  the  lethal  dose  was  0.0015  ce.
shows  that  0.1  cc.  jxiison  contEuns  66  L.  D.  Calculation  from  the
spectrum  gives  65  L.  D.

The  second  phase,  of  course,  agrees  entirely  with  the  statcmenU
of  the  authors,  since  the  sjx^ctrum  was  constructed  according  to  these.

In  the  third  phase  the  formation  of  the  prototoxoid  zone  from
the  previous  zone  of  hemitoxin  is  readily  seen  from  a  second  neu-
tralization test,  one  made  with  normal  horse  antitoxin.

In  phase  IV  the  lethal  dose  had  risen  to  0.0027.  eorresponding
to  37  L.  D.  in  0.1  cc.  Calculating  this  from  my  spectrum  I  obtaia
35  L.  D.,  which  is  but  2  L.  D.  smaller  than  would  oorre3[>ond  to
the  final  stage.  Perhaps  tliis  stage  had  been  nearly  but  not  j-et
completely  attained.  It  is  probable  that  if  the  examination  had
been  made  a  little  later  the  figure  woiild  have  been  exactly  35.

The  figures  obtained  from  my  reconstructed  spectra  harmoniie
so  well  with  those  obtained  experimentally  by  the  authors  that  it
seems  almost  impossible  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  my  assumptioiu
concerning  the  constitution  of  the  poison  and  the  process  of  its  trata-


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN.


511


formation.  This  proves  that  in  this  poison  the  toxin  zone  behaved
exactly  the  same  in  its  transformation  as  it  did  in  the  other  diph-
theria poisons  examined,

I  believe  it  will  be  seen  from  my  explanations  that  my  mode  of
procedure  in  the  study  of  diphtheria  poison  has  been  exceedingly
Phase  I


lio   io  m   u  iM  110  1^  ite  i4o  iGd  tlo  ito  tto  ito  soO'


50    ia    -ta   Oi    A  IAD  iio  liD  i^  tio  IN  ita  it«  ite  ite  ^
Phase  IT


careful,  and  that  the  objections  raised  against  my  results  do  not  apply.
I  roust  therefore  continue  to  maintun  my  original  standpoint,  and
deem  it  well  therefore  to  once  more  define  my  views  concerning  the
poison  of  diphtheria.


512  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

1.  The  diphllieria  bacillus  produces  Beveral  kinds  of  poisoBs,
especially  toxins  and  toxons.

2.  The  affinity  of  diphtheria  toxin  to  the  antitoxin  is  verj-  gmt.

3.  The  deviationa  from  a  straight  line  as  they  manifest  themselves
in  the  graphic  representation  of  the  neutralization  of  the  poistm
cannot  be  explained  by  the  assumption  of  a  single  poison  possessing
a  weak  affinity.  They  are  rather  the  expression  of  the  fact  that  tbe
poiFKin  bouillon  contains  admixtures  of  various  kinds  of  substani-eB
of  a  toxoid  character.

4.  The  varied  affinity  of  the  toxoids  cannot  be  explained  hy  Ihe
assumption  that  a  simple  toxin  when  transformed  into  toxoid  aiifferB
a  change  in  affinity  cither  positively  or  negatively.  Rather  d<«
this  indicate  that  the  toxic  bouillon  contains,  preformed,  various
toxins  of  different  affinities.

5.  There  is  no  change  in  tbe  haptophore  group  in  tbe  formatioD
of  toxoid.

6.  The  absolute  number  of  combining  units  contained  in  the
immune  unit  or  in  the  l^  dose  of  poison  is  200.'

I  have  finished.  If  the  results  of  the  first  encounter  of  two  such
different  methods  of  study  as  the  mat  hem  ati  co-physical  and  the  bio-
logical have  not  shown  complete  agreement  we  should  not  be  at  all
surprised.     The  natural  aim  of  physical  chemistry  must  alwaj's  be

'  Bonlet  has  recently  ntteropted  to  explain  Ibe  toxon  pbcDonieoa  by  tbe
Bsaumption  that  tbe  toxin  molecule  can  combine  with  Eintitoxii)  in  varyini
proportionH.  Oue  would  accordingly  have  to  asaumc  that  the  toxin  mol«cul*
contains  BGvenU  haptophore  groups.  The  complete  occupation  of  these  ftroupt
causes  the  toxicity  to  be  entirely  loat.  whereas  partial  saturation  causes  a  itr>
crease  in  toxicity.  That  is  to  say,  amounts  of  antitoxin  which  do  not  coni-
plcCely  neutrohzo  tbe  toxin  would  weaken  it  in  Euch  lashion  that  it  would  exeft
a  different  action.  It  ia  atrange  that  so  eminent  un  invcBtiitator  as  Bordtf
shiiuld  not  have  attempted  to  convince  himself  of  the  correclncss  of  tbis  hy-
pothesis by  mesDS  of  tbe  experiment.  He  would  then  have  foiitid  that  i^
facta  are  irreconcilable  with  such  an  assumption.  We  have  Bhowm  at  grot
length  that  the  toxon  actions  are  nothing  les.*  than  constant  phenomenB  and
have  called  attention  to  the  great  extent  of  tbe  quantitative  variations  (0-3001.
If  one  were  to  follow  Bordet  it  would  then  be  necessary  to  assume  an  ciir>rmoiM
multiplicity  of  haptophore  groups  in  the  toxin  molecules,  and  this  would  lead
to  a  hypothesis  fat  more  comphcated  than  mine,  although  the  lat<«r  banuo-
niies  all  the  experimental  results.  In  support  of  his  conception  Bordet  relBM
to  experiments  with  complement  and  anticomplenienl.  I  must  say,  lio«re\«,
that  in  these  we  are  dealing  with  such  complicated  relations  that  it  is  not
raissible  to  apply  the  conclusions  drawn  from  them  to  the  far  simpler  rehukm*
existing  between  toxin  and  antitoxin


THE  CONSTITUENTS  OF  DIPHTHERIA  TOXIN  513

to  introduce  as  few  factors  as  possible  for  purposes  of  calculation,
whereas  biological  analysis  always  seeks  to  pay  due  regard  to  the
wonderful  multiplicity  of  organic  matter.  However,  I  believe  that
these  two  methods  can  readily  be  combined  and  that  this  will  be
very  desirable.  The  biologist  will  have  to  content  himself  in  so  far
yielding  to  the  economy  of  the  mathematical  view  that  he  restricts
his  assumptions  to  the  smallest  possible  number.  The  physical
chemist,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  escape  the  obligation  of  paying
due  heed  to  this  minimal  multiplicity,  the  result  of  experimental
research.  Naturally  the  problem  is  thus  made  extremely  difficult,  so
that  success  will  require  that  the  greatest  authorities  in  physical
chemistry  w^ork  hand  in  hand  with  the  best  biological  talent.  For
this  reason  I  regard  it  as  a  great  gain  to  science  that  so  eminent  a
leader  as  Svante  Arrhenius  is  taking  a  lively  interest  in  our  work,
and  has  joined  hands  with  my  friend  and  pupil,  Thorvald  Madsen.


XXX\in.  TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN:*

A  REPLY  TO  THE  LATEST  ATTACK  OF  GRUBER.

By  Paul  Ebrucb.

In  a  domiun  that  is  open  to  experiniental  investigation  it  ii
neither  easy  nor  without  danger  for  one  to  express  criticism  menh
as  a  result  of  literary  studies.

This  is  especially  true  in  that  most  difficult  field  in  the  entiw
etudy  of  immimity,  namely,  the  subject  of  toxins.  Only  one  who
has  devoted  years  of  unprejudiced  study  at  the  laboratorj-  Ubie
to  this  subject  and  gathered  a  host  of  observations  and  experienns
will  be  in  a  position  to  orientate  himself  in  the  confused  mass  of
true  and  false  statements  contained  in  the  literature.  The  outsidH
will  find  it  very  difficult  to  correctly  analyze  all  this  material.
Hence  it  is  all  the  more  remarkable  that  Gruber'  should  clioose
the  subject  of  toxins  for  the  main  portion  of  his  attack  upon  roe,
for  according  to  his  own  admissions  that  is  the  fipid  which  he  know
merely  from  literary  studies.  Against  such  critics  I  am  in  the  unpleas-
ant position  of  a  man  who  is  compelled  to  discuss  colors  with  ibt
blind.  Nevertheless  I  cannot  well  escape  the  thankless  task  ol
replying,  at  least  to  the  main  points  in  Gruber's  polemic,  for  it  is
indisputable  that  this  attack,  addressed  chiefly  to  those  withoiB
special  training  in  this  field,  is  capable  of  causing  wide-spread  con-
fusion, owing  to  its  positive  tone  and  its  severitv-

Gruber'a  first  important  error  lies  in  the  assumption  that  a  rw
troversion  of  the  plurality  of  poisons,  to  which  I  hold,  nignifiM  the
downfall  of  the  side-chfun  theory  without  further  ado.  The  stSe-
chain  theory,  however,  proceeds  from  the  assumption  that  the  toxin-

'  Reprinted   from  the  Miinch.   nied.   Wochensrh.   1903,  Nob.  33   t^ad  W,
'  M.Gruber  and  CI,  v.  Pir(|uet,Toiin  und  Antitoxin.  Munch,  med.  Wndff&Mfc.
1903.  Nob.  2S  and  2fl.


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN.  515

like  poisons  are  characterized  by  a  haptophore  and  a  toxophore
group,  of  which  only  the  former  effects  the  anchoring  of  the  toxin.
Practically  therefore  only  this  group  is  important  for  the  produc-
tion of  antitoxins.  This  view  is  only  the  logical  consequence  of
the  fact  that  on  long  standing  the  poison  bouillon  undergoes  modi-
fications, resulting  in  the  production  of  what  1  term  toxoids.  These
substances  are  characterized  by  this,  that  the  haptophore  group
has  remained  intact,  while  the  toxophore  group,  depending  on  cir-
cumstances, has  suffered  partial  or  complete  modification.  Not
infrequently  it  can  be  shown  that  the  formation  of  toxoid  is  quan-
titative, the  combining  power  of  the  toxic  bouillon  being  unchanged
despite  a  considerable  loss  of  toxicity.

Gruber,  by  means  of  certain  calculations,  appears  to  question
this  fact;  he  refers  exclusively  to  my  very  earliest  publications  in
which,  naturally,  the  evidence  was  still  incomplete.  It  would  have
been  better  if  Gruber  had  studied  instead  my  later  publications,
for  then  he  could  easily  have  convinced  himself  that  my  statement
is  entirely  correct.  I  shall  mention  but  one  of  my  poisons^  as  an
example.  In  this  the  L  dose  was  originally  0.25  cc,  the  lethal  dose
0.0025  cc.  At  the  end  of  the  investigation  L^  had  increased  to
0.26  cc,  the  lethal  dose,  however,  to  0.004  cc.  The  number  of  lethal
doses,  therefore,  in  approximately  the  same  amount  of  Lf  had  been
reduced  from  100  to  65.  Madsen  ^  describes  a  poison  in  which  the
neutralizing  power  remained  constant  during  the  course  of  two
years,  while  the  toxicity  was  reduced  one-half,  from  0.02  to  0.04.
Furthermore  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  in  their  most  recent  work^
describe  th*»  toxoid  modification  of  a  tetanus  toxin.  These  consist
in  the  fact  that  the  combining  power  remains  intact  while  the  toxicity
is  decreased  to  one-sixth.  It  is  seen  therefore  that  the  doubt  thrown
upon  my  quantitative  statements  is  due  entirely  to  a  disregard  of
readily  accessible  facts.  This  quantitative  transformation  consti-
tutes a  somewhat  annoying  fact  for  Gruber,  and  he  therefore  seeks
to  explain  it  as  follows:

"  Imagine,  if  you  will,  that  ^/lo  of  the  toxin  molecules  present
are  changed  into  toxoids,  the  minimal  lethal  dose  will  then  be  increased


^  Described  in  Deutsche  med.  Wochensch.  1898,  No.  38.

'Annaies  de  I'lnstitut  Pasteur.,  T.  13,  1899.

*  S.  Arrhenius  and  Tb.  Madsen.  Physical  Chemistry  applied  to  Toxins  and
Antitoxins,  Festskrift  ved.  indvielsen  af  Statens  Serum  Institut,  Kopenhagen,
X902;    German  in  Zoitsch.  f.ir  physiol.  Chem.  1003.


5ir>


COLLECTED  STUDIES    IN  IMMITXITY.


tenfold  whereas  the  Lo  value  will  remain  unchanged ;  thU  ia  Ek-
lich's  hj'[)uthesis.  If  Vio  the  toxin  moieculea  had  lost  their  tonotji,
without  there  being  any  formation  of  toxoid^s  capable  of  combitunj
with  antitoxin,  the  I-o  value  would  be  increased  ten  times.  H,  hw-
ever,  simuHaneously  with  the  loss  of  Vio  the  toxicity,  ihc  fluid
were  to  lose  ^/lo  the  reaction  rapidity  for  antitoxin,  so  that  tit
constant  of  the  reaction  would  be  decreased  ^/ig,  it  would  be  found
that  the  I^  value  would  manifest  itaelf  unchanged."

Gruber  would  have  done  better  to  have  made  some  of  these  con-
paratively  simple  experiments  himself  than  to  a<i^'anre  sucA  n
untenable  assumption.  We  are  here  dealing  with  ex|>enn)«u
which  constitute,  in  fact,  the  very  beginning  of  the  technique  rf
testing  poisons.  Thus,  when  in  1897'  I  formulated  the  law  Ihu
the  combination  of  poison  and  antiljody  takes  place  more  npiiU
in  concentrated  solutions  than  in  weak  solutions,  it  was  as  the  tesnh
of  just  such  studies  made  on  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxin.  In  tlw*
Btudies  I  convinced  myself  that  the  affinity  between  diphtheria  snu-
toxin  and  diphtheria  toxin  is  far  greater  than  that  between  I  "tun"
antitoxin  and  tetanus  toxin.  The  union  of  diphtheria  toxin  add
its  antitoxin  is  effected  very  quickly,  so  that  at  the  end  of  five  It
ten  minutes  one  may  be  sure  that  complete  union  has  taken  plaa,
It  ia  entirely  immaterial  whether  one  is  dealing  with  fresh  potsou
or  with  poisons  poor  or  rich  in  toxoids.  I  shall  here  reproduce  u
exireriment  which  I  have  recently  made  because  Danvsz  ^  tnaislfd
that  the  neutralizing  power  of  the  diphtheria  poison  changes  wba
the  poison  is  allowed   to  stand  for  some  time.

The  e.\periraent  was  performed  with  the  standard  serum  and
standard  toxin  used  in  the  official  standardization.  Both  substaons
had  therefore  been  very  accurately  titrated,  The  mixture  wb
allowed  to  stand  fifteen  minutes  and  twenty-four  hours  and  ih
result  showed  that  in  this  lime  not  the  least  change  had  taken  pla«
in  the  constant.  In  the  experiments  of  Danysz,  therefore,  somf
error  has  probably  crept  in.  In  any  event  there  is  no  change  i"
the  reaction  time  on  the  decrease  of  toxicity  of  the  diphthenn  toxm.

Ciuinea-pig  1  receives  1  I.  E.  serum+0,78  cc.  poison  (Lf)  fiflu*
minutes  after  mixing.     It  dies  on  the  fourth  day.

Guinea-pig  11  receives  the  same  mixture  twenty-four  hours  att<f
mixing.     It  dies  on  the  fourth  day,


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN  517

Guinea-pig  III  receives  0.8  cc.  poison,  otherwise  same  as  I.  It
dies  in  three  and  one  half  days.

Guinea-pig  IV  receives  0.8  cc.  poison,  otherwise  same  as  II.  It
dies  in  three  and  one-half  days.

Another  thing  which  is  entirely  irreconcilable  with  Gruber's
assumption  is  the  fact  that  there  exist  prototoxoids,  i.e.,  toxoids
which  possess  a  higher  affinity  for  the  antitoxin  than  the  toxin  itself
does.  The  existence  of  these  was  first  pointed  out  by  me  and  has
since  been  confirmed  by  Madsen  and  also  by  Arrhenius.  The  exist-
ence of  the  prototoxoids  becomes  clearly  manifest  by  the  fact  that
one  can  add  a  certain  quantity  of  antitoxin  to  the  toxin  solution
without  affecting  the  toxicity  in  the  slightest  degree.

Mention  must  also  be  made  of  the  fact  that  similar  phenomena
have  been  observed  in  a  large  number  of  other  poisons.  It  will
suffice  here  if  I  remind  the  reader  that  toxoid  changes  have  been
observed  in  ricin  (Jacoby),  abrin  (Romer),  staphylotoxin  (Wechs-
berg,  Neisser),  cobra  venom  (Meyers,  Flexner).  Furthermore  Mor-
genroth  and  I  showed  that  in  complement  also  there  is  a  destruction
of  the  real  active  portion,  the  zymotoxic  group,  while  the  hapto-
phore  group  remains  intact.  The  existence  of  complementoids
has  been  demonstrated  decisively  by  Sachs  and  myself,^  although
Gruber  had  termed  them  "  nlerely  fervent  wishes  floating  about
in  the  serum."

Furthermore  it  will  be  remembered  that  similar  phenomena
are  observed  in  the  agglutinins  and  coagulins  (precipitins),  the  hap-
tophore  group  of  the  agglutinin  or  the  precipitin  remaining  intact,
while  the  agglutinophore  group  is  destroyed.  This  phenomenon
was  first  pointed  out  in  the  excellent  study  made  by  Eisenberg  and
V^olk  in  Paltauf's  laboratory.  Since  that  time  a  large  mass  of  liter-
ature has  grown  up  around  this  subject  so  that  now  there  is  not
the  least  doubt  concerning  the  existence  of  these  substances,  which
normally  occur  in  the  form  of  proagglutinoids.  A  recent  study
by  Korschun  2  makes  it  probable  that  something  similar  to  this
occurs  in  ferments,  particularly  in  rennin.  In  all  these  various
oases  it  seems  to  be  the  rule  that  the  real  functionating  group  is  far
more  labile  than  the  one  which  effects  combination,  namely,  the
haptophore  group.     Hence   I   believe   that   the   formation   of  such

'  See  page  209.

'  Zeitsch.  f.  physioi.  Cbemie,  Bd.  37, 1903.


51 S


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN    IMMUNITY


modificatione  must  be  dasaej  with  the  positively  dctnonstralal
facts  in  medicine.

It  13  entirely  incomprehensible  how  Gmber  could  believe  thu
the  jrosaible  controveraion  of  ihe  plurality  of  poisons  assumed  by
me  denotes  the  downfall  of  the  entire  side-chain   theor>-.i

How  false  such  a  conrluaion  is  can  be  seen  from  the  fact  ihit
when  I  devised  the  aide-chain  theory  I  believed  the  diphtheria  poison
to  lie  a  simple  substance.  My  later  studies,  however,  convinrKi
me  that  the  poison  consist**  of  several  modifications:  prololown,
deuterotoxin,  trilotoxin,  and  toxon.  It  can  easily  bo  seen  tiwm
my  publications,  however,  that  I  ascribe  the  same  combining  group
to  all  of  these;  they  differ  merely  in  their  toxnphore  gmune.  lo
the  production  of  diphtheria  antitoxin  all  of  these  mndificatioos
act  in  exactly  the  sanic  way.  It  shows  a  deplorable  lack  of  mat-
prehension,  therefore,  when  Gmber  says  that  the  refutation  of  tk
plurality  of  toxins  will  "  give  this  side-chain-theory  spook  lU
quietus."

However,  let  us  see  what  proofs  Gruber  advances  against  the
plurality  of  the  poisons.  On  a  previous  occasion  when  Gruber
brought  forward  these  same  arguments  I  allowed  them  to  pass  with-
out specially  controverting  them,  for  I  felt  that  his  faulty  nwide
of  reasoning  would  at  once  be  apparent  to  the  specialist.  Now  thit
Gruber,  however,  returns  to  this  subject  I  think  it  may  l>e  wdl  u
discuss  the  facts  somewhat  in  detail.

In  the  majority  nf  poisons  it  is  probably  a  fact  that  the  toxtdir
depends  upon  the  animal  species,  a  certain  poison  being  more  loxi*
for  one  si^cies  than  for  another.  In  chemically  definite  poisons,
alkaloids,  etc.,  this  behavior  is  usually  a  constant  one,  so  that  ~m
text-books  on  toxicology  the  fatal  doses  per  kilo  of   bodv   wHclit

'Arrhenius  and  Hadsen  (I.e.)  in  their  verj- interesting  study  hiive  imb-
tioned  whether  the  phenomena  of  neutralization,  which  I  drscrilied  aiid  nfemd
to  B.  plurality  of  poisons,  are  due  to  a  difference  in  the  iKiisoiis  or  nhethet  ■•
they  think  probable,  they  are  merely  the  expression  of  a  neut  rati  tat  ion  betnvn
two  substancea  ot  weak  alfinities.  For  the  preaenl  1  shall  merely  poiol  «ie
that  my  own  statements  refer  only  to  diphtheria  toxin,  which  fHissesaM  «  taoA
higher  affinity  tor  the  antitoxin  than  does  tetanus  toxin.  The  in^-psticBCfwtf
of  theae  esteemed  authors  have  disclosed  one  Bource  of  error  whirh  (H>ukl  ^u3r
creep  into  neutralisation  experiments.  Nevertheless  I  Mieve  that  their  roa-
ception  does  not  apply  to  the  tonin  ot  diphtheria  which  I  have  studied  so  i-JonJr
I  shall  go  into  these  questions  more  fully  elsewhere,  und  hope  th^n  to  dM«
ihat   the  stjindpoint  ninintained  by   me  is  entirely  correct.


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN.  519

are  usually  given  for  various  animal  species.  In  the  beginning  it
was  thought  that  the  same  conditions  held  true  for  the  bacterial
poisons  and  several  such  scales  of  toxicity  were  given  out  by  high
authorities.  As  soon,  however,  as  different  toxin  solutions  of  the
same  species  were  examined,  e.g.  diphtheria  toxins  obtained  from
different  cultures  or  in  different  laboratories,  it  was  found  that,
unlike  the  alkaloids,  the  scale  of  toxicity  was  a  variable  one.  In
the  case  of  one  poison,  for  example,  I  found  that  a  guinea-pig  of
250  grammes  was  uniformly  killed  by  a  dose  of  0.00375-0.004  cc,
and  a  rabbit  of  1800  grammes  by  a  dose  of  0.009  cc.  This  corre-
sponds to  a  ratio  of  1:2:2-2.4.  In  another  poison  the  figures  were
0.003  for  guinea-pigs  and  0.004  for  rabbits,  corresponding  to  a  pro-
portion of  1:1.3.  This  showed  that  in  two  different  poisons  the
susceptibility  of  rabbits  varied  more  than  half.

The  conditions,  however,  are  far  more  interesting  and  instruc-
tive in  the  case  of  tetanus  poison.  For  a  long  time  a  controversy
existed  between  v.  Behring  and  Tizzoni.  The  former  stated  that
tetanus  poisons  act  150  times  weaker  on  rabbits  than  on  mice,  whereas
Tizzoni  declared  that  a  poison  prepared  by  him  was  just  as  toxic
for  rabbits  as  for  mice.  From  the  papers  of  these  authors  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  two  poisons  when  tested  on  mice  were  identical.  A
definite  amount  of  either  poison — for  example,  a  single  fatal  dose
for  mice — was  neutralized  by  the  same  quantity  of  antitoxin.  So
far  as  mice  w^ere  concerned,  therefore,  the  two  poisons  were  identical.
As  soon  as  the  poisons  were  tested  on  rabbits,  however,  the  above-
mentioned  enormous  difference  in  toxicity  becomes  apparent.  This
at  once  shows  that  these  two  poisons  cannot  possibly  be  identical.
Wherein,  then,  does  the  difference  consist?  We  have  seen  that  the
two  poisons  are  neutralized  by  the  same  antitoxin,  and  that  fur-
thermore immunization  with  one  of  the  poisons  is  followed  by  the
production  of  an  antitoxin,  which  acts  also  on  the  other  poison.
From  this  it  follows  that  the  haptophore  group  must  be  the  same
in  both.  Hence  we  must  be  dealing  with  a  difference  in  the  toxo-
])hore  group,  v.  Berhing's  poison  possessing  a  toxophore  group  which
is  highly  virulent  for  mice  and  only  slightly  so  for  rabbits,  whereas
Tizzoni's  poison  contains  a  group  which  acts  equally  on  both  ani-
mals. This  difference  would  be  very  like  that  which  I  have  demon-
strated in  the  case  of  diphtheria  toxin  and  toxon.  One  might,  how-
ever, think  of  an  entirely  different  explanation,  namely,  that  the
strain  of  bacteria  with  which  Tizzoni  worked  secreted  an  entirely


520  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY.


different  kind  of  poison  than  the  Marburg  culture.  But  this  provei
not  to  be  the  ease,  for  v.  Behring  demonstrated  that  his  tetanus  poison
when  injected  into  rabbits  in  large  quantities  suffers  a  conadcrable
diminution  in  toxicity.  On  testing  the  properties  of  the  poisoo
contained  in  the  serum  of  the  poisoned  animals  he  found  that  ths
residual  poison  possessed  the  same  constanta  as  Tizzoni's  poiion.
From  this  it  follows  that  v.  Behring's  poison  contained  also  a  cer-
tain proportion  of  the  Tizzoni  variety.  The  Marbuig  culture  must
therefore  have  produced  two  varieties  of  poison  at  the  same  lime.
Naturally  by  mixing  the  two  poisons  one  erni  obtain  new  poirana
which,  while  they  manifest  the  same  action  on  mice,  will  have  any
desired  relative  toxicity  for  rabbits;  this,  of  course,  n-ithin  certain
limits.  If  one  were  to  take  the  time  and  trouble  lo  examine  a  large
number  of  native  poisons  from  different  lalwratories,  coirespondiog
differences  between  them  would  probably  be  encountered.

If  we  recollect  that  various  specimens  of  the  chemically  simple
poisons  manifest  the  same  relative  toxicity  on  different  animab,
and  then  consider  the  behavior  of  tetanus  toxins  as  just  described,
we  shall  conclude  that  bacterial  poisons  of  different  origin,  whifh
manifest  a  variation  in  their  relative  toxicity,  are  not  of  simple  con-
stitution, but  are  made  up  of  several  different  constituent*.  It
ahowa  very  little  knowledge  of  the  subject  therefore  when  Gruber
says:  "  v.  Behring  shows  that  two  toxin  solutions,  which  in  a  given
unit  of  volume  contain  equal  t  Ms.,  i.e.,  whose  unit  of  volume  kill*
a  like  number  of  grammes  of  mouse  in  four  daj"8,  may  have  an  entirdy
different  content  of  t  rabbit,  t  pigeon,  tgoat,  and  f  horse.  This
at  once  disposes  ot  Ehrlich's  conclusions."  It  is  just  such  phenomena
which  argue  in  favor  of  the  plurality  of  poisons;  they  do  not  spe^
against  it.

Gruber  bases  another  of  his  objections  on  the  interesting  obser-
vations  made  by  Madsen  and  Dreyer  on  toxons  (Zeitsch,  f.  Hypene,
Vol,  37,  page  251).  In  his  dictatorial  manner  he  says  that  "  theae
observations  demonstrate  conclusively  that  Ehrlich's  method  of
itnalyzinp  toxins  is  absolutely  useless.  Only  a  person  ignorant  of
chemi.'itry  could  maintain  that  the  different  results  in  guinea-pigs
and  in  rabbits  are  sufficiently  explainett  by  the  different  suscepti,
bility  of  the  animals  to  the  toxins."

To  begin,  Gruber's  premise  is  absolutely  misleading,  when  be
says:

"  But  if  the  poison  \e  neutralized  it  will  be  without  effect  even


J


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN.  521

on  the  most  susceptible  animals.  Let  us  imagine,  for  example,  a
mixture  of  sulphuric  and  acetic  acids,  neutralized  by  the  gradual
addition  of  baryta  water.  Once  all  the  sulphuric  acid  is  neutralized,
even  the  most  sensitive  reagent  to  free  strong  mineral  acids  will  be
unable  to  detect  any  trace  of  it."

Let  us  see  just  what  Gruber  means  by  this  comparison.  The
sulphuric  acid  corresponds  to  the  toxin ;  the  antitoxin  is  represented
by  the  alkali.  In  accordance  with  the  comparison  the  receptors  of
the  cells  are  represented  in  the  animal  body  by  the  alkali  of  the
tissues.  If  now  we  inject  an  animal  with  sulphuric  acid  previously
neutralized  with  ammonia,  i.e.,  a  solution  of  ammonium  sulphate,
it  will  depend  mainly  on  the  affinity  of  the  tissue  alkali,  whether  or
not  the  neutral  ammonium  sulphate  will  be  decomposed  and  sul-
phuric acid  allowed  to  enter  the  tissues,  ammonia  being  set  free.
If  we  assume,  for  instance,  that  the  tissue  alkali  is  comparable  to
a  strong  base  like  sodium  hydroxid  or  barium  oxid,  the  ammonia
introduced  in  combination  with  the  sulphuric  acid  will  be  absolutely
unable  to  prevent  the  poisoning;  the  weak  base  will  be  forced  out
of  the  salt  and  replaced  by  the  stronger  base.  In  general  we  must
assume  that  the  antitoxin  possesses  a  higher  affinity  to  the  toxin
than  do  the  tissue  receptors,  for  only  on  this  assumption  can  we
explain  the  protective  action  of  the  antitoxin.  Numerous  phenomena,
how^ever,  indicate  that  the  affinity  of  the  tissue  receptors  can  become
increased.  I  had  reached  these  conclusions  long  before  the  pub-
lication of  my  theory,  which  as  many  know  I  formulated  years  before
it  was  published.  The  cause  of  this  long  delay  was  the  phenomenon
of  hypersusceptibility,  i.e.,  the  peculiar  fact  that  immunized  ani-
mals, despite  a  colossal  excess  of  antitoxin,  succumb  to  the  action
of  the  poison.  The  first  light  on  this  subject  was  the  study  of  Donitz,
in  which  it  was  shown  that  the  poison  shortly  after  its  union  with
the  tissues  is  but  loosely  bound.  In  the  course  of  a  few  hours  the
union  becomes  firmer  and  firmer  so  that  after  a  certain  time,  which
may  vary  from  a  few  minutes  to  six  hours,  according  to  the  dose,
the  poison  can  no  longer  be  abstracted  from  the  tissues  by  the  anti-
toxin. This  fact  seemed  to  indicate  that  under  the  influence  of
the  poisoning  the  affinity  of  the  tissue  receptors  gradually  becomes
Increased  and  that  when  a  certain  point  is  reached  a  cure  by  means
of  antitoxin  is  impossible.  This,  however,  furnished  me  with  an
explanation  of  hypersusceptibility  and  removed  the  obstacle  which
had  kept  me  from  publishing  my  theory.


522  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

I  should  also  like  to  mention  that  Kretz,'  many  years  later  lai
entirely  independent  of  me,  reached  exactly  the  same  conclufioB
as  I  had.  His  very  interesting  study  was  based  on  experimeDti
with  diphtheria-immune  horses.  Following  his  usual  tactics.  Gnibe
will,  of  course,  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  increase  in  the  tiaaw
affinity,  since  it  agrees  with  my  theory,  cannot  really  occur,  and
he  will  therefore  regard  the  entire  subject  as  utterly  fallacious  and
best  not  discussed.  The  unprejudiced  observer,  however,  ntti
hardly  be  told  that  it  is  impossible  for  chemical  groups  attarlie^
to  living  protoplasm  to  maintain  their  affinity  unchanged  as  though
they  were  made  of  stone;  especially  is  this  true  if  we  consider  tb*
varying  function  of  the  protoplasm.

Let  us  take  anilin  as  an  example,  and  determine  the  combinini
heat  of  the  NHa  group  for  a  certain  acid.  We  shall  then  find  thit
nearly  all  substitutions  of  the  Ixinzol  nucleus,  as,  for  instance,  the
introduction  of  an  amido  group,  a  nitro  group,  a  sulfo  group,  etc.,
markedly  change  the  affinity  either  positively  or  negatively.  Thus
even  the  introduction  of  what  is  conceivably  the  most  indiffennt
group,  the  methyl  radical  causes  a  distinct  and  marked  diminution
of  the  combining  heat.  Under  these  circumstances  any  one  who
thinks  chemically  would  consider  it  peculiar  if  a  change  in  the  affinity
of  the  cell  constituents  were  to  be  regarded  as  something  ab&olutdv
inconceivable  and  beyond  the  pale  of  discussion.

Since  Gniber  has  given  only  that  part  of  Madsen  and  Dreyw's
experiments  which  fits  into  his  j.x)lemic,  it  will  be  necessarj-  (or  bk
to  supplement  this  with  some  additional  data  from  their  atudv.

These  authors  employed  a  diphtheria  poison  of  which  the  fatal
dose  for  a  guinoa-pig  of  250  grammes  was  0.009.  and  for  rahbite
of  1200-1600  grammes,  0.0070.  Calculated  per  kilo  this  shows
that  tlie  rabbits  wore  about  six  times  as  ^uaceptible  as  guinea-pi^
The  Lq  dose,  i.e.,  that  amount  of  poison,  which  is  just  completely
neutralized  by  one  immune  unit,  was  0.6  cc.  for  guinea-pigs  Right
here  I  must  emphasize  that  the  Lq  dose,  as  1  conceive  it.  refers  exclu-
sively to  guinea-pigs,  since  according  to  my  experiences  this  is  the
only  animal  in  which,  thanks  to  the  peculiar  susceptibility,  ihe  con-
slants  of  the  poison  can  accurately  he  determined.  In  the  serum
mixture  I^  all  the  constituents  of  the  poison,  toxin,  and  toxon  we
completely  neutralized,  so  that  not  only  the  single  amount  but  ako


TOXIN  AND   ANTITOXIN  523

high  multiples  of  this  can  be  injected  into  guinea-pigs  without  causing
a  trace  of  local  or  general  reaction.     If  the  same  amount  of  poison,

0.6  cc,  was  mixed  with  ^r^  I.  E.  instead  of  with  one  I.  E.  it  was

found  that  the  toxin  fraction  had  practically  been  completely  neu-
tralized, leaving  only  the  toxons,  characterized  by  the  develop-
ment of  paralyses.  Just  in  this  poison  Madsen  and  Dreyer  have
shown  that  the  difference  between  toxin  and  toxon  is  qualitative
and  not  quantitative.  They  found  that  mixtures  of  poison  and
antitoxin,  which  were  near  the  limit  of  toxin  neutralization,  showed
only  toxon  action  when  given  in  small  doses,  whereas  when  the  mix-
ture was  increased  tenfold,  death  occurred  from  toxin.^

//,  however,  the  quantity  of  antitoxin  mas  also  slightly  increased,
even  the  tenfold  multiple  showed  only  toxon  action.  From  these  data
we  see  that  the  poison  consisted  of  about  167  units  toxin-toxoid
and  33  units  toxon.

This  same  poison  was  subjected  to  a  thorough  investigation  on
rabbits  by  Dreyer  and  Madsen  and  gave  the  following  results:  If
0.6  cc.  poison  are  mixed  with  one  I.  E.,  it  will  be  found  that  this
mixture,  which  represents  the  Lq  dose  for  guinea-pigs,  is  still  highly
toxic  for  rabbits.  In  order  to  render  this  amount  of  poison  com-
pletely innocuous  for  rabbits  it  is  necessary  to  add  more  antitoxin;

240
as  a  matter  of  fact  it  requires  ^^  I.  E.     Their  statements  concern-
ing the  behavior  of  mixtures  between  these  two  limits  are  also  very

210
interesting.     A  mixture  of  0.6  cc.  poison  +  ^7^  I-  E.  given  to  a  rabbit

gives  rise  to  paralytic  phenomena  appearing  on  the  fifteenth  day
and  ending  fatally  on  the  twenty-second  day.     Even  a  mixture  of

232

the  same  dose  of  poison  with  ^z-^  I.  E.  produced  paralysis  com-
mencing on  the  sixteenth  day  and  continuing  for  several  weeks.
In  view  of  the  importance  of  these  facts  for  the  conception  of  a  plu-
rality of  poisons,  I  cannot  pass  on  without  discussing  them  more
fully.     According  to  our  definition  of  the  Lq  dose,  such  over-neu-

'  The  explanation  of  this  is  that  the  toxon  determination  by  means  of  1  I.E.
naturally  cannot  be  an  absolutely  exact  one,  small  residual  amounts  of  toxin,
e.g.,  1/10  lethal  dose,  readily  being  overlooked.  If,  however,  an  appropriate
multiple,  sa^  ten  times  this  mixture,  be  injected,  this  will  contain  ten  times
1/10  fatal  dose.


524  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITY

tralized  doses,  which  (like  the  mixture  ;^\  possess  &  considerable   I

excess  of  antitoxin,  are  absolutely  innocuous  for  guinea-pigs  md
can  be  injecteci  in  any  desired  quantity.  In  fact,  owing  to  tbe  exrass
of  antitoxin,  such  mixtures  furnish  the  animal  with  passive  ImmumlT
and  protect  it,  provided  suitable  amounts  have  been  injected,  agaiosl
diphtheria  poison  and  diphtheria  bacilli.  If  such  mixtures,  bow-
ever,  are  still  toxic  for  rabbits,  only  one  possibility  remains,  namely
that  the  diphtheria  poison  in  question  contams  a  substance  wbirh
is  non-toxic  for  guinea-pigs,  but  still  toxic  for  rabbits.  This  is  my
toxonoid.'

So  tar  as  the  behavior  of  partially  neutralized  mixtures  is  cod-
cerned.  the  investigations  of  the  two  authors  show  that  naistures
which  exert  only  toxon  effects  on  guinea-pigs  cause  death  and  symp-
toms of  diphtheria  poisoning  in  rabbila.  In  my  opinion  the  phe-
nomenon described  can  best  be  explained  by  the  assumption  tlut
at  least  three  varieties  of  poison  are  to  be  distinguished,  posi
different  affinities  and  different  actions.  Such  an  assumpti
believe,  will  best  harmonize  the  actual  facts.     These  poisons  are:

1.  Toxin,  possessing  the  greatest  affinity,  kills  rabbits  and  guints-
pigs  acut-ely,  but  is  much  more  toxic  for  the  former.

2.  Toxon,  killing  rabbits  acutely  and  guinea-pigs  witli  paraiytie
symptoms.

3.  Toxonoids,  producing  paralyses  in  rabbits  but  innocuous  for
guinea-pigs.

That  all  these  poisons  act  more  powerfully  on  rabbits  than  on
guinea-pigs  is  explained  by  the  absolute  higher  susceptibility  of
these  animals.  So  far  as  the  behavior  of  the  toxonoids  is  concerned,
in  which  enormous  differences  in  rabbits  and  guinea-pigs  are  mani-
fested, such  behavior  finds  numerous  analogies  in  toxicology,  esiif-
cially  in   the  sludy  of  toxins.    Thus   heroin,  an   acetyl    derivative


'  Almost  at  the  oulael  of  my  investigations  and  long  pnor  to  Madsen  and  I
Dreyer  1  obtained  resulta  entirety  similar  M  these.     My  utipublistied  but  vtij   I
extenaive  Ktudies  showed  that  ttiiit  property  ik  not  possesHcU  by  all  diphlherM
poisons,  for  I  also  encountered  poisons  in  whieb  Ihc  L,  dose  was  exactly  Uie
same  in  guinea-pigs  and  rabbila.     Ttiis  tact  controverts  the  assumption  tial
perhaps   the  described   phenomenon   is  due   to   an   incomplete    neutralixatioa.  '.
Biich  as  Arrhenius  and  Mudsen  have  iicmonBtral«d  in  the  union  of  boric  nai  a
and  ammonia,  and  In  that  of  t«tanolysin  and  antilysin.     If  this  were  th«  »M'l
one  would  expect  the  phenomenon  to  be  present  in  alt  diphtheria  poisons  to  I
the  fiame  extent,  and   this  is  not   the  case.


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN  525

of  morphine,  is  far  less  toxic  for  rabbits  than  is  morphine;  for  asses
on  the  other  hand  it  is  far  more  toxic  than  the  latter  substance.  In
the  case  of  toxins  v.  Behring  long  ago  showed  that  for  different
species  of  animals  certain  toxins  are  very  differently  affected  by
trichloriodine.  As  1  suggested  in  my  address  at  the  International
Medical  Congress  in  Paris  we  are  evidently  dealing  here  with  incom-
plete toxoids,  i.e.,  with  toxoids  whose  toxophore  complex  is  not
yet  completely  destroyed.  Portions  of  this  complex  still  left  to
the  poison  possess  a  high  toxicity  for  one  species  of  animal  and  little
or  no  toxicity  for  another.  The  toxophore  groups  of  the  tetanus
poisons  mentioned  above  (Tizzoni  and  v.  Behring)  afford  a  sufficient
analogy.

A  consideration  of  these  facts  will  show  that  Gruber's  statement,
that  the  facts  observed  by  Madsen  and  Dreyer  reduce  my  theory
to  an  absurdity,  is  absolutely  incorrect.  On  the  contrary,  1  may
say  that  the  facts  brought  out  by  these  authors  are  most  readily
explained  on  the  basis  of  my  theory.


I  shall  now  take  up  Gruber's  recent  experiments.  These  were
first  published  in  the  Wiener  klin.  Wochenschrift  ^  in  a  form  strongly
suggestive  of  the  comic  supplement  of  a  newspaper.

The  discussion  takes  the  form  of  a  letter  purporting  to  be  written
by  a  certain  "  Phantasus,"  and  is  really  very  cleverly  conceived.
Only  1  would  protest  against  publications  of  this  sort  appearing  in
the  columns  of  a  scientific  journal.

Two  series  of  experiments  come  into  question.  The  first  series
is  so  curious  that  I  have  not  felt  any  desire  to  repeat  the  experi-
ments. These  deal  (a)  with  the  property  of  sulphuric  acid  to  act
as  a  poison  on  cane  sugar,  and  (6)  with  the  antitoxic  action  which
water  exerts  on  this  property.  Any  one  with  even  the  faintest  knowl-
edge of  chemical  processes  knows  that  the  sulphuric  acid  as  such
is  not  deprived  of  this  poisonous  action  by  water;  this  is  effected
only  by  an  alkali  which,  by  forming  a  salt,  neutralizes  the  acid.  1
am  able  to  furnish  an  additional  case  which  shows  the  "  detoxitizing  "
effect  of  water.  A  highly  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  containing
considerable  anhydride,  acts  destructively  on  iron.  If  H2O  is  added
until  the  solution  contains  the  monohydrate  it  will  be  found  that
the  addition  of  the  water  has  reduced  this  capacity  to  attack  iron


*  Wiener  klin.  Wocbenschr.,  No.  27,  1903.


526  COLLECTED  STUDIES  I\   IMMLINITY.

to  practically  zero.  In  this  case  then,  just  as  Gruber  stales,  thf
water  has  acted  as  an  antitoxin.  On  the  addition  of  more  Ksltr
to  the  mixture,  however,  the  iron  is  again  attacked.  In  fact  tlw
more  water  now  added  the  stronger  becomes  this  action.  We  ihus
obtain  the  curious  result  that  in  small  doses  water  acts  as  antitoxiD.
while  in  large  doses  it  increases  the  action  oE  the  poison,  surely  to
interesting  problem  for  Dr.  Phantasue!

This  is  merely  one  of  the  special  instances  of  the  fact  thus  br
unexplained,  that  the  different  hydrates  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  ihcir
mixtures,  manifest  a  most  extraordinary  variation  of  propenies-
!  may  refer  the  reader  to  the  minute  and  fundamental  study  of
Knietsch,'  in  which  the  variations  of  the  properties  of  sulphiinc
acid  at  different  concentrations  have  been  represented  in  the  fnrm
ot  a  curve  for  many  of  these  properties,  thus  specific  heat,  elerlnf
resistance,  boiling  point,  vapor  tension,  viscosity,  capillarity,  action
on  iron,  etc.  A  glance  at  this  chart  gives  one  the  impreasioo  ot
chaos,  and  at  once  shows  that  on  these  complicated  problems  only
deep  studies  can  lead  to  any  results,  and  that  the  ten-minute  experi-
ments made  by  Phantasus-G  ruber -Pi  rquet  are  absolutely  worthlca.
This  is  especially  true  in  Gniber's  case,  which  deals  with  an  objure
reaction  in  which  oxidation,  abstraction  of  water,  cleavage  and  sul-
phurization  take  part-  Hence  I  deny  that  crude  experiments  ot
this  kind  can  be  used  to  gain  an  insight  into  such  an  entirely  diffenul
subject,  or  that  the  conditions  there  observed  can  even  be  com-
pared to  the  minutely  differentiated  processes  of  toxJn-anti toxin
combination.

We  shall  next  take  up  Gruber's  experimenta  which  deal  with
the  hemolytic  action  of  water,  since  to  persons  at  a  distance  these
might  give  the  impression  that  they  really  have  something  in  com-
mon with  studies  in  hipmolvtic  toxins.  The  experiments  are  sup-
posed to  show  that  water  is  composed  of  an  infinile  number  of  differ-
ent poisons.     I.*t  us  listen  to   Gruber  for  a  moment:

"  Pure  water  exercises  a  very  great  osmotic  pressure  on  wd
blood-cells,  leading  to  their  swelling  and  to  the  escape  of  hxmnglobin.
Hence  water  is  a  toxin  for  the  erythrocytes,  salt  is  an  antitoxin.
When  successive  amounts  of  salt  are  added  to'the  water  this  toxicity
IS  gradually  lost,  for  the  affinity  of  the  water,  and  with  it  the  osmolitf
pres.sure.  is  thus  gradually  decreased."


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN  527

We  see  therefore  that  Gruber-Pirquet  assume  that  pure  water
possesses  a  high  osmotic  pressure  and  that  salt  diminishes  this.  The
very  foundation  of  the  doctrine  of  osmotic  tension,  however,  is  the
fact  that  water  as  such  possesses  NO  osmotic  pressure,  and  that
such  pressure  is  produced  by  salts  dissolved  in  the  water.  I  can-
not, refrain  from  pointing  out  this  woful  ignorance  of  the  most  ele-
mentary principles  on  the  part  of  authors  who  do  not  hesitate  to
accuse  me  of  **  complete  lack  of  insight  into  chemistry,"  although
for  years  I  have  endeavored,  and  not  unsuccessfully,  to  apply  the
great  discoveries  in  chemistry  to  medicine.

The  solution  of  erythrocytes  by  means  of  water  is  one  of  the
best  studied  subjects  in  medicine.  It  is  generally  recognized  that
the  water  as  such  is  no  poison  whatever,  but  that  its  action  is  due
to  the  fact  that  water  abstracts  the  salts  and  other  soluble  substances
from  all  living  cells,  including,  of  course,  the  red  blood-cells.  These
substances  are  abstracted  in  such  considerable  amounts  that  this
alone  suffices  to  bring  about  the  death  of  the  cell.  The  swelling
of  the  red  blood-cells  is  due  to  the  penetration  of  water  and  this
a^ain  depends  on  the  permeability  of  the  limiting  membrane  on
the  one  hand  and  the  power  of  the  water  to  abstract  water  on  the
other.

With  the  same  right  that  Gruber  regards  water  as  a  poison  one
could  call  nitrogen  a  poison  and  oxygen  as  the  counter  poison  for
the  nitrogen,  for  animals  die  in  pure  nitrogen,  but  live  if  oxygen  is
added.  At  any  rate  nitrogen  poison  can  be  recommended  to  Dr.
Phantasus  for  extended  study.  Perhaps  some  day  he  will  also  work
out  its  spectrum  for  us.

Despite  the  fact  that  the  premises  from  which  their  experiment
proceeds  are  based  on  a  complete  misconception  of  the  idea  of  poison,
I  have  repeated  the  experiments  of  Gruber  and  Pirquet.  The  results
show  that  their  statements  concerning  the  experiment  are  entirely
incorrect.  I  first  determined  the  concentration  of  salt  and  of  sugar,
in  which  the  ox  blood-cells  remained  completely  intact;  for  NaCl
this  was  found  to  be  0.63%,  for  cane  sugar  6.4%.  By  diluting
with  water,  various  degrees  of  this  isotonicity  (1/10,  2/10,  etc.)
were  produced.  Each  tube  contained  altogether  2  cc.  of  fluid  and
one  drop  of  defibrinated  ox  blood.  The  result  is  shown  in  the  form
of  a  *'  spectrum,''  which  may  be  compared  to  that  obtained  by
Gruber  in  his  experiments.

This  comparison  shows  us  that  Gruber's  experiments  are  abso-


S2S


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMUNITV


lutely  incorrect,  and  that  they  contradict  all  that  is  thus  far  knoin
concerning  solution  of  the  red  blood-cells.  Gruber  states  that  a
a  1/10  isotonic  solution,  one  containing  about  0.07^.  NaCI,  about
one-fifth  of  the  blood-cells  remain  undissolved.  All  other  autbon,
however,  have  found  that  even  in  a  solution  of  0.3%  NaCI.  ihe
blood-cella  of  all  warm-blooded  animals  are  still  completely  de-
eolved,  so  that  the  solution  appears  uniformly  lakj',  and  microscopidl
examination  shows  not  even  a  trace  of  red-blood  corpusclej.  la
Gruber'a  spectrum,  however,  we  find  that  with  this  percentage  more
than  half  of  the  blood-cells  remain  undissolved.  Tliis  indicate
that  in  Gruber's  experiments  the  grossest  sort  of  errors  abouml.
With  Salt  WithSugar

HDmoly»  Id  rermu  BmuoijMlu  rcrceut


FlQ

What  ca


Isotonieity

Poison  spectnim


'  of  n


Isotonicity

r  accordiTiR  to  Gruber.


1  we  deduce  from  these  spectra?  The  fact  that  a  c«-
tain  amount  of  NaCI  can  be  added  to  the  "  poisonous  "  wat-er  with-
out inhibiting  hjemolysis,  would  lead  authors  holding  Gruber's  view
to  conclude  that  this  "  poisonous  "  water  contains  a  prototoxotd
whose  neutralization  has  no  effect  whatever  on  the  toxic  actioiL
A  single  glance  at  the  detailed  literature  on  this  subject  should,  how-
ever, have  convinced  these  authors  that  their  curve,  as  such,  bit
nothing  whatever  to  do  wifh  toxic  actions,  but  m  merely  the  expiw*
BOn  of  the  specific  differences  in  the  red  blood-cells.     It  is  well  knom


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN


52U


that  the  blood  represents  a  mixture  of  cells  of  various  ages,  and  it
is  not  at  all  surprising,  therefore,  that  these  should  behave  differently
toward  different  injurious  influences.  We  are  here  dealing  with  a
property  of  the  erythrocyte's  protoplasm,  which  protoplasm  will  possess
a  different  degree  of  vulnerability  according  to  its  age.  Are  Gniber-
Pirquet  entirely  unaware  that  an  important  and  much-employed
procedure  for  determining  the  resistance  of  the  blood  rests  on  just


With  Salt


With  Sugar


r


Pig.  2.— "Poison  spectrum"  of  i


Isotonic)  ty
T  according  to  Ehrht^


this  principle?  Every  text-book  on  hseniatology  teaches  that  we
distinguish  blood-cells  of  maximum,  minimum,  and  intermediate
resistance,  and  that  the  extent  of  resistance  is  merely  the  difference
between  the  maximum  and  minimum.

Instead  of  this,  however,  Gruber  feels  compelled  to  draw  from
hia  curves  conclusions  having  such  far-reaching  consequences  as,
for  example,  that  water  is  full  of  poisons,  of  haptophore  and  toxo-
phore  groups,  etc.  But  if  he  believes  that  this  proves  the  folly  of
my  conception  of  toxin  neutralization,  so  much  the  worse  for  him
and  his  authority  Phantasus.


•'530  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMONITY.

If  one  conducts  experiments  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  tbf
problem  under  discussion,  further,  if  the  method  of  th«^  expei-
menta  is  grot^ly  at  fault,  and  it,  finally,  the  results  thus  ohtuiMl
are  given  an  utterly  false  interpretation,  it  is  not  surprising  Hot
the  mojst  fantastic  res-ults  are  obtained.

Finally  (.'ruber  describes  one  more  experiment  which  he  ilhi;-
trates  by  means  of  a  curve.  Accordiiiji  to  him  this  too  demnnstnia
that  my  theory  is  untenable.  The  experiment  shows  that  the  hxmul-
yais  of  ox  blood,  bj  means  of  a  certain  quantity  of  specific  )uE-nii>ltDr
serum  within  hall  an  hour,  is  dependent  on  the  dilution.  I  dmiI
hardly  remind  my  reailers  that  1  have  always  laid  stress  on  the  cbtisa-
cal  nature  of  the  toxin  and  antitoxin  combination.  1  can  assnrr
them  that  the  factor  of  the  degree  of  concentration  has  ever  bea
sufficiently  regarded.  If  Gruber  will  refer  to  my  first  study  on  thk
BUbject,  "  Die  Werthbcmessung  des  Diphlherieheilserums,"  he  «il
find  the  statement:  "  that  the  union  of  poison  and  antibody  [i»
ceeds  much  more  rapidly  in  concentrated  than  in  diUite  sohitiont.*
and  further  also  "  that  heat  hastens  the  union  and  cold  retaidi
the  same."

The  behavior  which  Gruber  describes  is  all  the  lews  surpiisof
since  he  is  dealing  with  a  complex  process  depending  on  the  aclJM
ot  the  amboceptor -complement  combination.  How  readilv  tb»
combination  is  diaaoeiated  has  repeatedly  been  ]»ointed  out  by  »,
Perhaps  Gruber  thinks  that  this  experiment  is  new  to  me;  ^vbj
one  versed  in  the  subject,  however,  knows  that  we  are  here  dtJ-
ing  with  the  most  commonplace  phenomena,  with  which  every  bt^inos
is  well  acquainted.  1  should  like  to  point  out,  however,  that  thit
phenomenon,  namely,  that  dilution  with  water  inhibits  the  actia
of  ha^molysins,  is  not  at  all  constant.  On  the  contrary  ii  is  hmitnl
to  those  cases  in  which  tho  affinity  between  amboceptor  and  nJ),
or  between  amboceptor  and  complement  ia  relatively  slight.  H
one  employs  iKiiaons  in  which  the  affinity  between  receptor  sod
cell  is  great  it  will  be  found  that  wilhin  the  limits  mentioned  the
addition  of  water  is  practically  without  effect.  Thiis,  in  woriciog
with  cobra  venom,  I  found  that  a  given  quantity  of  this  iMiscm
exerted  exactly  the  same  effect  whether  the  volume  of  water  usrf
was  1  or  15.

It  would  lead  us  too  far  to  enter  into  all  the  distortions  and  ^B^
conceptions  contained  in  Grul'ier'a  polemic.  To  do  this  would  rrawte
almost  a  complete  reprint  of  all  my  articles,  as  well  as  of  tnanv  othos


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN.  531

emanating  from  the  Institute — with  all  of  which  Gniber  seems  quite
unfamiliar.  I  shall  content  myself  therefore  with  a  brief  discussion
of  Gruber's  conclusions.     Gruber  states:

1.  '*  There  is  no  warrant  for  assuming  that  the  bacterial  toxic
solutions  contain  a  number  of  poisons  possessing  qualitatively  simi-
lar actions  but  differing  in  intensity  and  in  their  affinity  to  the  anti-
toxin.**

In  the  preceding  pages  I  have  conclusively  shown  that  his  view
cannot  be  harmonized  with  the  actual  facts.  But  even  a  priori
there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  bacterial  cells  always  produce
only  a  single  poisonous  metabolic  product.  Thus,  to  mention  only
a  few  examples,  we  know  that  cinchona  bark  contains  about  twenty
different  alkaloids,  opium  about  the  same  number;  Flexner  and
Noguchi^s  researches  show  that  snake  venom  contains  at  least  four
different  poisons  (haemotoxin,  leucotoxin,  neurotoxin,  endothelio-
toxin),  and  the  yeast  cell,  we  know,  contains  a  number  of  different
ferments.  Furthermore,  1  may  again  call  attention  to  the  fact  that
the  secretion  of  tetanus  bacilli  contains  four  distinct  poisons,  namely,
two  varieties  of  tetanospasmin,  my  tetanolysin,  and  the  poison
which,  according  to  Tizzoni,  causes  the  cachexia.  So  far  as  diphtheria
poison  is  concerned  the  reader  is  referred  to  my  previous  statements.
My  assumption  of  the  existence  of  at  least  two  poisons,  toxins,  and
toxons,  is  borne  out  by  the  clincal  observation  that  in  certain  epi-
demics there  is  a  large  percentage  of  paralyses.^

2.  "  There  is  no  reason  for  assuming  that  the  mode  of  action  of
the  toxins  is  absolutely  unlike  that  of  other  organic  poisons."

Nevertheless,  the  fact  remains  that  the  principal  characteristic
of  the  toxins,  namely,  the  production  of  antibodies,  does  differentiate
them  from  all  other  poisons,  Gruber  to  the  contrary  notwithstand-
ing.   Two  years  ago  Gruber  could  have  found  an  ally  in  Pohl,  who


*  In  animal  experiments  as  a  rule,  the  toxons  do  not  manifest  themselves
until  the  toxins  (which  possess  a  greater  affinity)  have  been  neutralized  by
the  antitoxin.  Dreyer  and  Madsen,  however,  have  described  a  diphtheria
poison  (Festskrift,  Kopenhagen,  1902),  in  which  the  toxons  could  be  demon-
strated even  by  the  mjection  of  sublethal  doses,  the  injections  being  followed
by  paralytic  phenomena.  In  view  of  the  constants  of  this  poison,  as  they  were
determined  by  Dreyer  and  Madsen,  this  behavior  is  not  at  all  surprising,  for
while  old  diphtheria  bouillons  ordinarily  contain  about  33  toxon  equivalents
to  167  toxin  equivalents,  this  poison  contained  about  500  toxon  equivalents
for  that  amount  of  toxin.


a'Si  COLLE(TED  STL'DIES  IN   IMMLI.MTY

had  apparently  autreeded  in  immunizing  against  solanin.  ftin*
then,  however,  the  researches  of  Bashford '  and  of  Besredka '  hs*i
shown  that  it  is  impossible  to  produce  antibodies  against  r^\ha
solanin  or  saponin.  Pohl  himself  no  longer  maintains  the  exi-iairf
of  a  specifjo  antisolanin  Of  the  vari.ius  poisons,  which  fevtati
to  promise  the  best  for  successful  immunization,  morphine  shoud
be  mentioned  first.  Recently  Hirachlaft  ^  clsimed  actually  In  hsn
produced  an  antimorphine  serum.  Morgenroth,*  however.  wa.s  ^'
to  show  that  the  results  obtained  by  Hirschlaff  were  merely  appan-ni,
not  real,  and  that  they  depended  on  the  fact  that  the  do^e^  of  p*
son  employed  bv  Hirschlaff  were  not  surely  fatal,  especially  oiiu
to  the  increased  resistance  of  the  animal  foliowinR  the  ewno
injection.  Hence  the  statement  still  holds  true  that  all  ptiuwi'
chemically  well  defined  do  not  possess  the  property  of  produmtf
antitoxins.

So  far  as  other  differenees  between  ordinary  poisons  and  ti^u:
are  concerned,  I  mav  refer  particularlv  to  niv  detailed  articles  ■
von  Leydens  Festschrift"  and  tn  the  excellent  monograph  by  Oib-'
ton.^  From  these  it  will  be  seen  that  the  action  of  the  chemifsllf
defined  poisons,  alkaloids,  ghicosidea.  etc.,  on  parenchyma
result  of  a  solid  solution  or  of  a  loose  salt  formation.  In  acconlan'
with  the  loose  character  of  the  coml>ination,  the  action  of  iIm
poisons  is  a  transitorv'  one.  The  firm  union  and  prolonged
peculiar  to  the  toxins  is  entirely  absent.  Besides  this  the  paioJ
of  incubation  is  wanting  in  most  ordinary  poisons,  although  lh«
are  a  few  exceptions  like  arsenic,  phosphorus,  tartrate  of  tin  ul
sodium,  and  vinylamin.  In  the  toxins,  on  the  other  hand,  a  prriJ
of  incubation  is  the  rule.

Entirely  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  Emil  Fischer  k
ing  ferments,  I  have  aHcril>ed  the  specific  combining  proceese  d
toxins  to  certain  stereochemical  groups  of  atoms  (haptophore  grou|^
These  unite  only  with  such  other  atomic  groups  which  fit  to  Ih*
as  does  a  key  to  a  look.  The  ordinary  chemical  groups  of  orgMl
chemistry  po8se5a  affinities  for  a  large  number  of  other  groups.    '

'  Artliives   Internntionales  de  PharmncodvnamiCH.   Vols.   S   aod  9,
'See  Metchnikoff    L'Immunitf.  Paris,   1901,
'  Berliner  klin.  Woohenschrift    11102.
Mbid.,  1903.  No    21

•  Von   Leydens  Feat .TCh rift.  .^iiRiist   HitsrhwBlcl,  Berlin.   1902.

•  Stiidien   liber  die  N:irk.>se    -Iciiu     iml.


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN  533

the  aldehyde  group  can  unite  with  amido  groups,  hydrazin  groups,
methylen  groups,  etc.  In  this  group  therefore  the  combining  prop-
erty is  not  specifically  limited,  but  extends  to  a  large  number  of
combinations.  On  the  other  hand  the  one  characteristic  of  toxins
and    ferments   is   just   this  specific   combining   property.

3.  "  The  transformation  of  toxins  into  non-poisonous  combina-
tions (toxoids),  possessing  the  same  affinity  for  the  antitoxin  is  pos-
sible, but  has  not  been  definitely  proven.*'

I  have  already  clearly  shown  that  the  doctrine  of  toxoids,  now
generally  accepted,  is  one  of  the  best-established  foundations  in  the
entire  subject  of  immunity.  However,  with  critics  like  Gruber,
who  blindly  condemn  the  views  of  others,  one  ought  to  be  satisfied
if  they  recognize  at  least  a  possibility.

4.  "  Toxin  and  antitoxin  have  feeble  chemical  aflfinities  and
therefore  unite  with  one  another  to  form  dissociable  combinations  or
perhaps  molecular  combinations  in  varying  proportions.  These  con-
ditions explain  the  long  incubation  of  the  poisonous  action  and  other
marked  phenomena.*'

To  be  sure  the  affinity  between  toxin  and  antitoxin  may  in  some
instances  be  a  feeble  one,  but  this  is  by  no  means  always  the  case.
The  affinity  between  tetanus  toxin  and  antitoxin  is  slight,  and  so
is  that  between  complement  and  amboceptor.  On  the  other  hand,
however,  there  are  poisons,  such  as  diphtheria  toxin  and  snake  venom,
in  which  the  reaction  proceeds  under  strong  affinities,  so  that  the
process  of  neutralization  takes  the  course  of  a  straight  line  and  not
of  a  curve.

Gruber's  statements  might  also  give  one  the  impression  that
he  is  the  first  to  introduce  dissociation  as  an  explanation  of  some
of  the  phenomena  in  immunity.  1  have  always  emphasized  the
fact  that  amboceptor  and  complement  are  loosely  bound,  uniting
at  high  temperatures,  but  dissociating  at  low  temperatures.^  But
this  is  all  wrong  according  to  Gruber,^  for  a  year  and  a  half  ago  he


'  I  shall  cite  a  passan^e  from  Ebrlich  and  Morgenroth's  First  Communi-
cation Concerning  Hemolysins  (see  page  7  of  this  volume),  a  passage  which
Wechsberg  has  already  called  to  Gruher's  attention  (Wiener  klin.  Wochenschr.
1901.  No.  51).  "This  experiment  clearly  shows  that  under  the  conditions
present  complement  and  immune  body  exist  in  the  serum  independently  of
one  another  ";  further  also,  "  under  certain  circumstances  the  immune  body
enters  into  a  loose  chemical  union  with  the  complement,  one  which  is  easily
dissociated.*'     In  view  of  this  I  cannot  understand  why  Gruber  still  main-


534


COLLECTED  STirDlES  ]N   IMMUNITY


laid  down  the  diPtiiin,  "  There  is  po  dissociation  by  raeana  of  rold.'
It  seems  not  to  have  mattered  to  him  that  his  statement  is  oppoed
to  even  the  most  elementary  principles  of  chemistry.

As  a  matter  of  fact  we  have  always  paid  due  attention  to  dim-
cistion  and  to  the  reversibility  of  the  reactions.  I  should  like  b)
call  Gruber's  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  sentence:  "  In  the  mrm
of  the  amlK)neptors  we  are  dealing  with  a  reversilile  process"  ocnits
in  one  of  Morgenroth's  studies  =  from  this  Institute.  Further  thn
this  such  questions  do  not  afTect  the  Side-chain  Theory,  as  such.  TTk
whole  discussion  is  evidently  designed  to  hide  the  fact  that  Grubo-'i
position  is  really  based  on  my  theory.

So  tar  as  the  mode  of  action  of  the  toxins  is  concenwd
Gruber's  standpoint  and  mine  are  es.sentially  the  same.  Thie
Gruher  states  that:  "All  poisons  must  be  'anchored  tq-  ibt
cells  and  the  anchoring  group  of  atoms  is  probably  always  different
from  that  group  which  gives  the  substance  its  toxicity  "  I  sitent
many  years  in  establishing  this  view  and  it  is  now  everywhere  aireptf^
as  axiomatic.  I  defy  Gruber  to  show  me  the  text-books  of  toii-
oology  in  which,  previous  to  ray  work,  this  conception  apjieais,  i
conception  which  dominates  the  laws  of  the  distribution  and  action
of  poisons,  If  he  should  again  refer  to  S.  Friinkel'a  book  ^  1  cm
only  remark  that  while  the  account  of  my  views  is  very  admirable.
it  is  nothing  more  than  a  rfeumS  of  the  points  which  I  had  previoudv
developed.  Perhaps  I  can  even  aid  Gruber's  memory  and  let  him
apeak  for  himself.  A  year  before  his  declaration  of  war  he  spoke
of  "  the  brilliant  hypothesis  of  ihat  genius  Paul  Ehrlirh,  the  greaint
of  living  pathologists.'  In  a  little  work^  published  at  that  timr
and  quite  enthusiastic  over  my  theory  he  states:  '■  According  to
Ehrlith  only  such  substances  are  poisons  which  unite  chemtcallv
with  ."ajme  constituent  of  the  organism."  And  yet  this  eamc  Grulw
to-day  says:  "These  are  merely  new  words  for  what  has  long  brcB
known,"

I  should  not  like  to  deprive  the  reader  of  hearing  still  aaotiier


tainif  that  my  view  of  llie  production

.amboceptOT  and  complement  are  firmly  united,  is  abaoiulely  incoroi

'  Miinch.  med.  Wochenscht.   1901,  No.  48.

■  Ibid..  1903,

'  Die  Arziieiiiiitteliiyntbese,  Berlin.  1901.

'  Max   Gruber,     Neuere  Forechungen   iiber  erwarbene   Immunilgt
1900.


ding  to  wUA


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN.  535

authority  often  cited  by  Gruber,  namely  von  Behring.  Shortly  after
my  theory  was  formulated  this  author  expressed  himself  as  follows :  ^
'*  It  seemed  about  hopeless  to  attempt  to  penetrate  these  mysteries,
when  recently  Prof.  Ehrlich  published  a  theory  which  is  destined
to  illuminate  even  this  subject."

But  even  now  Gruber,  does  not  doubt  "  that  the  toxins  are  very
complex  bodies  and  that  the  toxic  action  is  connected  with  certain
atomic  groups;  that  possibly  it  is  necessary  for  certain  atomic  groups
to  be  present  so  that  the  poison  molecule  can  be  anchored  and  the
toxicity  manifest  itself."

One  will  at  once  ask  why  then  Gruber  attacks  my  theory  if  he
is  satisfied  with  its  fundamental  principle,  namely,  the  assumption
of  an  independent  haptophore  and  toxophore  group  m  the  poison
molecule?  That  I  cannot  answer.  To  be  sure  further  along  one
encounters  the  warning,  "  But  one  must  not  too  highly  personify
these  different  atomic  groups,  and  think  of  this  entire  poisoning
as  a  drama  with  four  long  intermissions  between  the  acts."  I  cannot
see  what  is  to  be  gained  by  such  idle  talk.

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  majority  of  infectious  diseases  as  well
as  the  poisonings  do  proceed  in  three  phases,  and  these  have  always
been  separated,  namely,  incubation,  the  disease  itself,  recovery.
Hence  to  explain  these,  as  we  do,  through  the  independent  action
of  toxophore  and  haptophore  groups  seems  the  most  natural  thing
to  do.  It  is  strange  that  Gruber  should  now  speak  of  the  anchoring
of  the  poison  by  the  elements  susceptible  thereto  as  something  per-
fectly obvious,  for  in  his  first  attack  he  laid  especial  emphasis  on
**  his  being  the  first  to  furnish  the  important  demonstration  that
the  specific  immune  substances  are  bound  by  the  bacteria."  How-
ever, Gruber's  claim  cannot  be  allowed,  for  all  that  he  demonstrated
was  thstt  the  agglutinins  are  used  up  in  the  reaction.  The  signifi-
cance of  a  chemical  union,  however,  was  first  pointed  out  by  us.
This  union,  as  Morgenroth's  studies  on  the  behavior  of  anchored
amboceptors  show,  need  in  no  way  be  connected  with  toxic  action
or  with  a  using  up  of  the  substance.

Gruber's  statement  that  the  long  period  of  incubation  is  explained
by  the  feeble  aflSnities  I  must  emphatically  deny.  The  studies  of
Donitz^  and  of  the  Heyman  school  3  show  that  the  injected  toxins


*  Deutsche  med.  Wochenschr.  1898.
'  Ibid..  1897.


•  Decroly  et  Rouse,  Arch,  de  Intemat.  de  Pharmat^odynamie,  Vol.  VI.


536  COLLECTED  STUUIfa  IN  IMMUNITY

disappear  from  the  circulation  in  a,  few  minutes.  It  is  ihereim
idle  to  talk  of  a  slow  union  such  as  would  correspond  to  weak  affim-
ties.  But,  says  Gruber,  "  it  is  impossible  to  understand  why  the
toxophore  groups,  after  they  have  been  brought  into  proximiiy
the  protoplasm,  do  not  at  once  commence  their  activity,  but  alwin
stop  to  consider  the  matter  for  several  hours,"  One  cannot  seriou^
discuss  the  subject  with  such  a  questioner.  Gruber  might  ju&l  a
ask  that  all  chemical  reactions  proceed  rapidly,  and  deny  the  poai-
bility  of  a  slow  reaction.

The  slow  action  of  the  toxophore  group  is  not  at  all  remarknUt,
especially  in  the  domain  of  toxins.  This  is  particularly  true  if  «t
remember  that  with  certain  poisons  (e.g.  botuhsm  toxin),  one  p»B
of  toxin  to  500  million  parts  of  body  weight  suf!tce3  to  cause  deMK
and  that  the  rapidity  of  action  is  dependent  to  a  high  degree  ot
the  amount  of  the  active  substance.

Is  Gruber  possibly  of  the  opinion  that  in  the  paralysis  of  dijib-
theria,  which  as  is  well  known  usually  develops  after  the  lapse  d
weeks,  the  toxon  courses  about  free  for  twenty  days  or  more  befon
entering  the  tissues  and  then  suddenly  exerts  it.s  action?  To  llx
unprejudiced  critic  the  importance  of  the  separation  of  toxin  biml-
ing  and  toxin  action  for  the  proper  understanding  of  the  period  ti
incubation,  is  conclusively  demonstrated  by  Morgcnroth's  '  experi-
ments with  tetanus  in  frogs.  Courmont  and  Doyon,  as  is  well  known,
discovered  that  the  frog  is  susceptible  to  tetanus  poison  only  )t
higher  temperatures,  and  not  when  the  animal  is  kept  cold.  Mor
genroth  was  able  to  show  that  at  low  temperatures  the  tetanus  poima
is  bound,  but  exerts  no  toxic  action.  Frogs  are  injected  with  lelanw
toxin  and  then  kept  on  ice  for  days.  If  then  they  are  subjected
to  higher  temperatures,  it  will  be  found  that  they  behave  exacttr
as  if  they  had  just  been  inoculated.  And  yet  the  toxin  has  been
bound  by  the  centra!  nervous  system  even  at  the  low  temperaturr;
for  if  after  several  days  at  low  temperature  the  animal  be  injected
with  an  amount  of  antitoxin,  even  much  more  than  sufficient
neutralize  the  poison,  tetanus  will  still  develop  if  the  frog  is  subject«d
to  a  higher  temperature.  But  this  is  not  all.  If  frogs,  after  toeing
injected  with  tetanus,  are  subjected  to  a  high  temperature  for  one
day,  and  then  placed  in  the  refrigerator,  they  will  not  become  sicL
But  on  bringing  the  animals  back  into  higher  temperatures  aft«


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN.  537

;  the  lapse  of  weeks  or  months,  it  will  be  found  that  they  sicken  after
a  shortened  period  of  incubation.     Are  any  further  proofs  of  the

n.   slow  action  of  the  toxophore  group  required?

It  is  not  easy  to  meet  all  of  Gruber's  statements  because  he  fre-
quently  makes   use  of   misleading   tactics.     He   often   reaches   the

-  same  conclusions  as  1  myself,  and  grants  that  certain  of  my  views
are  permissible  or  probable.     In  some  things,  he  says,  I  am  correct

..  in  the  main,  in  others  I  may  be  right,  but  have  not  strictly  proved
my  point.    All  these  statements  are  but  a  clever  contrivance  to

.    give  the  reader  the  impression  that  my  theory  is  but  a  product  of

.  the  imagination  when  as  a  matter  of  fact  is  it  really  a  hypothesis
developed  experimentally.    This  brings  me  to  Gruber's  fifth  con-

.    elusion.

5.  "  The  development  of  antitoxin  has  no  connection  whatever
with  toxic  action  or  cell  immunity."

It  will  suffice  for  me  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  I  have  always
hasisted  on  distinguishing  between  the  haptophore  and  toxophore

[.  groups  in  the  toxin  molecule  and  also  between  the  anchoring  and  the
action  of  poison.  I  might  add  that  this  absolute  independence  of
toxic  action  and  antibody  production  is  a  principle  which  I  formu-
lated, not  Gruber.  As  far  back  as  1898,  Weigert  ^  rightly  pointed
out  that  my  demonstration  ^  of  antitoxin  production  through  non-
poisonous  toxoids  was  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the  independence
of  antitoxin  production  and  toxic  action.  Furthermore  I  have
repeatedly  pointed  out  that  the  development  of  antitoxin  depends
on  the  haptophore  group.  Over  IJ  years  ago  Paltauf^  called
Gruber's  attention  to  the  weak  points  in  his  objection  and  one  might
therefore  have  expected  that  Gruber  would  not  again  bring  forward
this  old  fairy-tale.  In  the  future  I  shall  not  reply  to  perversions
of  this  kind.

So  far  as  the  reasons  are  concerned,  which  Gruber  gives  in  sup-
port of  the  above  statement  regarding  the  development  of  anti-
toxin, I  may  at  once  say  that  I  can  assent  to  them  word  for  word-
Thus  the  statement  that:

(a)  "  Many  substances  which  are  entirely  innocuous  lead  to
the  formation  of  antibodies''  is  the  first  consequence  of  my  views
and  experimental  labors.    The  fact  that

^  Lubarsch-Ostertag,  Ergebnisse  der  pathologischen  Anatomie,  IV  Jahrgang
'  Werthbemessung  des  Diphtherieheilserums,  Klin.  Jahrbuch.
*  Wiener  klin.  Wochenschr.  No.  49,  1901.


538  COLLECTED  STiroIES   LN    IMMUNITY

\b)  "  Certain  animab  no n -susceptible  to  certain  toxins  newr-
tbeleas  produce  antibodies  "  needs  no  further  explanation  accMdia|
to  my  theory.  Certain  species  of  animals  may  possess  suiUhli
receptors  For  binding  the  toxin  and  producing  antitoxiu  &ltto0
their  cells  are  insensitive  to  the  action  of  the  toxophore  group,  Kwxi-
ing  to  Metchnikoff  this  seems  often  to  be  the  case  with  tetanus  lau
in  crocodiles.  As  already  pointed  out  years  ago  by  Weigert'  sctont'
ing  to  my  theory,  the  production  of  antitoxin  need  not  at  tJI  fc*
preceded  by  any  injury  in  a  clinical  sense.  In  fart,  loo  slronjia
injury  may  cause  the  cell  to  lose  its  power  of  regeneratioo.  oirat
to  the  toxic  action  on  the  vital  group  [I^istungskern].  I"or  etfltnpia,
if  a  specific  nerve  poison  is  anchored  by  a  fitting  receptor  of  an  iailiSe-
ent  cell  (liver)  we  should  expect  the  production  of  an  antibodv  bf
the  liver,  even  if  the  liver-cell  does  not  become  tctanized.
address  at  Hamburg'  before  the  Congress  of  Naturalists  I  poinid
out  that  the  local  origin  of  antitoxin,  which  Romer  deducfs
his  splendid  experiments  with  abrin,  will  often  make  it  possible  n
transfer  part  of  the  antitoxin  production  from  the  vital  ore&nsV
the  indifferent  connective  tissue,  by  means  of  subcutaneous  ipjer
tion  of  poison.

Gruber's  next  statement  is;

(c)  "  Despite   a   plentiful    production   of   antibody,    the   subo?'
tibility  to  the  poison  may  remain,  or  even  increase,"

I  have  already  discussed  the  principle  of  hypersensitivenoi
and  mentioned  the  fact  that  this  objection  restrained  me  for  h
time  from  publishing  my  theory.  But  even  these  phenomena  wot
satisfactorily  explained  in  accordance  with  the  side-chain  theoq',
by  the  assumption  of  an  increase  of  affinity  and  a  rupture  of  ih
toxin-antitoxin  combination.  To  be  sure  it  is  possible  that
explanation  touches  but  part  of  the  subject,  and  that  in  reality  lie
phenomena  are  far  more  complex.  But  this  is  no  reiisnn  for
ing  to  overthrow  the  theory;  to  do  so  would  be  to  completely
apprehend  the  purpose  of  a  theory.  Surely  one  cannot
that  a  theory  will  at  once  explain  all  the  complex  phenomena  rf
so  difficult  a  subject  as  this.  A  theory  ought  primarily  to  posem
heuristic  value,  pointing  out  new  paths  into  a  complex  subject;  i
should  smooth  the  way.  The  actual  research  must  be  left  to  tie'
8cienti6c    investigator.     Science   can    be   advanced   only    by


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN.  539

of  experimental  analysis,  and  not  by  high-flown  words  of  a  mis-
leading dialectic.

{(l)  **Cell  immunity  can  be  acquired  without  the  formation  of
antibodies.''

This  statement,  too,  does  not  surprise  me.  All  that  the  side-
chain  theory  aims  to  do  is  to  explain  how  the  production  of  anti-
bodies may  be  conceived.  But  1  have  never  yet  claimed  that  this
is  the  only  means  by  which  the  organism  can  defend  itself  against
deleterious  influences.  1  would  call  attention  particularly  to  the
Sixth  Communication  on  Haemolysins,^  in  which  Morgenroth  and  I
pointed  out  that  not  all  substances  capable  of  being  anchored  need
necessarily  excite  the  production  of  antibodies.  We  have  always
■emphasized,  however,  that  immunity  may  be  developed  despite
this,  chiefly  through  a  disappearance  of  receptors.^  In  our  isolysin
experiments  we  observed  that  the  blood-cells  became  insusceptible
and  we  demonstrated  that  this  was  due  to  a  lack  of  receptors.  The
interesting  fact  observed  by  Kossel  and  by  Camus  and  Gley  that
during  the  course  of  immunization  with  eel  blood,  the  blood-cells
of  rabbits  acquire  a  high  resistance  against  that  poison,  is  probably
most  easily  explained  by  assuming  that  the  cells  acquired  immunity
in  the  wav  above  mentioned.

This,  of  course,  does  not  exhaust  the  possibilities  of  the  origin
of  immunity  not  due  to  antitoxins.  Thus  under  the  influence  of
the  anchored  i)oison  new  receptors  may  be  formed  which  are  so  firmly
imited  to  the  protoplasm  that  they  are  not  thrust  off.  Such  receptors
Morgenroth  and  1  have  therefore  termed  "sessile  receptors."  If
the  production  of  such  an  excess  of  receptors  takes  place  in  a  rather
indifferent  tissue,  as  in  connective  tissue,  it  will  readily  be  seen  how
the  receptors  can  serve  to  deflect  the  poison,  and  produce  a  more
or  less  marked  immunity.  In  that  case  on  comparing  a  normal
animal  with  an  immunized  one,  the  conditions  would  be  like  those
observed  with  tetanus  poison  in  normal  guinea-pigs  and  normal
rabbits,  respectively.  The  studies  of  Donitz  and  Roux  have  shown
that  the  guinea-pig  possesses  receptors  for  tetanus  toxin  only  in
the  brain,  whereas,  rabbits,  in  addition  to  the  receptors  in  the  cen-
tral nervous  system,  possess  about  thirty  times  as  many  such  recep-
tors outside  this  system.


'  See  page  88.

2  Schlussbetrachtungen  in  Nothnagel's  Handbuch.,  Vol.  VIII.


F


540  CULLECTED  STnilES  IN   IMMl'NITV.

Another  possibility  of  cell  immiinily  is  that  the  proiojik-aii  rf
cells  which  are  ordinarily  susceptible  is  no  longer  affei-ted  In*  to-
tain  poisons.  This  kind  of  immunity,  whieh  to  be  sure  I  i^oad?
very  rare,  would  correspond  t«  mithridatism  or  acquired  lolenin
in  the  old  sense.  A  fourth  possibility,  finally,  is  the  adaplalion  d
the  phagocytic  apparatus  in  Metchnikoff's  sense.

It  IS  obvious,  of  course,  that  all  the  sevarious  subordinate  HiA
of  immunity  occur  alone  as  well  a.**  in  manifold  combinations.  This,
as  already  mentioned,  immunization  with  cc!  blood  i^  followed  b;
antitoxin  immunity  and  tissue  immunity.  In  the  lower  aninut.
however,  which  as  Metchnikoff  has  shown  are  but  little  ad&vud
to  the  production  of  antitoxin,  other  defensive  contrivam-es  Jeodiif
to  cell  immunity  will  predominate  From  this  ]x)int  of  view  there-
fore the  condition  described  by  Gruber.  namely,  that  frogs  can  be
immunized  against  abrin  without  their  showing  any  antitoxin,
no  difficulty.  So  far  as  the  frog  is  concerned  the  only  question  ii
which  kind  of  cell  immunity  is  present,  i.e.,  whether  there  is  a  ife-
appearance  of  receptors,  or  whether  there  are  sessile  receptors,  et*.

In  view  of  the  detailed  statements  given  above  I  presume  1  neti
add  nothing  to  the  following  passage  in  Gniber's  conclusion

(c)  "The  production  of  antibodies  takes  place  at  entirely  differait
localities  than  does  toxic  action."

The  discerning  reader  will  at  once  see  that  this  statenoent  doe
not  in  the  least  contradict  my  views.  In  fact  it  is  merely  anotbtr
way  of  expressing  what  is  really  the  nucleus  of  mv  theory.  Thf
generalization,  however,  is  false,  that  the  production  of  anttbotti
necessarily  takes  place  in  localities  different  from  those  in  »hid
toxic  action  occurs.  If  Gruber  therefore  believes  that  this  riddln
my  theory  it  is  evident  that  he  understands  the  principles  under-

'Gruber  citea,  as  a  seriouH  objection  to  my  theory,  that  Madsc-n  uti«n<J
immuaUy  io  a  rabliit  which  bad  tieen  immuniied  with  diphtheria
yet  was  unable  to  find  anlitoxin  in  the  blood.  1  will  only  say  that  MtihM
did  not  find  the  blood  etitiix-ly  free  from  antitoxin  since  he  tested  the  b
only  to  l/IO  1  E.  Small  quantitieft  of  antitoxin  could  be  very  well  have  Iws
present  and  these,  of  course,  would  be  of  conaiderable  imporlBiice  (or  Ihe  a
tion  as  to  whether  this  wan  a  case  oF  entire  alisence  of  antitoxin.  Ikstdo
this  I  may  add  that  in  diphtheria  poison  the  cage  reported  by  Mndwn  d
be  eitremely  rare.  During  the  course  of  many  years  the  dlfTrrent  Se
Institutes  have  immunised  thousands  oF  difTerent  animals  nuBinst  diphtbeiw.
In  all  this  lime,  however.  I  have  never  learned  of  a  case  analogout
either  from  the  literature  or  from  private  sources.


iMadi^J


TOXIN    AND  ANTITOXIN  54J

lying  my  views  no  better  than  he  did  two  years  ago.  At  that  time
Paltauf  ^  tried  in  vain  to  make  this  elementary  consequence  of  the
side  chain  theory  comprehensible  to  him.

(J ruber's  sixth  conclusion  is  as  follows:

G.  "  The  specific  antibodies  are  not  normal  body  constituents.
They  are  newly  formed  only  after  the  introduction  of  foreign  sub-
stances. This  new  formation  has  the  character  of  an  internal  secre-
tion.''

80  far  as  the  first  point  is  concerned  one  cannot  help  being  amazed
at  the  lack  of  literary  knowledge  which  permits  an  author  to  make
such  statements.  1  need  only  refer  to  the  studies  of  Keiffer,  Bordet,
Flexner,  Kraus,  Bail,  Peterssen,  etc.,  or  to  the  comprehensive  rfeum^
by  M.  Neisser^  concerning  the  antibodies  found  in  normal  serum,
The  literature  on  normal  antibodies  of  various  kinds  is  very  large,
and  yet  has  been  entirely  ignored  by  Gruber.  Thus  amboceptors
against  different  bacteria  (cholera,  typhoid,  anthrax),  antiambo-
ceptors,  anticomplements,  antitoxins,  antiferments,  etc.,  have  been
olwerved.  I  shall,  however,  mention  merely  a  few  points  which
may  be  of  special  interest.

I.  The  very  frecjuent  occurrence  of  diphtheria  antitoxin  in  horses
(Meade,  Roux,  Holton,  Obbett).  In  view  of  the  high  percentage
of  this  occurrence,  the  attempts  to  ascribe  this  antitoxin  in  normal
horse  serum  to  a  diphtheria  running  a  latent  course  must  be  regarded
as  failures.  Since  this  phenomenon  has  been  observed  in  about
3(V  f;  of  the  horses,  it  is  surely  not  reasonable  to  assume  that  an
occurrence  of  diphtheria  in  horses  should  so  frequently  have  entirely
escaped  the  large  number  of  excellent  observers  representing  animal
pathology.  Such  a  frequency  of  the  disease  should,  of  course,  also
have  manifested  itself  epidemiologically.  The  fact  that  in  one  single
instance  Cobbett  observed  a  diphtheritic  infection  in  a  horse  cer-
tainlv  does  not  alter  the  circumstances.

II.  I  must  mention  the  interesting  observations  made  by  v.  Dun-
gern  *  that  normal  rabbit  serum  contains  an  antibody  against  that
substance  in  star-fish  eggs  which  is  toxic  for  sea-urchin  spermatozoa.
1  am  sure  that  no  one,  just  to  please  Gruber,  will  assume  that  there
is  any   connection   between  rabbits  and  star-fish  and  their  eggs

III.  I-.averan  has  found  that  the  blood  of  healthy  human  beings


*  Wiener  klin.  Wochenschr.  1901.  No  49.

'  Deutsche  ined.  Wochenschr.  1900.

'Zeitschr.  f.  allgemeine  Physiologie.  Vol.  1,  1901.


542


COLL^CTEU  STUDIES  IN    IMMUNITY


cuntains  u  substance  which  kills  Irypanaeomes,  whereas  this  is  not
pie;icnt  in  the  blood  of  other  animals  and  cannot  be  produced  m  a)
targe  an  amonnt  even  by  Ininiunization.  This  might  ht  the  leaain
why  (aside  Irom  sleeping  sickness  of  Central  Africa)  man  la  so  refrsc-
tory  toward  trypanosouie  infection.

Bui  if  such  a  wealth  of  facts  is  disregarded  in  statements  cm
cerning  "  our  certain  knowledge,"  it  must  be  admitted  that  a  scieniifir
discussion  is  entirely  out  of  the  question,  and  bad  best  be  avoidnl
in  the  future.

Furthermore,  so  far  as  conceiving  the  production  of  antJtom
to  be  a  secretion  is  concerned,  1  may  say  that  this  part  of  the  papff
is  nothing  but  another  way  of  stating  what  I  have  always  held.
Paltauf,'  tor  instance,  pointed  this  out  to  Gruber  some  years  ago,
"  In  passing  I  may  say  that  an  '  escape  '  of  particles  of  protopt&aa
into  the  blood  really  denotes  a  secrelion,"  In  an  address  delivered
in  1899  (I)  I  expiessed  myself  in  a  way  that  shows  that  I  luw
always  considered   the  production    of    antitoxin   to   be  a  secretorr


"  Or,  s'il  y  a  lieu  de  eroire  que  les  Antitoxines  doivent  !eur  ori^w
k  une  sorte  de  fonction  s^cr^toire  des  cellules  et  ne  sont  par  cnnsf
quent  nullement  6trang&rea  S  1  organisme,  le  rapjKjrt  api5c)hque  qm
les  unit  avec  leurs  toxines  n'en  devient  que  plus  6trangc.  '

This  point  has  been  demonstrated  esjiecially  by  the  researcb«B
of  Salumoiisen   and   Madsen,   and   of   Roux   and    Vaillard.

But  just  this  secretory  character  of  antibody  produetion  is  abso-
lutely at  variance  with  the  older  view  that  antitoxins  arc  mervlv
transformation  products  of  the  toxins.  This  was  the  viow  defended
by  Buchner  and  held  to  be  possible  by  Gruber  even  in  his  last  att^rt.
It  is  just  as  impossible  to  believe  that  antitoxins  arise  from  toioM
as  it  is  to  believe  that  lipase  is  transformed  fat,  or  amylaiie,  traiu»-
formed  starch.

Thus  we  see  that  the  various  points  brought  up  by  Gruber  are
nothing  but  reproductions  ot  my  views,  the  little  that  deviates  »
incorrect  or  is  based  on  misconceptions  of  an  inflated  knowledge
of  the  literature.

(Jrubers  last  two  conclusions  contain  so  little  that  is  tievb  that
it  hardly  pays  to  discuss  them  For  completeness'  sake,  however,
(  shall  append  them.

'  Weinei  klin.  Wochenaclir,  1901.  No   49,  "

'  Tfala  appeared  ouly  us  wa  abstract  io  La  Scmaine  MddJcale.  1899.


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN.  54^

7.  ^'The  power  to  excite  the  formation  of  antibodies  is  due  to
certain  peculiarities  in  the  chemical  structiu*e  of  the  substance  which
excites  this  antibody  production.  A  prerequisite  for  this  produc-
tion as  well  as  for  toxic  action  is  the  chemical  union  of  the  foreign
substance  with  certain  particular  constituents  of  the  cells."

This,  I  may  say,  is  a  short,  though  not  particularly  good,  r&uni^
of  the  side-chain  theory.

8.  "The  non-poisonous  toxin-antitoxin  combination  also  lacks
the  power  to  excite  the  production  of  antitoxin.  The  entire  chemi-
cal character  of  this  combination  is  different  from  that  of  the  uncom-
bined  substances."

This,  too,  is  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  my  theory,  and
is  most  readily  explained  by  the  assumption  that  the  antitoxin  fits
into  the  same  group  which  effects  the  union  of  the  toxin  with  the
susceptible  cells.  Fiu'thermore,  I  really  see  no  reason  why  Gruber
should  make  a  special  point  of  the  fact  that  the  chemical  character
of  the  toxin-antitoxin  combination  has  changed.  That  is  merely
a  trick  of  speech  which  will  make  but  little  impression  on  the  scientific
reader.

That  the  antitoxins  are  nothing  but  thrust-off  receptors  capable
of  uniting  with  the  poison — this  assumption,  together  with  its
immediate  consequence  that  the  toxin-antitoxin  combination  must
be  non-poisonous,  is  the  key  to  my  entire  theory.  We  are,  in
fact,  dealing  with  an  extremely  important  law  which  Weigert
and  I  compared  to  the  principle  of  the  lightning-rod  and  which
V.  Behring  briefly  expressed  as  follows:  "The  same  substance  in
the  living  body  which,  when  in  the  cell,  is  the  prerequisite  of  a  poison-
ing, becomes  the  healing  agent  when  it  is  present  in  the  blood."
This  law  apphes  not  only  to  the  toxins  but  possesses  general  applic-
ability. I  may  here  refer  the  reader  to  Ransom's  experiments,  which
show  that  the  cholesterin  in  the  red  blood-cells  causes  haemolysis
by  saponin,  while  at  the  same  time  the  cholesterin  of  the  serum
caases  an  inhibition  of  this  poisoning.

Gruber,  however,  thinks  that  it  has  not  been  proved  that  thc^
haptophore  group,  which  anchors  the  toxin  to  the  vital  constituent
of  the  protoplasm,  is  the  same  which  anchors  the  toxin  to  the  anti-
toxin. A  year  and  a  half  ago  he  expressed  this  quite  clearly  as
follows :  ^

"Ehrlich  may  have  demonstrated  that  the  toxin  is  bound   to

»  Wiener  klin.  Wocheiuchrift,  I90I,  No.  60.


544  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN   IMMCNITY

the  antitoxin  by  a  combining  group  which  differs  from  Ihe  Vat

phore  group.  But  where  and  how  has  he  shown  that  the  tons  a
addition  to  its  toxophore  group  possesses  only  vne  haptophore  grooft
namely,  the  one  which  combines  with  the  antitoxin?  How  his  b(
shown  that  the  same  haptophore  group  acts  in  all  chemical
tions  of  the  toxin?  On  the  contrary  it  can  positively  be  stated  llal
the  toxin  must  necessarily  be  a  very  complex  molecule  poas
manif  different  haptophore  grotlps.  Here,  gentlemen,  lies  the  wt
of  the  evil.  All  this  misconception  of  the  side-chain  theorj'  wouid
have  been  impossible  but  for  the  mistake  in  the  choice  of  an  articli,
i.e.,  if  Khrlich  instead  of  speaking  of  the  haptophore  group  bad  bbJ
a  haptophore  group."

So  this  is  my  great  fault,  the  choice  of  an  article  I  I  may  le»w
it  for  the  reader  to  decide  how  weighty  this  objection  is.  \ew-
theless  let  us  see  what  Gruber  really  means.

Let  us  assume,  for  example,  that  a  poison,  in  addition  to  tb
toxophore  group,  possesses  two  different  groups  with  baptopboR
functions.  One  of  these,  group  a,  corresponds  to  what  ray  Ibean
demands,  since  it  is  able  to  combine  with  a  receptor  of  the  cell,  .li
a  residt  of  this  combination,  however,  there  is  to  be  not  an  OTft-
production  of  a  receptor  fitted  to  a,  but  the  production  of  a  diffff-
ent  substance,  fitting  the  second  haptophore  group,  b,  of  the  touit.
It  will  at  once  be  seen  that  this  entire  premise  of  Gruber
very  artificial  and  unnatural.  One  can  easily  understand  that  ite
blocking  of  a  given  group  can  cause  a  new  development  of  the
group.  This  corresponds  to  Weigert's  fundamental  law  of  r^enei*
tion.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to  comprehend  how  the  blocking  ol
one  group,  a,  would  always  lead  to  the  development  of  a  different
group,  b.  Furthermore,  it  is  incomprehensible  why  at  least  part
of  the  poison  by  means  of  its  haptophore  group  b  should  not  bt
anchored  by  a  comhming  substance  preformed  in  the  cell,  a  substatw
^  which  can  therefore  act  as  a  receptor.     If  the  toxin  really  possesnl

H  two  haptophore  groups,  a  and  b,  it  would  be  possible  and  probabk

H  that  two  different  antitoxins  wouid  be  developed  by  the  cell.     But  that

H  is  a  question  easily  decided  experimentally,  and  one  which  has  hew

^^  studied  in  this  Institute  for  years.     During  all  this   time  w~e  hsn

^^      ,       never  discovered  even  the  slightest  reason  for  believing  that  diph-
^M  theria  serum,  obtained  from  different  animals  and  by  means  of  diffa-

^^  ent  cultures,  possesses  any  such  complex  constitution   as   Gruber^

^^  view  would  require.


TOX'IN    AND   ANTITOXIN  545

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  first  step  taken  with  the  aid  of  Gruber's
hypothesis  leads  us  astray.  But  when  we  attempt  to  see  how  the
antitoxin  could  act  according  to  Gruber's  scheme,  we  find  ourselves
lost  in  a  maze.  The  antibody  secreted  by  the  ceil  is  to  combine
with  a  collateral  group  6,  of  the  toxin,  leaving  group  a,  which  pri-
marily effected  the  anchoring  of  the  poison,  intact.  How  then  is
any  antitoxic  effect  to  take  place?  One  might  perhaps  assume  that
by  the  occupation  of  group  6,  the  toxin  loses  its  toxicity  through
some  influence  exerted  on  the  toxophore  group.  The  poison  would
thus  in  a  certain  sense  be  changed  into  a  toxoid  by  the  occupation
of  group  6.  In  that  case,  however,  the  toxin  with  group  b  neutralized,
should  still  be  able  to  excite  the  production  of  antitoxin,  just  as  toxoids
do.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is  not  at  all  the  case,  for  we  know  that
toxin  neutralized  with  antitoxin  has  completely  lost  both  its  toxic
property  and  its  power  to  produce  antitoxin.  This  fact,  which  is
absolutely  irreconcilable  with  a  plurality  of  the  haptophore  groups,
IS  easily  explained  by  my  theory  by  a  blocking  of  the  haptophore
group  of  the  toxin.

We  see,  therefore,  that  Gruber's  assumption  leads  to  consequences
which  are  absolutely  untenable.  It  certainly  is  far  from  being  an
improvement  on  my  theory.  In  general,  also,  the  principles  of
scientific  investigation  demand  that  we  restrict  ourselves  to  the
simplest  explanations  possible  and  only  make  use  of  more  complex
ones  if  it  is  absolutely  necessary.  But  there  is  not  the  least  reason
for  Gruber's  assumption  of  several  haptophore  groups;  on  the  con-
trary there  are  a  large  number  of  objections  to  it.

By  this  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  in  addition  to  the  haptophore
and  toxophore  group  the  toxin  molecule  contains  no  other  chemical
groups,  such  as  amido  or  aldehyde  groups,  which  are  able  to  com-
bine with  other  bodies.  I  merely  contend  that  these  atomic  groups
do  not  influence  the  specific  immunizing  process.

To  take  a  chemical  example,  it  is  possible  by  diazotizing  all  kinds
of  amins  to  transform  these  into  diazo  combinations  which,  corre-
sponding to  the  original  substance  employed,  contain  other  radicals
capable  of  reacting,  thus  COH,  CN,  OH,  NO,  etc.  The  specific  prop-
erty of  these  substances,  that  is,  the  property  of  forming  azo  dyes,
is,  however,  connected  exclusively  with  the  N-N  group.  The  reac-
tions which  the  other  groups  can  enter  into  have  nothing  to  do  with
this  specific  reaction.  I  conceive  the  constitution  of  the  toxins
to  be  similar  in  character.


546  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMML^NlTi'.

A  few  words,  now,  eoncerning  the  side-chain  theor>'  and  imnnmin
Gruber  himself  has  found  that  this  theory  is  constantly  gaimti
ground,  whiSe  I  am  gratified  to  see  it  treated  in  detail  in  the  bri
text-books  as  well  as  in  excellent  digests  compiled  by  a  large  nun?-
ber  of  my  colleagues.^  In  addition  to  this  hundreds  of  separate
studies  have  been  based  on  the  side-chain  theory  so  that  I  may  vfH
believe  that  it  best  serves  to  explain  the  fact«  already*  obsen'ed  e
well  as  to  allow  new  facts  to  be  predicted.  Gruber'a  appeal,^  there-
fore, that  '■  Ehrlich's  theorj'  is  a  great  mistake,  and  is  bound  soon  »
disappear  from  the  scientific  arena,"  has  had  but  little  sucte&s;  in
fact  it  aeems  to  have  had  the  contrary'  effect.  The  large  number
of  investigators,  who  are  constantly  eagerly  working  on  the  pnA-
lems  of  immunity  know  what  ia  best  for  them,  and  will  not  be  dictat«il
to  against  their  own  experience  and  conviction  by  one  who  i<eb
to  make  up  his  own  lack  of  experimental  work  in  this  complex  domaio,
by  superficial  studies  of  the  literature.  Gniber,  for  instance,  sip
that  his  original  failure  was  due  perhaps  to  the  fact  "  that  a  few
of  his  experiments  proved  not  to  be  quite  suEBcient,"  This  li  i
mild  expre^ion  in  view  of  the  tact  that  every  one  of  Gruber's  cxpen-
ments  directed  against  ray  views  has  been  shown  to  be  fallaciotn
The  studies  in  which  his  errors  were  pointed  out  and  demonstrated
experimentally  have  all  been  published  in  detail.'  Tbe  result,  u
usual,  was,  that  after  the  corrections  had  been  made,  Gruber's  attacb
proved  to  be  additional  supports  for  my  theory.  Gruber  has  ofX
replied  to  these  articles,  despite  the  long  time  since  their  publication.
Perhaps  he  thinks  the  less  said  the  better.

I  have  finished.  I  must  almost  wonder  why  this  detailed  rejJy
to  an  attack  whose  virulence  and  unusual  tone  are  almost  a  con-
firmation of  my  views.  But  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  guide  the
reader  through  the  intricate  maze  of  Gruber's  statements  because  I
feel  that,  owing  to  the  large  number  of  misconceptions  and  mislefldr
ing  arguments  which  they  contain,  a  field  of  investigation  full  of
promise  might  become  discredited.


'  I  may  mention  those  of  AschoS,  v.  Dungorn,  Griinbaum,  Levaditi  BmIii
Tavcl,  Wassermann.  Welch.  Bruck.

'Wiener  kiln.  Wochpnsch.  1901,  No.  44.   ■

■Sachs,  Berl.  klin.  Wochensch,  1902.  Noa.  9  and  10;  Ehrlich  und  Sachs.
B  journal,  1902,  No,  21;  Moryenrolh  and  Sachs,  same  jonrnal.  1902.  No*.
27  and  35;  Marx,  Zeitach.  f,  Hyg..  Bd.  40,  1902;  WcohsberB,  Wiener  klin.
Wochenach.   1902,  Noa.   13  and  28.


XXXIX.  THE  RELATIONS  EXISTING  BETWEEN  TOXIN
AND    ANTITOXIN   AND  THE  METHODS  OF  THEIR

STUDY.i

BY

Prof.  Paul  Ehrlich  and  Dr.  Hans  Sachs.

The  subject  of  toxins  and  antitoxins,  although  representing  one
of  the  best  studied  domains  of  biology,  is  still  the  subject  of  lively
controversy.  The  difficulties  which  beset  exact  studies  are  obvious.
We  are  dealing  with  substances  which,  for  the  present  at  least,  are
of  unknown  chemical  constitution  and  which  we  are  compelled  to
employ  in  the  form  presented  by  the  life  activities  of  vegetable  or
animal  organisms,  i.e.,  in  an  impure  state  and  mixed  with  countless
other  products  of  the  living  body.  All  attempts  to  isolate  these
bodies  and  discover  their  chemical  character  encounter  endless  diffi-
culties, so  that,  if  we  consider  their  great  significance  in  practical  medi-
cine, it  almost  seems  ironical  for  nature  to  offer  these  substances  to
man  in  such  an  unstable  and  variable  form.  In  spite  of  this,  however,
scientific  investigations  have  been  able  to  obtain  a  deep  insight  mto
the  nature  and  mode  of  action  of  toxms  and  antitoxins;  and  since
chemical  means  could  not  be  employed,  it  remained  for  the  experi-
mental biologist  to  undertake  these  studies.  In  place  ot  chemical
analysis,  therefore,  we  have  the  biological  reaction,  which  in  the  case
of  toxins  is  the  characteristic  toxic  action,  in  the  case  of  antitoxins
the  property  of  specifically  influencing  or  inhibiting  this  action.

An  event  of  considerable  importance  was  the  introduction  of  the
quantitative  method  of  study  by  Ehrlich,  a  method  which  opened
the  way  for  the  present  development  of  immunity  studies.  At  the
same  time  Ehrlich's  introduction  of  test-tube  experiments  (hspmag-
glutination,  haemolysis),  by  avoiding  the  individual  fluctuations  of

'  ijber  die  Beziehungen  zwischen  Toxin  und  Antitoxin  und  die  Wege  ihrer
Erforschung.  Leipzig,  1905,  Gustav  Fock.

547


548


COLLECTED  STtJDlES  IN  IMMUNITY


animal  experiments,  furnished  a  more  exact  basts,  so  that  the  nuili'
matiral  harmony  of  toxin-antiloxin  experiments  in  vivo  and  in  (i
became  very  ranvincing.     At  the  present   time,   therefore,  we  n
regard  it  as  almost  axiomatic  that  toxin  and  antitoxin  act  on  ad
other  chemically  and  without  the  intervention  of  vital  forces.

These  quantitative  biological  studies,  however,  have  not  ni
thrown  light  on  the  relations  existing  between  toxin  and  antitoui
but  have  also  given  us  valuable  inlormation  concerning  thecon^tiu-
tion  of  the  poisons  themselves.  Almost  at  the  outset  it  was  founi
that  the  two  properties  of  toxins  which  could  be  analyzed,  nsmeh,
poisonous  action  and  the  property  to  bind  antitoxin,  do  not  at  il
go  hand  in  hand.  In  this  connection  the  continuous  study  of  V
solutions  which  are  allowed  to  stand  for  some  time  proved  partica-
larly  instructive,  for  it  was  found  that  while  the  power  lo  bmdaoli-
toxin  remained  constant,  the  toxicity  gradually  dminished.  Tlai
study  gave  us  one  of  the  fundamental  conceptions  underljing  tl«
modern  view  of  toxins,  namely,  that  toxicity  and  eombining  pots
are  two  distinct  and  independent  properties  of  the  toxin  molecult
As  is  well  known,  this  fact  is  expressed  by  the  side-chain  theory  bf
assuming  that  the  toxin  molecule  possesses  two  specific  atomic  groups,
one  of  which  is  toxophore,  the  other  haptophore.  Destruction  «
loss  of  the  toxophore  group  gives  rise  to  the  non-toxie  to.xoids  whiA
are  still  capable  of  binding  antitoxin.  .\s  a  result  of  the  high  depa
of  lability  of  the  toxophore  group,  this  transformation  into  toxoid  it
a  spontaneous  process.  And  since  the  production  of  ef!fcetive  baderid
toxin  solutions  takes  a  certain  time,  it  is  obvious  that  \vc  ean  imtti-
cally  never  obtain  a  pure  toxin  consisting  entirely  of  similar  molecuks.
All  our  work  must  be  done  with  toxic  solutions  which,  even  if  «
assume  that  the  bacteria  have  produced  only  a  single  primsrv  toxu^
represent  a  mixture  of  toxin  and  toxoid.

But  do  the  bacilli  secrete  only  a  single,  homogeneous  po'isonl
This  question  has  come  more  and  more  to  be  the  subject  of  an  •
maled  discussion.  Closely  associated  with  it  is  the  further  qtieetica
as  to  the  nature  of  the  reaction  which  occurs  when  toxin  and  a
toxin  unite.    The  study  of  these  problems  was  made   possible  t


an    important    extension    of    quantitative    toxin    analysis,    naindv,
Ehrhch's  method  of  partial  neutralization.     This  consists  e^eentiallr  \
in  mixing  a  constant  amount  ot  poison  with  varj-ing  amounts  of  anti*
toxin  and  then  determining  the  toxicity  of  the  various   mixttins,
i.e.,  the  decrease  in  toxicity  brought  about  by  each  successive  wM-


J


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN:    METHODS  OF   THEIR  STUDY     549

tion  of  antitoxin.  By  means  of  a  graphic  representation  ot  the
figures  thus  obtained,  we  can  get  a  deeper  insight  into  the  details
ot  the  combining  phenomena.  Even  now,  after  physical  chemistry
has  taken  such  great  interest  in  the  reactions  between  toxin  and
antitoxin,  all  the  various  statements  concerning  the  subject  are
finally  based  on  the  method  of  partial  neutralization.

From  the  outset  Ehrlich  felt  sure  that  toxin  and  antitoxin  could
Dot  be  simple  substances  ot  strong  affinities  which  combined,  for
instance,  like  caustic  soda  and  hydrochloric  acid.  This  was  evi-
denced particularly  by  the  phenomenon  which  haa  often  been  termed
the  "inequality"  of  serum  experiments.  Thus  if  varying  amounts
of  toxin  are  added  to  a  constant  amount  of  antitoxin  (an  immune
unit),  two  distinct  limits  will  be  obtained:  I^  (  =  Limit  zero)  is  the
quantity  ot  toxin  m  which  the  mixture  is  just  completely  non-toxic,
i.e.,  physiologically  neutral.  Lf  (  =  Limit  death)  is  the  quantity  of
toxin  in  which  the  mixture  is  still  just  able  to  exert  all  its  character-
istic toxin  action,  i.e.,  in  the  case  of  diphtheria  poison  to  just  kill
the  guinea-pig  acutely.  Now  if  toxin  and  antitoxin  beliaved  like
caustic  soda  and  hydrochloric  acid,  the  difference  between  Lf  and  Lq,
which  we  shall  term  D,  should  correspond  to  one  lethal  dose  (L  D  )
As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  D  is  usually  considerably  larger,  so  that
our  first  inequality  becomes  Lt~Lo>L.  D.

Hence  only  two  possibilities  exist.  Either  toxin  and  antitoxin
react  with  one  another  like  a  weak  base  and  a  weak  acid  (e.g.,  am-
monia and  boric  acid),  in  which  case  the  high  value  of  D  is  the  expres-
sion of  an  incomplete  neutralization,  or  else  the  poison  solution,
besides  the  real  toxin,  contains  a  second  substance  of  less  affinity.
This  substance,  while  unable  to  produce  the  characteristic  toxin
effects,  gives  rise  to  certain  mild  toxic  phenomena.  In  the  case  of
diphtheria  poison  (owing  to  the  practical  importance  ot  diphtheria
antitoxin,  the  discussion  has  usually  centered  around  ttus  poison)
human  pathology  tiad  long  taught  that  acute  diphtheria  infection
is  often  followed  by  a  second  set  of  intoxication  phenomena, namely,
the  peculiar  paralyses  which  develop  after  the  acute  disease  has  dis-
appeared. A  priori,  therefore,  the  assumption  was  highly  probable
that  the  high  value  of  D  was  due  to  different  components  of  the  poison.
And  when  the  results  of  clinical  experience  and  animal  experiments
tiarmonized  so  perfectly,  the  probability  became  almost  a  certainty
It  has  been  found  that  the  toxicity  of  mixtures  whose  toxin  content
lies  between  Lq  and  Lf  is  not  quantitatively  diminished,  but  is  actually


560  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

different  ijualilatively.  Guinea-pigs  injected  with  such  mixtures
tiicken,  after  a  long  period  of  incubation,  with  typical  paralyser  and
show  no  louai  reaction.  The  hypothetical  toxic  constituent  which
gives   rifle  to  these  paralyse  sis  termed  "toxon,"

Why  then  is  it  ini|X)ssible  to  demonstrate  the  action  of  the  toxoo
in  native  diphtheria  poison?  This  is  readily  exphuned  by  the  relative
I  oiicentration  of  toxin  and  toxon  in  the  toxic  bouillon.  Quantitati^-fi
analysis  has  shown  that  the  toxin  is  usually  much  more  (about  5  times]
concentrated  than  the  toxon.  Hence  the  fractional  parts  of  the
lethal  dose  which  allow  the  animal  to  live  long  enough  to  manifeet
toxon  effects  asually  contain  too  little  toxon  to  produce  the  typicsl
paralyse).  If,  however,  a  large  amount  of  poison  is  so  far  neutralized
mth  serum  that  all  the  toxin,  with  the  higher  affinity,  is  just  bound
»nd  the  toxon  is  still  free,  a  mixture  will  be  obtained  which  practically
represents  a  pure  toxon  solution,  for  the  neutral  toxin-atititoxiii
raoleculea  play  no  rflle  in  an  animal  experiment.  It  is  at  once  appar-
ent that,  in  view  of  the  individual  multiplicity  of  vital  phenomena,
the  poisons  of  all  strains  of  diphtheria  bacilli  will  not  contain  both
components  in  the  same  relative  concentration.  Aa  a  matter  of  fact,
we  find  tliat  the  number  of  lethal  doses  contained  in  the  different
Lf  — Lo  varies  enormously,  and  so  far  as  the  toxon  content  is
cerncd  the  variations  were  from  0  to  300^  figured  on  the  basis  of
the  toxin  content.  It  will  be  well  to  enter  somewhat  more  into  a
study  of  these  t  wo  extremes,  for  these  striking  exceptions  to  the  tyiijcd
conditions  argue  strongly  in  favor  of  the  views  here  presented.  On«
of  the  poisons  in  question  was  studied  by  Ehrlich.  and  was  remarkable
in  that  the  difference  Lt  — Lo  represented  only  1.7  lethal  doses,
may  therefore  assume  that  the  poison  was  free  from  toxon  or  nearly
so,  for  the  value  of  D  was  actually  quite  near  one  lethal  dose,  tht
figure  demanded  of  a  toxon-free  poison,  provided  toxin  and  anti-
toxin combine  like  a  strong  base  with  a  strong  acid.  The  opposite
extreme  was  manifested  by  a  poison  descril>ed  by  Dreyer  and  Madfen.
The  constants  of  this  showed  that  it  contained  three  times  as  mucb
toxon  as  toxin.  This  poison,  moreover,  gave  rise  to  toxon  effects
when  sublethal  dose  of  the  native  poison,  without  serum  addition,
were  injected  into  animals.  In  view  of  what  we  have  said  abo**e^
this  is  readily  understood,  the  relative  concentration  of  toxon  in
this  ease  was  so  great  that  even  sublethal  do.ses  sufficed  to  make  the
toxon  effects  manifest.  In  most  native  poisons  this  demonstratwo
fails  because  of  the  slight  relative  content  of  toxon.


TOXIN   AND   ANTITOXIN:    METHODS  OF  THEIR  STUDY.    551

The  existenee  of  the  toxons  which  has  been  deduced  mathematic
ally  from  the  biological  experiments  is,  however,  no  longer  based
merely  on  these  calculations.  At  the  present  time  their  existence
is  a  proven  fact,  for  quite  recently  van  Calcar  succeeded  in  separately
isolating  toxin  and  toxon  from  the  native  poison  solution  by  means
of  a  ingenious  dialyzing  procedure.  Owing  to  its  smaller  molecular
volume,  toxin  diffuses  through  a  suitable  membrane  under  less  ten-
sion than  toxon.  In  this  way  one  obtains  toxon-free  toxin  on  one
side  and  toxin-free  toxon  on  the  other.

This  direct  confirmation  of  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the  bio-
logical analysis  of  the  toxins  shows  how  a  mathematical  study,  pro-
vided biological  facts  are  carefully  regarded,  can  get  at*  the  nature
of  the  phenomena  in  question,  despite  the  failure  of  chemical  methods.
To  be  sure  the  mathematical  treatment  of  biological  problems  must
be  undertaken  very  carefully.  The  phenomena  of  animate  nature
are  so  manifold,  and  subject  to  so  much  change,  that  they  cannot
all  be  forced  into  the  limits  of  a  formula.  It  is  particularly  dangerous
to  build  up  formulas  and  laws  on  the  basis  of  too  simple  assumptions.
For  them  one  can  easily  be  deceived  by  the  apparent  exactness  of
figures,  and  arrive  at  conclusions  which  do  not  suflSciently  regard  the
complexity  of  the  actual  phenomena.

Unfortunately  these  warnings  are  much  needed  at  the  present
time,  for  certain  high  authorities  are  striving  energetically  to  explain
the  most  complex  phenomena,  like  those  which  occur  in  the  union
of  toxin  and  antitoxin,  as  though  they  were  simple  and  readily  cal-
culated reactions  between  simple  substances.

In  opposition  to  the  plurality  of  the  poison  constituents  demon-
strated by  Ehrlich,  Arrhenius  and  Madsen,  as  is  well  known,  uphold
a  unitarian  standpoint.  Their  deductions  are  based  entirely  on
the  method  of  partial  neutralization  introduced  into  toxin  study  by
Ehrlich  and  referred  to  above.  Up  to  this  point  they  differ  only  in
the  method  of  representing  their  results  graphically.  For  this  purpose
they  use  a  system  of  coordinates,  laying  off  the  amounts  of  antitoxin
contained  in  each  mixture  on  the  abscissas.  But  whereas  inEhrlich's
scheme  the  ordinates  represent  the  amounts  of  toxin  which  each
addition  of  antitoxin  causes  to  disappear,  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  use
the  ordinates  to  represent  the  toxicity  which  each  mixture  still  retains.
In  their  work  these  authors  observed  that  now  and  then  in  a  num-
ber of  poisons,  especially  in  tetanolysin,  the  line  connecting  the  points
plotted  possessed  a  certain  similarity  to  curves  obtained  when  weak


552


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


bases  are  neutralized  by  weak  acide  (ammonia  and  boric  acid).  Tim
similarily  constitutes  the  basis  for  their  mathematical  work,  which
leads  them  to  conclude  that  toxin  and  antitoxin  are  simple  substances

I  whose  reaction  is  reversible.     This  reaction  finds  its  expression  in
the  curve  just  mentioned.     Let  ub  examine  their  conclusions  and

I  Bee  whether  they  are  justified.

The  two  graphic  methods  referred  to  are  equally  correct.  Never-
theless it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  one  employed  by  Ehrbch,  the
so-called  "poison  spectrum, "  has  certain  advantages,  for  it  brings
out  more  clearly  any  deviations  from  the  regular  curve.  Speaking
mathematically  we  say  that  the  "poison  spectrum"  is  the  graphic
representatiDn  of  the  differential  quotienta  of  Arrhenius  and  Madsen's
curve.  In  this  sense,  the  ordinates  of  the  spectrum  represent  the
direction  of  the  neutralization  curve,  i.e.,  the  trigonometric  tangent
of  the  angle  which  the  tangent  forms  at  every  point  with  the
axis  of  the  abscissas.  Hence,  if  the  course  of  the  neutralization
curve  is  that  of  a  straight  line,  the  direction  therefore  being  the  same
at  all  points,  we  must  represent  the  poison  spectrum  as  a  rectangle.
If,  as  is  often  the  case,  the  addition  of  a  small  amount  of  antitoxm
causes  no  decrease  in  toxicity  (pro  to  toxoids),  so  that  the  neutralisa-
tion curve  in  this  part  of  its  course  lies  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the
abscissas,  we  must  represent  the  poison  spectrum  as  having  a  gap
at  this  point,  for  the  angle  between  tangent  and  axis  of  abscissas
is  0°.  This  brief  statement  should  make  it  clear  that  in  the  poison
spectrum,  by  rejiresenting  the  direction  of  the  separate  parts  of  the
curve  as  ordinates,  deviations  from  the  regular  curve-like  course
will  be  more  clearly  shown.  It  may  be  well  to  study  these  conditions
by  means  of  a  diphtheria  poison  investigated  by  Madsen.'  See
Figs.  1  and  2.

These  figures  show  that  the  deviations  from  the  hyperbolic  mm
demanded  by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen's  views  are  much  more  clearly
shown  in  the  representation  employed  by  Ehrlich.  Entirely  aside
from  the  question  whether  the  sharply  defined  zones  of  the  poison
spectrum aetuallyexist, or  whether  a  gradual  transition  must  be  inter-
polated, it  is  certain  that  the  changes  should  always  occur  in  the  Bsme
way;  for  they  merely  represent  the  differential  quotients  of  the
neutralization  curve,  and  should  therefore,  if  this  curve  were  hyper-
bolic, show  a  successive  decrease.     The  manifestly   very   irre^ilar

'  The  sole  object  in  employing  tbia  poison  is  U)  illuatrste  ttie  two  mol
of  graphic  representation.


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN:   METHODS  OF  THEIR  STUDY.    553

rise  and  fall  of  the  differential  quotients  shows  at  once  that  a  hyper-
bolic curve  is  out  of  the  question  in  the  case  pictured  above.  If
we  examine  the  poison  spectrum,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  this
represents  Madsen's  poison  entirely  in  accord  with  Ehrlich's  views
concerning  the  constitution  of  diphtheria  poison.  If  toxin  and  anti-
toxin unite  firmly,  and  the  course  of  the  neutralization  curve  there-
fore is  a  straight  line,  the  irr^ular  course  is  explained  by  the  toxoid
present  in  the  poison  and  by  the  varying  affinity  of  the  poison  con-
stituents. The  highest  zone  in  the  poison  spectrum  (zone  c)  indicates
that  at  this  point  equal  amounts  of  antitoxin  cause  the  greatest


s
t

o


10
9
8
7
6
5
4
8
2
1
0


o..

PROTOTC  KOID

6.,

HCMITOX  N

c.

PURE  Ta

I
UN

TOXON

OM       0.1        0j5       OJl       0.85        0.8       0.85       0.4

"V '^  y  "^  r  ^  AHTTTOWIi

Fio.  1. — Poison  spectrum  according  to  Ebrlich.


0.45


decrease  in  toxicity.  Hence  this  part  of  the  poison  must  contain
the  least  toxoids,  or  none  at  all,  and  we  may  therefore  speak  of  this
as  pure  toxin.  It  will  serve  as  a  unit  for  judging  the  degree  of  con-
tamination with  toxoid  in  the  remaining  portions.  We  should  then
speak  of  zone  6  as  the  hemitoxin,  i.e.,  for  each  molecule  of  toxin
there  is  one  of  toxoid.  The  sequence  of  the  different  zones  corre-
sponds to  the  different  affinities  of  the  components.  Thus  we  see
that  the  addition  of  a  small  amount  of  antitoxin  (a)  does  not  cause
any  decrease  of  toxicity  whatever.  And  yet  the  antitoxin  must
have  been  bound.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  toxoids  must  here
be  present  which  possess  a  higher  affinity  than  any  other  constituent
of  the  poison.  We  are  here  dealing  with  the  important  prototoxoid
zone  which  we  encounter  so  frequently  in  diphtheria  poison,  abrin,
ricin,  crotin,  etc.  The  hemitoxin  zone  which  follows  this  is  to  be
regarded  as  a  deuterotoxin  in  its  affinity.     The  constituents  of  the


554


fOLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


poison  can  thus  be  arranged  as  proto-,  deutero-, ,  tritotoxiii,  eK,,

after  which  finally  comes  the  constituent  possessing  the  weakest
affinity,  namely,  the  toxon.  That  this  varied  affinity  does  not  arise
when  the  toxoids  are  formed,  but  differentiates  the  undecomposn)
constituents  of  the  poison  from  the  outset,  is  demonstrated  by
the  genesis  of  tosnid  formation.  Thus  if  one  is  in  a  position  to
study  a  very  pure  poison  in  its  various  stages  of  decomjmsition,  it  will
be  found  that  there  is  a  first  phase  which  leads  to  the  formation  of
hemitoxin,  and  that  a  later  phase  changes  this  into  prototoxoid.
If  there  were  a  change  in  affinity,
however,  we  should  have  had  a
pure  toxoid  zone  from  the  start.

The     pro  to  toxoids     proved     a
serious  obstacle   to   Arrhenius  and
Madsen     in     the    logical    develop-
ment of  their  views.      According  to
their  theory  just  the  first  amounts  ,
of     antitoxin     added    should     de-  I
crease     the     toxicity     the     most.  5
Nevert.heleas  a  numlxsr  of  experi-  e
ments    were    published    by    these  e
authors    (Madsen,  with    diphtheria  S
poison,     and     Madsen     and    Wal-
baum,  for  ricin)  in  which  the  prolo-
toxoids  and  their  development  were
only  too  apparent.     And  Arrhenius
and    Madsen    seem    to    appreciate
that  they  can  no  longer  explain  this
contradiction  by  assuming  that  the
prototoxoid  zone  isdueto  "change-  Fjo  2.-.\eutraliwtion  curve  accond-
ments  minimes  dans  le  milieu  am-         ing  to  An-hemuaaDd  Madaeo.
biant,"  or  by  saying  that  tlie  proto-
toxoid  zone  is  "of  little  interest."     In  order,  therefore,  to  elimli


0

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

s

'v

*■

X  II.

It

lUttJ

nledl

eath  j


these  prototoxoids,  so  annojing  for  their  formula,  thej'  have  discanled
the  well-tried  criterion  for  a  fatal  dose  of  diphtheria  poison  (dttth
of  the  guinea-pig  in  3  to  4  days),  and  now  attempt  to  calculate  the
fatal  dose  in  a  new  way.  Their  procedure  is  as  follows:  RetatDioi
the  definition  of  a  fatal  dose,  they  believe  it  possible  to  calfruUie  the
fraction  or  multiple  of  the  fatal  dose  employed,  from  the  tittle
the  animal's  death  or  even  from  the  resulting  loss  of  weight.     Such


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN:    METHODS  OF  THEIR   STUDY.    555

a  procedure,  in  order  to  possess  any  justification  whatever,  would
have  to  be  based  on  an  enormous  experience.  But  even  aside  from
this  it  is  amazing  to  see  how  a  lot  of  experimental  protocols,  going
back  to  1897,  are  unhesitatingly  used  for  their  calculations.  The  old
determinations  of  the  lethal  dose,  in  which  death  produced  acutely
in  3  to  4  days  was  the  criterion,  are  very  difficult  to  make  use  of
owing  to  the  individual  variations  in  the  animals.  Certainly  it  re-
quires some  experience  to  know  which  animals  should  be  discarded
because  of  over-  or  undersusceptibility.  But  how  much  more  com-
plex the  conditions  really  are  is  at  once  apparent  if  one  attempts  to
determine  i  or  ^  of  a  lethal  dose  from  the  clinical  course  of  the  disease.
Hence  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  the  lethal  doses  calculated
by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  represent  the  averages  of  figures  which
often  differ  from  each  other  by  many  times.  The  tedious  work
which  these  authors  have  undertaken  may  perhaps  satisfy  a  mathe-
matician; to  the  biologist,  however,  it  can  only  represent  useless
and  dangerous  playing  with  figures.  It  signifies  nothing,  therefore,
if  the  figures  recently  obtained  by  this  method  by  Arrhenius  and
Madsen  with  three  poisons  fail  to  show  any  prototoxoid  zone.*  For
the  same  reason,  also,  we  cannot  regard  certain  other  figures,  which
differ  markedly  in  observation  and  calculation,  as  arguments  against
their  views.

However,  we  need  neither  confirmation  nor  controversion  of
their  theory.  For  it  has  been  found  that  the  assumptions  on  which
this  theory  is  based  have  no  existence  whatever.  We  have  already
alluded  to  the  fact  that  van  Calcar  has  recently  demonstrated  the
existence  of  toxons.  But  it  has  also  been  shown  by  another  method
that  diphtheria  poison,  as  well  as  most  other  toxins,  must  contain
various  constituents  capable  of  binding  the  antitoxin.  This  method
had  its  inception  in  the  following  considerations.

Arrhenius  and  Madsen,  as  already  stated,  regard  the  union  of  toxin
and  antitoxin  as  a  reversible  reaction  between  two  simple  [einheitlich]
substances.  According  to  this  view,  therefore,  the  reaction  is  incom_
plete,  i.e.,  the  two  substances  reacting  (toxin  and  antitoxin)  are
never  completely  used  up,  a  certain  portion  of  both  toxin  and  anti-
toxin always  remaining  free  beside  the  neutral  toxin-antitoxin  combi-
nation.    The  equilibrium  which  exists  between  the  three  components

*  We  should  not  neglect  to  mention  that  the  existence  of  the  prototoxoid
zone  and  its  development  from  the  hemitoxin  phase  has  also  been  demonstrated
in  diphtheria  poison  by  so  excellent  a  worker  as  Theobald  Smith.


556  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMl-^vITY.

will  then  be  governed  by  the  law  of  mass  action  formulated  by
Guldberg-Waage,  namely,  (toxin). (antitoxin)  =  A(toxln-antitoxin),  in
which  the  brackets  denote  the  concentration,  and  k  the  constant  o(
equilibrium  to  be  determined  for  each  poison.'  All  the  calculations
of  Arrhenius  and  lladsen  are  based  on  this  formula,  and  their  entire
work  stands  or  falls  with  the  applicability  of  the  formula  to  the  sub-
ject of  toxins.

The  formula,  however,  is  only  then  applicable  if  the  reaction
is  really  completely  reversible,  and  this  is  not  the  case.  Thus  if  mix-
tures containing  the  same  amounts  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  are  t«st«d
at  the  end  of  the  reaction,  it  is  easy  to  convince  one's  self  that  the
toxicity  is  dependent  not  only  on  the  amounts  of  toxin  and  anti-
toxin, but  on  the  manner  of  making  the  mixtures.  If  to  the  sam*
amount  of  antitoxin  we  add  at  intervals  fractional  parts  of  the  toxin,
we  shall  find  that  the  resulting  end  product  is  considerably  more  toxie
than  if  the  same  amount  of  toxin  is  mixed  with  the  antitoxin  at  once.
This  holds  true  even  if  the  toxin  is  added  at  the  time  corresponding
to  the  addition  of  the  la^t  fraction  in  the  former  case.  Von  Dungeni
was  the  first  to  point  out  the  significance  of  this  experiment,  in  con-
nection with  an  observation  made  by  Danysz,  for  the  question  of
reversibility.  He  showed  that  if  this  really  was  a  completely  reversible
reaction  between  simple  substances,  as  is  assumed  by  Arrhenius  and
Madsen,  we  should  expect  that  the  same  equilibrium  should  alwa>-s
ensue  with  the  same  total  amounts  of  reacting  substances,  i.e.,  the
toxicity  of  the  end  products  should  always  be  the  same.  Any  devia-
tion from  this  could  occur  in  the  fractioning  process  only  during  the
course  of  the  reaction ;  and  then,  provided  the  deviation  were  a  function
of  the  reaction-time,  this  would  be  just  ihe  reverse  of  what  is  actually
observed.'     Hence  all  those  poisons  in  which  this  phenomenon  of

'  In  their  recent  publications  Arrhenius  and  Madeen  assuine  that  one  mole-
cule toxin  combines  with  one  molecule  antitoxin,  not  to  form  two  molecuka
of  the  toxin-antitoKin  combioation.as  the  above  formula  would  show,  but  that
two  different  substaaces  are  formed,  toxinan  and  titoxin.  To  be  sure  aa  Uw
equation  then  reads,  (toxio)  (antitoxinj  —  fc  (toxinan]  (titoxin),  one  objection
to  the  above  formub  is  done  away  with,  but  a  new  hypotheaia,  lacking  all  evi-
dence whatever,  is  thus  introduced  merely  tor  the  sake  of  the  formula.

'  The  phenomenon  in  question  therefore  shows  exactly  the  reverse  of  vbat
Arrhenius  and  Madsen's  theory  demand.  For  this  reason  the  limit  of  «nw
need  not  be  considered,  although. owing  to  the  enormous  quantitative  ditTeieocM,
it  would  play  no  r61e  in  judging  the  result.  Nor  can  Arrhenius  extricate  hinw
self  from  the  predicament  bysuggeating  that  we  are  dealing  with  alowly  progiw»


TOXIN   AND  ANTITOXIN:   METHODS  OF  THEIR  STUDY.    557

increasing  toxicity  on  the  fractional  addition  of  toxin  can  be  demon,
strated  must  at  once  be  excluded  from  any  mathematical  analysis
based  on  a  formula  of  equilibrium  derived  from  the  law  of  mass  action.
In  all  of  the  cases  ^  examined  for  the  purpose  (diphtheria  poison,
tetanolysin,  ricin,  staphylolysin,  arachnolysin,  rennin,and  precipitin),
this  method  has  shown  that  the  conception  of  Arrhenius  and  Madsen
is  entirely  inapplicable.

The  phenomena  observed,  however,  are  very  readily  explained
by  the  assumption  of  a  plurality  of  combining  groups  in  the  poison
solution.  Thus  if  to  an  excess  of  antitoxin  a  small  quantity  of
poison  is  added,  as  is  done  in  the  fractioning  experiment,  the  result
would  be  that  even  the  constituents  possessing  a  feeble  affinity  and
which  are  of  no  consequence  so  far  as  any  toxic  action  is  concerned,
would  be  bound  by  the  antitoxin.  When  then  the  second  portion
of  poison  is  added,  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  toxin  molecules,  al-
though possessing  a  higher  affinity,  to  crowd  the  previously  bound
constituents  out  of  their  combination  with  the  antitoxin.  The  result
is  that  a  certain  portion  of  toxin,  which  would  have  been  neutralized
by  the  antitoxin  if  all  the  poison  had  been  mixed  with  the  antitoxin
at  once,  now  remains  free.  That  is  to  say,  the  fractional  method  of
adding  the  poison  has  resulted  in  an  increased  toxicity,  the  Lf  dose
being  reached  with  a  smaller  amount  of  poison.  Furthermore  it  is
possible,  by  means  of  suitable  technique,  to  cause  a  reduction  of  the
Lq  dose,  from  which  it  follows  that  the  Lq  serum  mixture  contains
free  non-toxic  constituents  capable  of  binding  antitoxin,  and  that
these  must  possess  still  less  affinity  than  the  toxon.  These  are  the
so-called  "epitoxonoids"  of  von  Dimgem.  The  discovery  of  the
epitoxonoids  also  offers  an  easy  explanation  of  the  fact  that  it  is
possible  to  immunize  with  mixtures  of  toxin  and  antitoxin  which  are
physiologically  neutral.

All  this  shows  that  a  complete  reversibility,  even  of  the  individual


ing  side  reactions  which  do  not  interfere  with  the  main  reaction  when  one  works
rapidly.  For,  as  was  pointed  out  by  von  Dungem  and  Sachs,  the  increased
toxicity  is  abeady  demonstrable  at  a  time  when  the  union  of  toxin  and  antitoxin
is  not  yet  ended.  The  hypothetical  "side  reaction"  would  therefore  proceed
just  as  quickly  as  the  main  neutralizing  reaction.

'  The  single  exception  met  with,  namely  cobra  venom,  only  proves  the  rule;
for  cobra  venom  (we  are  dealing  with  the  h^emolytic  portion  which  is  activated
by  lecithin)  is  a  simple  substance  with  a  strong  affinity  for  the  antitoxin,  as  can
be  seen  from  the  course  of  the  neutralization  curve,  which  is  a  straight  line.


558  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMItNITY.

poison  constituents,  is  out  of  the  question.  On  the  contrary  we  most
assume  that  the  union  of  these  substances  with  the  antitoxin  is  subse-
quently tightened.  This  tightening  is  also  borne  out  by  other  obsena-
tions,  both  old  and  recent,  If  the  toxin-antitoxin  reaction  vcre
reversible,  it  should  be  possible,  by  removing  the  supposedly  free
toxin  residue,  to  constantly  change  the  equilibrium,  so  that  the  toidn
could  all  be  recovered.  Nevertheless,  although  toxin  can  be  filtered
through  gelatine  and  antitoxin  cannot,  it  is  impossible  either  \>y
gelatine  filtration  (Martin  and  Cherry)  or  by  gelaline  diffusion  ivan
Calcar)  to  obtain  free  toxin  from  neutral  toxin-antitoxin  mixtuna.'
In  addition  to  this  one  cannot  help  being  surprised  that  the  calcula-
tions of  Arrheniua  and  Madsen  entirely  ignore  the  cells'  toxin -binding
receptors  which  effect  the  poisoning.  In  accordance  with  their
views,  these  receptors  should  represent  an  imimrtant  element  in  the
equilibrium;  and  yet  they  appear  to  have  entirely  overlooked  ihis
fact.

It  would  lead  us  too  far  to  discuss  all  the  arguments  against  the
views  of  Arrhenius  and  Madsen.  It  will  suffice  to  call  attention  to
the  serious  objections  which  Nemst  has  raised  regarding  the  prin-
ciples involved,  and  to  Koppe's  criticism  of  their  technique  in  making
htemolytic  test-tube  experiments.  This  illustrates  the  danger  of  &
one-sided  mathematical  study  of  biological  problems.  Even  if  one
succeeds  now  and  then  in  making  the  figures  of  observations  and  cal-
culation tally,  it  is  impossible  at  the  present  time  for  these  mathe-
matical expressions  to  explain  the  facts.  To  be  sure  they  maj'  be
able  to  represent  the  resultants  of  the  processes  which  bring  about
the  phenomena,  but  in  that  ease  the  formula  is  nothing  more  thaa
an  interpolation  formula.  Corresponding  to  this,  therefore,  we  we
that  the  formulas  of  Arrhenius  and  Madsen  vary  widely  for  the  same
poison,  every  new  lot  of  poison  of  the  same  bacillary  origin  has  a  new
constant  of  equilibrium.  Hence  the  formula  is  applicable  onlv  lo
one  particular  case,  and  so,  even  if  it  were  a  correct  interpolation
formula,  progress  of  biological  science  would  in  no  way  be  furthered
by  it.


la  perfectly  evident  that  toxin  can  be  obtained  from  fresh  toxin-Antiioni
a  by  diffusion  through  gelatine,  and  this  has  recently  been  deanonslnUil
by  Madsen  and  Walbaum.  According  to  Morgenroth  such  mixtiucs  rcnuin
at  least  twenty-four  hours  for  the  union  to  liecome  complete.  Henc«  Ihe  slaie-
ment  by  Madsen  and  Walbaum  that  the  mixtures  must  be  fresh  in  order  to
demonstrate  what  tliey  regard  us  dissociation  only  confirms  our  view.


TOXIN  AND  ANTITOXIN:   METHODS  OF  THEIR  STUDY     559^

Biology  does  not  content  itself  with  a  mere  registration  of  phe-
nomena; it  seeks  to  discover  their  nature  and  their  relation  to  one
another.  In  fact  the  chief  mission  of  biology  is  to  attempt,  by  link-
ing facts  and  theories  and  hypotheses,  to  satisfy  the  craving  of  the
thinking  naturalist  for  an  insight  into  causes.


The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  literature  bearing  on  this  subject.

1897.  P.  Ehrlich,  Die  WerthbemessuDg  des  Diptberieheilserums.    Klinisches.

Jahrbuch.
The   samCi    Zur   KeDntniBS   der   Antitoxinwirkung.     Fortschritte   dcr
Medizin.

1898.  The  samei  Ober  die  ConstitutioD  des  Diphtheriegiftes.     Deutsche  med.

Wochenschrift.

1899.  Th.  Madben,  Uber  Tetanolysin.     Zeitschr.  fiir  Hygiene,  Vol.  32.

1902.  S.  Arbhenius  and  Th.  Madben.  Physical  chemistry  applied  to  toxins

and  antitosdns.     Festskrift  ved  Indvielsen  af  Statens  Serum  Institut.

1903.  The  same,  Anwendung  der  physikalischen  Chemie  auf  das  Studium  der

Toxine  und  Antitoxine.     Ztscbr.  f.  physik.  Chemie,  Vol.  44.
P.  Ehrlich,   Uber  die  Giftcomponenten  des  Diphtherietoxins.     Berl.

khn.  Wochenschr.
E.   YON   DuNOERN.   Bindungsverhftltnisse   bei   der   Pr&cipitinreaktion.

Centralblatt  f.  Bacteriol.,  Vol.  34.
Th.  Madsen.  La  constitution   du  poison  diphth^rique.     Centralblatt

f.  Bacteriol.,  Vol.  34.
1904.     S.   Arrhenius,   Die  Anwendung   der   physikalischen  Chemie   auf  die

Serumtherapie.     Arbeiten  a.  d.  Kaiserl.  Gesundheitsamte,  Vol.  20.
The   same,  Zur   Theorie    der    Bindung    von    Toxin     und   Antitoxin.

Berlin,  klin.  Wochenschr.
P.  Ehrlich,  Bemerkungen  zur  Mitteilung  von  Arrhenius:    Zur  Theorie

der  Absftttigung  von  Toxin  und  Antitoxin.     Berl.  klin.  Wochenschr.
E.  VON  DuNOERN,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Bindungsverh&ltnisse  bei

der  Vereinigung  von  Diphtheriegift  und  Antiserum.     Deutsch.  med.

Wochenschr.
S.  Arrhenius,   Die  Anwendung  der   physikalischen   Chemie   auf  die

serum therapeutischen  Fragen.     Boltzmann  Festschrift.
H   Sachs,  Uber  die  Constitution  des  Tetanolysins.      Berl.  klin.  Wo

chenschr.
P.  Ktes,  Cobragift  und  Antitoxin.     Berliner  klin.  Wochenschrift.
Th.  Madsen  et  L.  Walbaum,  Toxines  et  Antitoxines.     De  la  ricine  et

de  I'antiricine.     Centralblatt  f.  Bacteriol.,  Vol.  36.
W.  Nernst,  Cber  die  Anwendbarkeit  derGesetze  des  chemischen  Gleich-

gewichts  auf  Gemische  von  Toxin  und  Antitoxin.     Ztschr.  f .  Electro-

chemie,  Vol.  X,  No.  22.


560


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


J.  MoKOENROTH,  UntersuchuDgen  uber  die   Bindung  von    Dipbtberie-

toxin  und  Antitoxin,  eowie  iiber  die  Constitution  des   Dipbtben^

giftes.     Berlin,  klin.  Wocbenschr.    in  detail  in  Zeitschr.  f.  Hygiene.

Vol.  48.
H.  KoppEi  Zur   Anwendung  der  physikalischen  Chemie  auf  dai

Studium  der  Toxine  and  Antitoxine  und  das  Lackfarbenwerden

rotber  Blutscheiben.     Pfliiger's  Arcbiv,  Vol.  103.
An  address  entitled  '*  Die  Serum tberapie  vom  pbysikalisch-cbemiMfaeo

Standpunkte/'  by  Sv.  Arrbenius.     Discussion  by  Ehrlicb,  Nerast,

Arrbenius.     Zeitscbr.  f.  Electrocbemie,  Vol.  X»  No  35.
E.  YON  DuNOERN,  Bemerkung  sum  Vortrag  von  Professor  S.  Arrbeniui:

"Die  Serumtberapie  vom  pbysikaliscb-cbemiscben  Standpunkte."

Zeitscbr.  f.  Electrochemie,  Vol.  X,  No.  40.
Th.  Madsen.  Toxins  and  Antitoxins.     Britisb  Medical  Journal.
R.  P.  VAN  Calcar,  Ober  die  Constitution  des  Dipbtberi^ftes.    fied.

klin.  Wocbenscbr.
8.  Arrbenius  et  Th.  Madsen,  Toxines  et  Antitoxines.    Le  Poa

dipbtb^rique.    Centralblatt  f.  BacterioL,  Vols.  36  and  37.
H.  Sachs,  t)ber  die  Bedeutung  des  Danyss-Dungemachen

nebst  Bemerkungen  uber  Prototoxoide.    Centralblatt  f.  BacteiioL,

Vol.  37.
L.  MicHAELis,  A  collection  of  studies  on  tbis  question  together  with  •

critical  review.    Biocbemiscbes  Centralblatt,  VoL  VI,  No.  !•


XL.    THE   MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION   OF

ANTIAMBOCEPTORS.i

By  Prof.  Paul  Ebrlich  and  Dr.  H.  Sachs.

Owing  to  closer  investigations  into  the  nature  of  immunity  our
conceptions  regarding  the  relation  between  antibody  and  the  sub-
stances exciting  the  production  of  immunity  (the  antigen,  as  it  is
called)  have  undergone  a  certain  modification.  This  consists  in  a
more  precise  definition  of  the  concept  specificity.  In  the  beginning
it  was  assumed  that  an  antibody  produced  by  immunization  acted
only  against  the  substance  through  which  it  was  developed.  Further
observations,  however,  soon  brought  to  light  cases  in  which  this
law  was  apparently  violated.  A  clear  insight  into  this  subject  was
finally  made  possible  when  the  receptor  was  looked  upon  as  the
agent  which  excited  the  production  of  immunity.  According  to
the  side-chain  theory,  therefore,  specificity  of  the  antibodies  always
means  *'  the  specific  relations  between  the  individiuil  types  of  antibodies
and  of  receptors,^'  ^  Since,  therefore,  the  same  receptor  can  be  dis-
tributed not  only  among  different  kinds  of  cells,  and  bodies  of  differ-
ent functions  all  within  the  same  animal  species,  but  also  among
different  species  of  animals,  we  see  that  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of
a  specificity  in  a  zoological  sense,  or  of  a  specificity  in  respect  to  the
morphological  or  functional  properties  of  the  antigens.  The  anti-
body is  specific  only  for  the  receptor,  i.e.,  for  those  elements  possess-
ing this  fitting  receptor.

Of  the  various  substances  which  excite  the  production  of  im-
munity, a  special  place  is  occupied  by  the  receptors  of  the  third  order :
these,  when  free,  constitute  the  amboceptors.  As  is  well  known,
the  amboceptors  possess  a  double  function.  On  the  one  hand  they
unite  with  the  cytophile  group  of  the  cells ^  and  on  the  other  with  the

'  Reprinted  from  Berliner  Win.  Wochenschrift,  1905,  No.  19.
'  P.  Ebrlich  and  Morgenroth,  Haemolysins.     See  page  88.

561


562


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


complementophile  group  of  the  complement.  Each  of  these  twD
haptophore  groups  mil  therefore  be  able  to  excite  the  production
of  corresponding  antibodies,  a  fact  to  which  attention  was  called
in  the  Croonian  lecture,  1900.'

"The  lysin,  be  it  bacteriolysin  or  hspmolyain,  possesses  altogether
three  haptophore  groups,  of  which  two  belong  to  the  immune  body
and  one  to  the  complement.  Each  of  these  haptophore  groups  can
be  bound  by  an  appropriate  antigroup,"  Three  'antigroups'  are  thus
conceivable,  any  one  of  which,  by  uniting  with  one  of  the  haptopbon
groups  of  the  lysin,  can  frustrate  the  action  of  the  lysin."

In  other  words,  according  to  the  amlxiceptor  theory  two  difTemit
an ti amboceptors  are  at  once  conceivable,  either  of  which  would
inhibit  the  action  of  the  amboceptor  One  would  act  by  prevenliflg
the  union  of  amlxiceptor  and  cell,  the  other  by  preventing  the  comple-
ment from  uniting  with  the  amlxiceptor.  Originally  the  antiambo-
ceplors  produced  by  immunization  were  regarded  as  being  directed
against  the  cytophile  group.^  In  view  of  this  it  was  extremely  de-
sirable for  the  support  of  the  amboceptor  theory  that  the  existenw
of  antibodies  for  the  complementophile  group  should  be  demoo-
strated.  This  has  recently  been  done  by  Bordet,^  and  it  is  strange
to  see  that  he  employs  his  discovery  in  combating  the  receptor  theory
when  it  really  is  a  verj'  neat  confirmation  of  this,

Bordet  finds  that  antianiboceptors  can  be  produced  not  only  by
immunization  with  hfemolytic  immune  serum,  but  also  with  nonuil
serum  of  the  same  species,  even  though  this  normal  eenim  contain
no  corresponding  amboceptors.  He  treated  guinea-pigs  with  trarmd
rabbit  serum  which  contains  no  hipmolytic  amboceptors  for  M
blood,  and  obtained  an  immune  serum  which  yet  was  able  to  in-
hibit the  action  of  the  amboceptors  derived  by  immucizirg  will
ox  blood.  That,  certainly,  is  a  discovery  which  cannot  readilv  be  »■
plained  in  harmony  with  Bordet's  sensitization  theory.  Accordii(
.  to  Bordet,  as  we  know,  these  immune  bodies  {his  "sensitiaeia")
possess  the  one  property  of  combining  with  the  susceptible  aS
and  thus  rendering  this  ^^Jlnerable  to  the  action  of  the  complenmt.
This  being  the  ease  it  is  incomprehensible  how  a  serum  which


'  P.  Ehrlich,  On  Immunity,  Proceedings  Royal  Society,  1900.
'  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  VI.  Communication,  page  88.
'  J.  Bordet,  Leg  propn^tfs  des  antisensibila trices   et  les  ttiteri^B
de  riramunitfi,     Annal.   de  I'lnstit.  Pasl«ur,   1904,  No.   10.


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTIAMBOCEPTORS.      563

lo  seDsitizers  whatever  for  the  species  of  cell  in  question  can
^et  excite  the  production  of  antibodies  directed  against  them,
rhe  matter  takes  on  an  entirely  different  aspect  if  we  regard  this
>henomenon  from  the  standpoint  of  the  amboceptor  theory.  Ac-
»rding  to  what  has  been  said  above  we  at  once  see  that  two  func-
lionally  different  types  of  antiamboceptors  are  possible.  In  Eordet's
jase  the  normal  rabbit  serum  possessed  no  amboceptors  (i.e.,  no  cyto-
>hile  groups)  for  ox  blood ;  therefore  the  antibodies  which  are  de-
veloped cannot  be  antiamboceptors  directed  against  the  cytophile
groups.  Hence  by  exclusion  one  will  already  pronounce  them  anii"
miboceptors  of  the  complemerUopkile  group.  The  facts  brought  for-
ward by  Bordet  all  go  to  confirm  this.

If  such  antiamboceptors  are  to  be  produced,  the  only  requisite
B  that  the  serum  used  for  immunization  must  contain  the  corre-
iponding  complementophile  groups.  Is  this  the  case  in  normal
tibbit  serum?  Every  normal  rabbit  serum,  as  Eordet  admits,  con-
ains  a  large  number  of  different  amboceptors.  If,  by  immunizing
vith  a  given  species  of  cell,  a  new  specific  amboceptor  develops  in
he  serum,  the  new  element  in  the  receptor  apparatus  is  really  only  the
ytopkile  group,  which  is  produced  in  response  to  immunization.  The
»mpIementophile  apparatus  need  not  suffer  the  least  change  quali-
Atively;  in  fact  according  to  our  conception  it  usually  does  not
;hange  markedly,  there  is  merely  an  increase  in  the  complemento-
)hile  groups  corresponding  to  the  formation  of  the  additional  immune
x)dy.  We  have  already  expressed  this  opinion  in  a  previous  paper.^
'In  my  judgment  we  shall  arrive  at  a  correct  conception  if  we  pro-
teed  from  the  standpoint  that  in  general  the  specific  amboceptors
ixhibit  a  uniform  structure  so  far  as  their  complementophile  portion
3  concerned,  while  their  c)rtophile  groups,  which  physiologically
ire  concerned  with  the  absorption  of  food,  differ  most  widely."

It  must  not  be  thought  that  this  uniform  constitution  of  the  com-
>lementophile  portion  ^  contradicts  the  assumption  of  a  multipUcity

*  P.  Ehrlich,  Betrachtungen  iiber  den  Mechanismus  der  Amboceptorwirkung
md  seine  teleologische  Bedeutung.     Koch  Festschrift,  Jena,  1903.

*  For  the  present  we  cannot  say  whether  the  complementophile  complex
3  really  uniform  throughout  or  whether,  perhaps,  certain  partial  groups  do
lot  differ  in  the  individual  amboceptor  types  of  the  same  animal  species.  Such
k  condition  is  easily  conceivable.  In  any  event  we  must  assume  that  the  com-
plementophile apparatus  of  the  amboceptors  of  a  given  species  is  identical
kt  least  in  some  essential  part  of  its  haptophore  functions,  and  that  this  char*
bcterizes  it  as  coming  from  the  animal  species  in  question.


664


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


of  complements.  Naturally  the  different  cotDplements  must  lun
dItTerent  com  piemen  to  phile  groups  corresponding  to  them.  But,
waa  stated  in  the  Sixth  Communication  on  Hemolysins,*  an  imnii
body,  in  addition  to  a  particular  cy tophile  group,  contains  two,  three,
or  more  complementophjle  groups.  In  a  later  paper  Ehrlich  and
Marshall  offered  experimental  evidence  for  just  this  joint;  bedda
this,  Bordet's  experiments,  according  to  which  an  amboceptor  after
having  combined  with  cellular  elements  is  able  almost  completdf
to  rob  a  serum  of  its  complement,  also  support  this  \iew.*

We  must  therefore  conceive  the  amboceptor  to  be  structurally
a  polyceptor,  and  assume  further  that  the  amboceptors  of  a  distiMl
species  are  all  supplied  with  a  large  number  of  complememophib
groups  which  vary  considerably  in  detail  but  in  their  entirety  r^
sent  a  uniform  complex.  This  complex  is  reproducf?d  in  all  tl
amboceptors  of  the  same  serum.  In  general  the  amboceptors M
different  and  specific  only  so  far  as  the  cytophile  group  is  concenied

This  being  so  it  will  at  once  be  clear  that  an ti amboceptors  directed
against  the  compiementophile  groups,  and  obtained  through  imiui
zation  with  any  particular  amboceptor,  will  act  against  all  amborqt
tors  of  the  same  animal  species  no  matter  whether  thcs9  amlA
ceptors  are  normally  present  in  the  serum  or  have  been  produr«d
by  immunization.     For  the  compiementophile  amboceptor  appanti^


is  the  same  for  all  types  of  amboceptors  of  the  s


;  si>ecie8,    Afii


result  of  this,  an  immune  serum  obtained  through  immunixalii*
with  normal  serum  contains,  thanks  to  the  normal  amboceptor*  is
the  serum,  antiamboceptors  directed  against  the  artificiaily  produi
amboceptors  of  the  same  species.  This  explains  also  the  earto
observations  made  by  Pfeiffcr  and  Friedberger^  that  ant.iamboce[>im
obtained  by  immunizing  with  cholera  serum  act  also  against  ty[>hni4
serum;*  it  also  explains  the  recent  experiments  made  by  Bordet.    Wt


'  Ebrlich  and  Morgearoth.     Sec  page  88.

'P.  Ehrlich  and    11.   T.   Marshall,   t'ber  die  complementophilen
tier  Amboceptorcn.    Berl.  kliii.  Wochenschr.  1902,  No.  23,

'R.  Pfeiffer  and  E.  Friedberger,  Wcitere  Beitrflge  zur  Frage  dr-r  Anl
und  deren  Beziehungen  n)  den  bacteriolylischen  Amboceptoren.      CeatnDU
f.  Dacteriol.  1904,  Vol.  .17;    also  1903,  Vol.  34.

'Naturally  the   statement   made   liy  Ehrlich  and    Morgenroth    (B«il  I
Wochenschr.  1901,  No.  21)  that  "it  Bcema  improbable,  imless    in  a  «fMi
a  tortunat*  coincidence  intervenes,  that  anti-immune  bodies   will  be  «bu
directed  against  the  bactericidal  immune  bodies"  cannot  apply  to  the  antiunte
ceptors  directed  againat  the  com  piemen  tophile  groups.    That  statement  aj^


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTIAMBOCEPTORS.     565

.must  call  particular  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  chief  point  in
Bordet's  study,  the  non-specificity  of  the  antiamboceptors  so  far  as
the  cytophile  group  is  concerned,  had  already  been  published  by
Keififer  and  Friedberger.  These  authors  have  explained  the  fact
entirely  in  accordance  with  our  views,  as  follows:

"We  are  inclined  to  believe  that  the  various  immune  bodies  of
one  and  the  same  animal  species  possess  one  group  in  common  which
in  a  way  stamps  them  as  coming  from  that  particular  animal  organism.
The  antiserum  must  possess  certain  relations  to  this  group."  To
this  we  would  add  that  for  the  present  it  seems  simplest  to  class  this
group  or  groups,  specific  for  the  animal  species,  with  the  complemento-
phile  group.  In  the  amboceptor  we  differentiate  a  specific  cytophile
group  and  a  large  apparatus  made  up  of  complementophile  groups.
Aside  from  the  property  of  anchoring  the  cells,  the  latter  groups
exercise  all  the  remaining  functions  of  the  amboceptor.  Considering
that  the  normal  amboceptors  and  those  produced  by  immunization
are  essentially  similar  (a  point  which  we  have  always  emphasized),
it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  one  can  produce  the  same  antiamboceptors
by  immunizing  with  normal  amboceptors.  Hence  what  Bordet's
study  really  brings  forward  is  the  actual  experimental  demonstration
of  what  we  had  long  expected  was  the  case.

Naturally  we  were  able  to  confirm  all  of  Bordet's  statements  of
fact.  We  had  at  our  disposal  the  serum  of  a  goat  which  had  been
immunized  with  normal  rabbit  serum,  and  could  easily  convince
ourselves  that  this  serum  acts  as  an  antiamboceptor  against  ambo.
ceptors  derived  from  rabbits  by  specifically  immunizing  with  ox
blood.  Furthermore,  we  succeeded,  by  adding  the  antiamboceptor
to  previously  sensitized  blood-cells,  to  protect  these  against  haemolysis
by  complement.  The  antiamboceptor  acts  just  like  a  complementoid
according  to  the  conception  of  "complementoid-blocking"  described
by  one  of  us  some  time  ago.^  It  occupies  the  complementophile
groups  and  so  prevents  the  anchoring  of  the  complement.^

only  to  the  antibodies  directed  against  the  cytophile  groups,  since  it  is  to  be
assumed  that  these  cytophile  groups,  which  have  their  natural  counter-groups
in  bacterial  cells,  will  not  have  these  in  the  cells  of  higher  animals.  This  limi-
tation, however,  does  not  apply  to  the  antiamboceptors  acting  on  the  comple-
mentophile complex.    This,  then,  disposes  of  Bordet's  objections  to  this  point.

*  Ehrlich  and  Sachs,  "Uber  den  Mechanismus  der  Amboceptorenwirkung.
Berl.  klin.  Wochenschrift,  No.  21,  1902.

'  We  must  not  fail  to  mention  that,  in  contrast  to  Bordet,  we  made  these  experi-
ments without  the  addition  of  inactive  guinea-pig  serum,  and  were  able,  despite


566


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


We  were  also  able  to  readily  confirm  Bordet's  statement  tbftt  tl
snti amboceptor  aciion  is  easily  inhibited  by  iiormal  rabbit  senita
Naturally  the  normal  amboceptors,  whose  completnentophile  groufi
excited  the  production  of  the  antiamboceptor,  will  combine  »it
this  antiamboceptor  and  so  be  able  to  deflect  it  from  the  ambocepH
acting  in  the  given  case.  Since  we  regard  the  antiamboceptor  i
the  sense  of  a  complementoid,  thia  phenomenon  corresponds  in  prii
ciple  to  that  described  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  as  <]eflectioD
complement.'

The  entire  complex  of  phenomena  just  discussed  shows  rant
Btrikingly  that  our  a-ssumption  harmonizes  best  with  the  obeencd
facts.  We  assume  that  in  Bordet's  antiamboceptors  we  are  deaiiD|
with  antibodies  directed  against  the  com  pi  em  en  top  hile  groups,  "[}»
existence  of  such  antiamboceptoi-s  again  demonstrates  that  t)
amboceptor  theory  is  correct.  According  to  Hordet's  seositiiatic*
theory  only  such  antiamboceptors  are  conceivable  which  prntit
the  amboceptor's  union  with  the  cell.  But  if  there  are  other  kidl
of  antiamboceptors,  as  the  findings  just  discussed  show,  we
assume  that  the  amboceptor  has  other  affinities  besides  those  for  tit
cell,  and  this  leads  us  at  once  to  the  conception  which  we  Ian
defined  under  the  name  amboceptor.  The  sensitization  theory
therefore  be  abandoned.

The  next  question  which  arises  is  whether  or  not  it  is
by  means  of  immunization  with  amboceptors  to  produce  antitunbl


this,  to  effect  an  inhibition  of  haMiiolyais  by  Biibsequenlly  adding  &ntiaa
ceptor.  It  seems  to  ua  that  thia  aimplificd  procedure  is  more  coHvJBcin*.
it  will  hardly  be  claimed  that  the  guinea-pig  Hemm  is  a  better  auspending  mtdi
than  physiologicul  suit  solution,  and  that  it  therefore,  in  contrast  to  the  lit


leaves  the  blood-cclla  intact,     Furlhennore,


J  gum


a-pig  (


inhibits  the  liseinolyais  of  ox  blood  by  anilioceptor  and  complciAenl  igiiim
pig).  Hence  when  guinea-pig  serum  ifl  present  the  tiuestion  trfaether  iht  i
aence  of  bffmolyBiB  is  due  to  an  antiamboceptor  or  not  ia  left   undecided.

'  In  contraat  to  Bordet,  however,  we  were  unable  by  meaaa  of  Donnal «
ceptor  to  effect  the  subsequent  breaking  of  the  union  between  aDIiamboetfH
and  sensitized  l)lood<cplls.  It  may  be  that  in  our  case  the  union  between  u
amboceptor  and  sensitized  cells  so  rapidly  became  firm  that  it  could  no  lo^
be  dissolved  by  the  normal  amboceptor.  Even  Bordet  admits  that  this  J
solution  can  be  effected  only  for  a  certain  period,  and  that  ibca  Ibe  u
becomea  very  firm.  We  are  pleased  to  note  that  Bordet  accepts  this  coorcf
of  a  gradual  tightening  of  the  union  of  these  substances,  a  coaception  tit  tt
highest  importance  in  the  study  of  immunity  reactions.


J


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION   OF  ANTI AMBOCEPTORS.     567

ceptors  also  against  the  cytophile  group.  We  have  therefore  ex-
amined another  antiamboceptor  serum,  and  compared  its  properties
with  those  of  the  antiserum  made  by  injections  of  normal  rabbit
serum.  This  serum,  like  the  latter,  was  also  obtained  from  a  goat,
but  instead  of  using  normal  rabbit  serum  for  immunization  the  goat
had  been  treated  with  the  serum  of  a  rabbit  previously  inmiunized
with  ox  blood.  Our  experiments,  however,  did  "not  permit  of  a
decision  on  this  point.  We  are  unable  to  say  whether  among  the
antiamboceptors  excited  by  the  injections  of  the  immune  serum  there
were  any  directed  against  the  cytophile  group.  Tt  is  entirely  con-
ceivable that,  despite  the  presence  of  the  cytophile  group,  these  are
unable  to  exert  any  immunizing  power,  since  the  complementophile
groups  invariably  encounter  the  corresponding  counter-group  in  the
organism  and  so  are  the  only  ones  bound  lo  the  tissue  receptors.  In
that  case  previous  to  injection  one  would  attempt  to  destroy  the
complementophile  group  (=cytophilic  amboceptoids)  or  to  neutralize
it  by  means  of  a  suitable  antibody.  The  decision  of  this  question
must  be  left  to  further  detailed  investigations.

In  the  course  of  our  experiments  we  met  with  a  very  curious  phe-
nomenon, one  not  only  of  some  practical  significance,  but  also  of
considerable  theoretical  interest.  Our  experiment  showed  exactly
the  opposite  behavior  which  Bordet  had  found.  That  is  to  say,  where
THordet  found  that  the  antiserum  acts  as  an  antiamboceptor  on  the
amboceptor  anchored  to  the  cell,  and  that  this  action  is  overcome
by  normal  rabbit  serum,  one  of  our  cases  represents  the  reverse  of
this.  We  see,  therefore,  that  it  can  happen  that  the  antiamboceptor
as  such  does  not  act,  but  requires  the  addition  of  normal  rabbit  senini
before  exerting  its  action.  We  have  constantly  observed  that  in  a
^'curative"  experiment,  i.e.,  after  a  previous  binding  of  amboceptor
and  cell,  large  amounts  of  the  antiserum  produced  by  means  of  im-
mune serum  were  unable  to  prevent  haemolysis.  The  following  proto-
col may  serve  as  an  example:

To  each  of  a  series  of  test-tubes,  containing  decreasing  amounts
of  the  antiserum,  1  cc.  of  ox  blood  was  added.  This  blood,  after
having  previously  been  sensitized  with  0.003  cc.  (  =  1}  amboceptor
units)  of  an  amboceptor  obtained  from  a  rabbit  by  immunization
with  ox  blood,  was  freed  from  serum  constituents  by  centrifuging
and  then  used  in  the  test.  After  digesting  the  mixtures  for  half  an
hour  the  blood-cells  were  centrifuged  off  and  the  sediments,  to
which   0.1   cc.  guinea-pig  serum  was  added  as  complement,  were


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN    IMMITNITY.


Buapeoded  in  salt  soiution.     The  result  of  the  experiment  is  shown
in  the  following  table:


Amount  of  Ihe  Aolwenjio

(derived  (torn  a  gout  by

Iwceptor.lhBreaultpr

Amount  of  HaimoLysu.

0.1

compleM

0.05

Tvell-marked

0.025

moderate

0.015

little

0.01

0

0.005

faint  trace

0.0025

very  little

0.0015

moderate

0.001

almost  complete

0.0005

complete

o.oooiia

complete

0

complete

Here  we  see  the  curiotis  result  that  with  a  certain  excess  of  the
antiserum  there  is  no  inhibition  of  bfemolj-sis.  This  paradoxical
phenomenon  we  observed  only  with  the  antiserum  produced  by
immune  serum  injections,  and  then  only  in  the  "curative"  experi-
ment. If  the  antiserum  was  used  for  "protective"  experiments,
i.e.,  mixed  with  amboceptor  previous  to  adding  the  blood-cells,  or
if  the  antiserum  produced  by  injections  of  normal  serum  was  employed.
the  course  of  the  experiment  was  entirely  uniform,  an  increase  in  the
amount  of  antiserum  causing  an  increase  in  the  antilylic  action.
For  the  present  we  are  unable  to  say  whether  we  are  here  dealing
with  an  essential  difference  between  the  antiserum  produced  by
normal  serum  and  that  produced  by  immune  serum,  or  whether  we
have  to  do  with  an  individual  fluctuation.  So  far  as  the  rnechanism
of  the  phenomenon  is  concerned  we  were  able  to  clear  up  at  least
one  point,  namely,  that  the  essential  factor  in  the  experitnent  is  the
presence  or  absence  of  the  very  small  quantities  of  normal  rabbit
serum  which  contains  the  amboceptor.  Thus  if  the  blood-cells  arc
sensilized  with  amboceptor  without  subsequently  remoflng  the  serum
by  centrifuging,  it  will  be  found  that  the  course  of  the  "curatiiT"
experiment  is  perfectly  regular.  There  is  no  inhibition  of  the  antilytic
action  with  an  excess  of  antiserum.     The  same  holds  true  if  we  eeps-


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTIAMBOCEPTORS.     569

rate  the  sensitized  blood-cells  by  centrifuge  and  replace  the  serum
j3uid  with  the  corresponding  amount  of  normal  serum  (in  our  cases
0.003  cc).  The  active  substance  contained  in  normal  serum  is
thermostable  at  56^  C,  but  is  destroyed  by  heating  for  half  an  hour
to  100°  C.    The  following  experiment  may  serve  as  an  illustration  :

The  blood-cells  which  have  been  sensitized  with  0.003  cc.  serum
and  then  separated  by  centrifuge  are  treated  with  a  considerable
excess  (0.5  cc.)  of  the  antiserum.  This  amount  corresponds  to  that
quantity  which  by  itself  is  just  able  to  overcome  the  antilytic  action.
To  this  mixture  are  added  decreasing  amounts  of  normal  rabbit  serum
which  has  been  heated  to  66®  C.  and  to  100®  C.  After  allowing  the
mixture  to  stand  for  half  an  hour  the  blood-cells  are  centrifuged
off  and  suspended  in  salt  solution  to  which  0.1  cc.  guinea-pig  serum
(complement)  is  added.

The  result  is  shown  in  the  following  table:


TABLE   II.


Amount  of  Nomutl  lUtbbit

1  00.  5%  Ox  Blood  (aensitiaed  with  0.003  oo.)-f  0.6  oo.
ADttaenim-f  Nonnml  Rabbit  Serum.

•

Serum.

Heated  to  66^*  C.
Amount  of  Hsmolyiis.

b.

Heated  to  100^  C.

Amount  of  Hemolysis.

0.005

0.003

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

0

0

0

little

moderate

complete

complete

>  complete

This  shows  us  what  a  tremendous  effect  the  presence  or  absence
of  a  small  amount  of  normal  serum  can  exercise.  This  of  course
at  once  explains  the  difference  which  manifests  itself  between  the
"curative"  and  the  "protective"  experiments.  In  the  latter,  it  will
be  recalled,  the  amboceptor  and  antiamboceptor  are  first  mixed.
All  of  the  normal  serum  constituents,  therefore,  come  into  action;
whereas  in  the  "curative"  experiment  these  are  removed  when  the
blood-cells  are  centrifuged.

How  are  we  to  conceive  the  mechanism  of  this  action?  Phe-
nomena in  which  an  excess  of  a  certain  substance  produces  a
change  in  the   character  of  the  reaction  are  frequently  due  to  the


570  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

presence  of  other  substanceg  with  different  properties.     In  the  case
described  above  there  is  an  absence  of  antilytic  action  with  a  certain
excess  of  the  antiserum.    If  we  look  at  the  subject  from  this  stand-
point, we  shall  have  to  assume  that  the  antiserum  contains  two  sub-
stances,* one  of  which,  of  course,  is  the  effective  antiamboceptor.
The  other  substance  would  then  be  the  cause  of  the  inhibition  of
the  antiamlioceptor  action.     Furthermore,   since   this   inhibition  a
only  brought  about  by  large  quantities  of  the  semm.  this  substaoee
would  be  present  in  the  serum  in  much  smaller  amounts  than  the
former.     The  simplest  explanation  of  the  action  of  this  substance
seems  to  be  somewhat  as  foUcws:    We  must  assume  that  this  sub-
stance's point  of  attachment  is  a  co  m  piemen  to  phi!  ic  auxiUar>~  group
in   the  amboceptor.    The  occupation  of  this  group  bo   affects  ibe
amboceptor  molecule  that  the  simultaneous  presence  of  antiaoibo-
cept.or  no  longer  prevents  the  combination  with  complement.    Sucb
a  behavior  would  be  analogous  to  an  observation  published  by  Ehr-
lich  and  Marshall.''      At  that  time,  by  means  of  a  different iatiif
method   made  available  for  one  particular  instance  ^    by   MarsfaiU
and   Morgenroth,   it  was  shown  that   the  amboceptor   anchored  to
the  cell,  althoughit  could  deprive  native  guinea-pig  serum  of  all  its
complement    functions,    was    unable    to   absorb    the    non-dommaol
complements  if  the  dominant  complement  had  6rst  been  neutralii«il
by  the  partial  anticomplements  of  Marshall  and   Morgenroth.    In  ]
other  words,  an  anchoring  of  the  non-dominant  complements  wm  '
only    possible    after     the     corresponding    com  piemen  tophile    group
of  the  amboceptor  had  combined  with  the  dominant    complement
In  our  case  we  would  be  dealing  with  an  influence  entirely  similu
in  principle,  except  that  here  the  influence  is  reversed,  i.e.,  the  affini^
of  the  amboceptor  to  the  antiamboceptor  is  reduced  by  the  occup*
tion  of  the  auxiliary  group.     We  believe  that  we  can  show  direct!]
that  the  antiamboceptor  is  bound  in  either  case,  but  that  where  tb
auxiliary  group  is  occupied,  the  union  of  amboceptor  and  antjamb*


'  We  can  oE  course  assume  a,  priori  that  an  antiamboceptor  serum  (UrMW
against   the   com  piemen  tophile   groups   will   poasesa   a   multiplicity    of   puttf
antiamboceptors,  for  tbe  amboreptora  which   take  part  in   the   inunuoiatva  i
possess   a   targe   number   of  different   com  piemen  top  bile   groups,   and    wwat
each  of  these  a  particular  antibody  b  conceivable,

*  Ehrlicb  and  Marshall,  1.  c.

'H.  T,  MarebatI  and  J.  Morgenroth,  Uber  DifFereoKierung  von  Comi
menten  durch  ein  PartJalanticom piemen t.  Centralblatt  [.  Bact.  1902  Vol.
No.  12.


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTIAMBOCEPTORS.     571

ceptor  remains  a  loose  one,  while  in  the  other  case  it  becomes  firm.
The  following  diagram  may  help  to  make  this  clear.    See  Fig.  1.

We  shall  designate  the  two  complementophile  groups  of  the  ambo-
ceptor as  a  and  p;  the  eflfective  antiamboceptor  corresponding  to
group  a  is  a,  the  antibody  fitting  group  ^  is  6.  In  small  quan-
tities of  antiserum,  b  can  practically  be  disregarded  owing  to  its
slight  concentration ;  a  therefore  by  occupying  a  prevents  the  comple-
ment uniting  with  the  amboceptor.  In  larger  quantities  of  anti-
serum; however,  b  comes  into  play,  so  that  the  occupation  of  group  /}


Loose  Union


Fio  1. — a  and  ^:  Complementophile  groups  of  the  amboceptor,  a  and  b  are
Partial  Substances  of  the  Antiserum,  a  is  the  effective  Antiamboceptor;
b  is  the  antibody  which  inhibits  the  action  of  the  antiamboceptor.  c  is  the
Complement.

changes  the  reactive  capacity  of  group  a  in  such  a  way  that  either  a
is  not  bound  at  all  while  the  corresponding  complement  is,  or  so
that,  wh  le  a  may  still  be  bound,  the  union  is  such  a  loose  one  that
the  complement  still  has  access.  We  shall  see  that  the  latter  pos-
sibility is  the  more  probable.  First,  however,  it  will  be  necessary
for  us  to  understand  clearly  the  manner  in  which  normal  rabbit
serum  overcomes  the  influence  of  the  antiserum  constituent  b.  In
view  of  what  has  been  said  this  will  not  be  diflficult,  for  it  is  but  a


572


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


natural  consequence  for  us  to  assume  that  normal  rabbit  eenim  con-
tains the  corresponding  counter-group  ^  in  such  high  concentration
that  even  small  ^mounts  are  able  to  neutralize  b  and  so  prevent  its
union  with  the  amboceptor  anchored  by  the  cell.     See  Fig.  2.

Coming  now  to  the  question  whether,  after  group  ^  is  occupied,
group  a  no  longer  reacts  witli  a,  or  whether,  while  the  reaction  takes
]>lace,  the  union  remains  a  very  loose  one,  we  decided  this  according
to  the  following  considerations.  If  the  latter  assumption  were  cor-
rect, it  would  follow  that  the  loose  union  should  subsequently  become   ,


Fig.  2.-


:   Complementophile  group  of  an  amboceptor  of  Dormal  s

Otherwise  as  in  Fig.  1.


firm  if  in  some  way  group  b  could  again  be  freed  from  its  combination
with  ^.  In  that  case,  evidently,  the  "curative"  action  of  the  anti-
amboceptor  a  should  become  manifest.  If,  on  the  contrary,  a  has  not
been  bound  at  all,  this  "curative"  action  should  fail  to  appear  on
the  removal  of  b.

Owing  to  the  presence  of  group  ^  in  small  amounts  in  normal
rabbit  serum  the  possibility  is  given  of  abstracting  the  antigroup  h
already  bound  to  the  sensitized  cell.  We  have  at  once  taken  advan-
tage of  this  fact,  and  attacked  the  question  experimentally  as  follows:

Sensitized  blood-cells  are  digested  with  an  excess  of  the  antiserum


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTI AMBOCEPTORS.     573

(0.25  cc).  After  centrifuging,  decreasing  amounts  of  inactivated
normal  rabbit  serum  are  added  to  the  sediments,  and  the  mixtures
again  centrifuged.  The  blood-cells  thus  separated  are  suspended
in  0.1  cc.  salt  solution  containing  0.1  cc.  guinea-pig  serum.  The  result
is  shown  in  the  following  table:

TABLE   III.


Id  active  Normal  Rabbit

Serum.

cc.

Amount  of  Hsmob^.

0.01

0.006

0.003

0.0015

0

little  to  moderate
complete

This  table,  therefore,  shows  that  sensitized  blood-cells  which  have
been  treated  with  an  excess  of  antiamboceptor  and  then  freed  from
all  free  serum  constituents  by  centrifuging  can  be  deprived  of  a  con-
siderable portion  ^  of  the  antiserum  constituent  b  by  subsequently
digesting  them  with  small  amounts  of  normal  rabbit  serum,  thus
a^ain  allowing  the  antiamboceptor  action  to  become  manifest.  It
is  permissible,  therefore,  to  assume  that  the  antiamboceptor  a  had
been  bound  and  that  the  union  had  remained  a  loose  one  owing  to
the  occupation  of  group  )9,  Owing  to  the  looseness  of  the  union  a
and  a  the  complement  was  not  prevented  from  combining  with  the
amboceptor.

We  have  gone  into  the  analysis  of  this  case  with  such  detail  because
it  again  shows  how  complicated  is  the  mechanism  of  amboceptors
and  yet  how  easy  it  is  by  means  of  the  aipboceptor  theory  to  bring
these  apparently  paradoxical  phenomena  into  harmony.  In  this  case
we  are  certainly  dealing  with  extraordinarily  complex  conditions,
conditions  in  which  Bordet's  rudimentary  sensitization  theory  is
entirely  helpless.

The  phenomenon  just  described  possesses  a  certain  practical
significance  in  so  far  as  it  could  easily  lead  to  the  erroneous  assump-

*  It  is  likely  that  the  reason  why  the  inhibiting  action  cannot  be  entirely
brought  out  by  this  means  is  that  the  union  of  b,  once  it  is  bound,  rapidly  be-
comes firm,  thus  permitting  only  a  partial  dissolution  by  means  of  free  p.  In
any  event  this  experiment  clearly  exhibits,  as  already  stated,  exactly  the  re-
verse behavior  of  that  shown  by  Bordet's.


574  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY

tion  that  the  antiamboceptor  acts  only  in  "protective"  experiments,
but  is  unable  to  act  on  amboceptor  already  anchored  by  the  blood-
cells.  In  order  to  orientate  ourselves  concerning  this  last  question,  we
would  of  course  begin  by  using  an  excess  of  antiamboceptor,  expecting
very  naturally,  if  the  antiamboceptor  exerts  any  influence  whatever
on  the  anchored  amlxiceptor,  that  this  influence  will  most  likely
become  manifest  with  large  amounts  of  antiamboceptor.  Further-
more, it  can  then  happen  that  the  conditious  obtaining  are  those  of
the  zone  in  which  the  curative  action  obtained  with  smaller  doses
ia  concealed,  owing  to  the  excess  of  antiamboceptor.  This  may
perhaps  account  for  Morgenroth's  negative  findings;'  the  antiambo-
ceptor serum  employed  by  us  was  also  used  by  that  author.

The  demonstration  of  the  fact  that  the  antiamboceptors  pro-
duced by  immunization  are  usually  directed  against  the  complemento-
phile  groups  calls  for  a  correction  of  certain  deductions  based  on
our  earlier  conception  of  antiamboceptors  as  being  directed  against
the  cytophile  group.  We  must  therefore  concede  (hat  Llordet  is
correct  when  he  refuses  to  accept  our  method  of  differentiating  partial
amboceptors  by  means  of  antiamboceptors,  a  method  which  we  pub-
lished in  the  Sixth  Communication  on  HiEmolysins.^  Chir  experi-
ments at  that  time  dealt  with  an  amboceptor  of  an  immune  serum
derived  from  a  rabbit  by  treatment  with  ox  blood.  This  amboceptor
could  be  complemented  either  with  guinea-pig  serum  or  goat  serum.  In
complementing  with  goat  serum  so  much  more  amboceptor  is  riecessary
that  the  absence  of  the  antiamboceptflrs'  action  must  be  ascribed  to
the  antiantilytic  action  of  the  normal  amboceptors  present.  But
this  correction  does  not  signify  that  the  conclusion  as  to  the  plurality
of  the  amboceptors  must  be  abandoned.  On  the  contrary  this  con-
clusion is  confirmed  by  so  many  weighty  arguments  of  a  different  kind
that  the  existence  of  partial  amboceptors  must  now  be  classed  as  one  of
the  facts  in  immunity.  We  need  only  call  attention  to  a  point  con-
tained in  our  Si.xth  Communication,  namely,  that  by  mutual  elective
absorption  we  have  shown  that  immunization  of  animals  with  ox
blood  results  in  the  formation  of  two  fractions  of  amboceptois,  OM
of  which  acts  only  on  ox  blood,  the  other  also  on  goat  blood;  ud
that  immunization  with   goat  blood  has  exactly  analogous    renne


'  J.  MorRonrolh.  Deflection  of  Complement  by  Means  of  Hemolytjo  ,
oeptors.     Cenlralblatt  Bact.  1904.  Vol.  35,  No.  4.
'Ehrlich  and  Horgenrolh.     See  page  88.


MECHANISM  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  ANTI AMBOCEPTORS.     575

results.  The  plurality  of  amboceptors  is  further  demonstrated  by
:be  results  of  the  isolysin  experiments  published  by  Ehrlich  and
Vloi^enroth,*  for  in  these  experiments  the  presence  of  antibodies
icting  against  the  complementophile  group  of  the  amboceptor  can
36  excluded.  The  fact  that  we  have  drawn  an  incorrect  conclusion
•rom  one  single  experiment  certainly  does  not  justify  Bordet  in  deny-
ng  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  antibodies  (especially  amboceptors)
n  a  given  immune  serum ;  the  correctness  of  our  view  is  established
Dy  a  number  of  incontestable  experiments.

Borders  arguments  concerning  deflection  of  complement  by  an
jxcess  of  amboceptor  may  be  answered  in  the  same  manner.  Even
granted  that  Morgenroth's  view  2  is  incorrect,  namely,  that  the  inhibi-
tion of  haemolysis  on  the  addition  of  an  amboceptor-antiamboceptor
mixture  is  due  to  a  deflection  of  complement,  this  would  not  in  the
least  refute  the  results  obtained  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  with
Imctericidal  sera.  In  these  experiments  absolutely  no  antiambo-
jeptor  is  present;  there  are  merely  bacteria,  amboceptor,  and  comple-
ment. Despite  this,  however,  there  is  no  bactericidal  action  when  a
certain  excess  of  amboceptor  is  present.  The  only  explanation  for
this  is  the  one  offered  by  Neisser  and  Wechsberg  ^  namely,  that  the
complement  is  deflected  from  the  amboceptor  combined  with  the
cells  by  the  free  amboceptor.  This  explanation  has  also  been  accepted
by  Lipstein,*  who  controverted  a  number  of  objections  which  had
been  made  by  various  authors.  Bordet  does  not  even  attempt  to
controvert  our  explanation,  but  contents  himself  by  saying:  "Pour
nous,  la  th^rie  de  la  deviation  du  complement  par  Tambocepteur
est  une  l^gende."  Needless  to  say  this  will  have  little  effect  on  our
view.

It  is  thus  seen  that  Borders  recent  experiments  have  furnished
additional  important  confirmation  of  the  amboceptor  theory.  Analysis
of  the  antiamboceptor  action  clearly  demonstrates  the  fact  that  the
amboceptor  possesses  other  affinities  besides  those  of  the  cytophile
group;  and  the  circumstance  that  the  occupation  of  these  groups
bars  the  action  of  the  complement  shows  that  they  are  complemento-
phile in  character.    Borders  attack  on  the  receptor  theory  has  thus

'  Ehrlicb  and  Morgenrotb,  Third  Communication.    See  page  23.
'  J.  Morgenrotb,  1.  c.

'  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg.    See  page  120.

«  A.  Lipstein,  Centralblatt  f ur  Bacteriologie,  1902,  Vol.  31.  No  10;  see  also
page  132  of  this  volume.


576  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

failed  utterly;  his  experiments,  on  the  contrary,  are  to  be  welcomo^
as  supplementing  the  arguments  supporting  the  amboceptor  theory


^  The  mistake  contained  in  our  previous  conception  of  antiamboceptoi
that  they  were  antibodies  directed  against  the  cytophile  group,  is  essentialW-
one  regarding  the  situation  of  the  point  of  attack.     In  this  connection  we  ma»^
look  upon  certain  chemical  substitutions  as  furnishing  ready  comparison;  for
•example,  the  different  substances  resulting  when  the  benzole  nucleus  is  substi*
tuted  in  the  ortbo,  meta,  or  para  positions.    Considering  how  difficult  these
problems  are,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a  statement  concerning  localization  wiU
now  and  then  be  made  which  subsequent  deeper  study  shows  must  be  corrected
Even  so  high  an  authority  as  Kekul^  once  erred  in  defining  a  compound,  and
yet  this  did  not  in  the  least  affect  his  fruitful  hypothesis.     In  our  case  after  tbe
way  had  been  cleared  by  the  demonstration  of  the  ''blocking  of  complemento"
(the  nature  of  which  corresponds  to  an  antiamboceptor  action),  and  by  the
-studies  of  Pfeiffer  and  Friedberger,  it  was  an  easy  matter  to  arrive  at  a  oonect
interpretation  and  transfer  the  site  of  the  antiambocepter's  action  to  tbe  compfe-
mentophile  group.     It  is  at  once  clear  that  this  merely  fulfills  an  old  postulate
of  the  side^hain  theory.    It  would  therefore  be  interesting  to  see  bow  Bordet
could  explain  the  facts  according  to  his  sensitization  theory,  and  to  have  him
show  how  the  sensitizers,  which  he  believes  do  not  combine  with  the  comple
ment,  excite  the  production  of  substances  whose  constitution  is  just  what  would
l>e  demanded  of  immunization  products  of  ''complementophile  groups."


XLL  A    GENERAL   REVIEW  OF  THE   RECENT  WORK

IN  IMMUNITY.!

By  Paul  Ehruch.

Two  yeaiB  have  elapsed  since  the  appearance  of  my  '' Collected
Studies  in  Immunity''  in  Germany,  and  now  that  the  book  is  about
to  appear  on  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  it  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to
review  briefly  the  progress  made  in  that  time,  naturally  without
pretending  to  give  a  complete  rfeum6  of  the  literature.

I  may  at  once  say,  however,  that  very  Uttle  really  new  has  been
added  to  the  views  formulated  by  myself  and  my  collaborators,  and
that  the  stereochemical  conception  of  the  immunity  reaction,  despite
numerous  attacks,  has  proven  itself  able  to  dominate  every  phase  of
the  subject.

The  arithmetical  view  of  the  toxin-antitoxin  reactions  and  their
analogues,  which  was  introduced  chiefly  by  Arrhenius  and  Madsen,
has  invariably  shown  itself  to  be  untenable.  It  has  led  to  a  numer-
ical science  which  is  far  removed  from  the  principles  of  biological
investigations  and  from  the  experimental  results  underlying  these.
On  the  other  hand,  so  able  an  authority  as  Nemst  at  once  recognized
that  the  laws  of  chemical  equilibrium  are  not  appUcable  to  mixtures
of  toxin  and  antitoxin.  In  addition  to  this  von  Dungem,  Morgen-
roth,  and  Sachs  have  collected  considerable  new  experimental  evi-
dence which  demonstrates  absolutely  that  the  toxin-antitoxin
combination  gradually  becomes  firm,  although  it  may  in  some
instances  be  quite  loose  in  the  first  stage.  The  complex  constitution
of  the  poison  solutions  has  thus  been  conclusively  demonstrated;
and  I  may  also  remind  the  reader  that  there  can  also  no  longer  be
any  question  as  to  the  independent  existence  of  toxons  in  diphtheria
poison,  for  van  Calcar  has  succeeded  in  a  direct  separation  of  these
bodies.^

'  This  chapter  is  written  expressly  for  this  American  edition.
'  van  Calcar  effected  this  by  means  of  an  ingenious  dialyzing  procedure
(Berlin,  klin.  Wochenschr.  No.  39,  1904).    Certain  objections  raised  by  ROmer

677


1578


TOiSs  IN   IMMITNITY.


In  view  of  the  extraordinary  success  which  physical  chemistry
IS  st:ored,  it  is  readily  understood  how  tempting  it  was  for  so  emi-
nent a  representative  of  this  science  as  Arrhenius  to  apply  its  princi-
ples to  tlie  new  field  ot  immunily.  I  have  always  emphasized  the
chemical  nature  of  the  reaction,  and  am  glad  therefore  thai  the
attempt  to  apply  these  principles  has  been  made.  It  has  demon-
strated anew  that  the  phenomena  of  animate  nature  represent  merely
the  resultants  of  infinitely  complex  and  variable  actions,  and  tiiat
they  differ  herein  from  the  exact  sciences,  whose  problems  can  be-
treated  mathematically,  The  formulas  devised  by  Arrhenius  and
Madsen  for  the  reaction  of  toxins  and  antitoxins  explain  absolutely
nothing.  Even  in  particularly  -  favorable  cases  tliey  can  merely
represent  certain  experimental  resull*  in  the  form  of  interpolation
formulas,  Neither  do  I  believe  that  the  phenomena  observed  in
toxins  and  antitoxia'j  bear  any  relation  to  the  processes  of  colloid
chemistry.  The  attempt  which  has  been  made  t«  interpret  tlie
immunity  reaction  from  the  standpoint  of  colloid  chemistry,  a  sub-
ject itself  more  or  less  obscure,  is  based  on  purely  external  analogies.
I  see  absolutely  no  advantage  in  such  a  method,  and  I  have  grave
feare  that  it  will  result  in  checking  further  progress  along  this  line.
Structural  chemistry,  on  the  other  hand,  has  not  only  served  to
explain  all  the  phenomena  in  immunity  stiidies,  but  has  also  proved
a  valuable  guide  in  indicating  the  lines  along  which  further  progress
might  be  made.  The  limitations  of  colloid  chemistry  have  already
manifested  themselves,  and  enthusiastic  advocates  of  this  science
have  been  compelled  to  assume  the  existence  of  specific  atomic
groupings  in  accordance  with  my  views.  I  therefore  see  no  reason
for  abandoning  the  views  expressed  in  my  receptor  theory,  a  theory
in  complete  accord  with  the  principles  of  synthetic  chemistry.  My
decision  finds  additional  support  in  the  fact  that  the  studies  ld
immunity  are  constantly  bringing  to  light  new  observations  best
harmonized  with  the  views  of  structural  chemistry.  Thus  I  may
remind  the  reader  that  Morgenroth  has  recently  very  cleverly  proved
the  postulate  that  the  com[X)nents  of  the  neutral  toxin-antitoxin
combination  can  be  restored.  This  author  succeeded  in  completely  j
recovering  the  two  components  of  a  neutral  mixture  of  cobra  venom  J

(Berl.  kiin.  Wocbenscbr.  No.  8,  1906)  have  been  effectuuUy  anawerod  by  \
Calcar  by  means  of  Home  additional  eicperimeota,  and  by  the  denionstnilioiJ
that  the  membranes  employed  by  ROmer  were  unsuitable  (Berl.  klin.  Woe

No.  43,  1905).


GENERAL  REVIEW  OF  THE  RECENT  WORK  IN  IMMUNITY.  579

^*d  antitoxin  by  means  of  an  ingenious  method.    But  even  here  we
^^-te  not  dealing  with  a  reversible  reaction,  for  it  requires  certain
^^^anipulations  to  disrupt  the  neutral  combination;  thus,  in  the  case
^Df  cobra  venom,  the  addition  of  hydrochloric  acid  is  necessary.    The
:jieutral  cobra-venom-antitoxin  combination  therefore  behaves  like  a
^lucoside,  which  in  itself  is  entirely  stable,  but  is  split  up  by  the  addi-
tion of  hydrochloric  acid.

Besides  this,  the  interesting  investigations  recently  published  by
Obermayer  and  Pick,^  on  the  production  of  immune  precipitins  by
means  of  chemically  altered  albuminous  bodies,  are  of  particular  sig-
nificance in  connection  with  the  chemical  conception  of  the  immunity
reaction.  These  authors  succeeded^  by  iodizing,  nitrifying,  and
dia^otizing  animal  albuminous  bodies,  in  so  changing  them  that,
when  introduced  into  the  organism  of  the  same  or  of  different  species,
they  excited  the  production  of  precipitins  which  lacked  specificity.
These  precipitins,  however,  were  strictly  specific  for  their  respective
iodized  albumins,  xanthoproteids,  or  diazo-albumins,  no  matter  from
what  animal  species  the  albumins  were  derived.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  introduction  of  a  certain  chemical  group
into  the  albumin  molecule  completely  alters  the  latter's  power  to
excite  the  production  of  antibodies.  This  certainly  corresponds
entirely  to  the  view  that  the  production  of  antibodies  is  dependent
on  the  chemical  constitution  of  the  exciting  agent,  a  view  which  finds
expression  in  my  receptor  theory.

The  heuristic  value  of  the  receptor  idea,  the  idea  which  underlies
my  side-chain  theory,  can  best  be  appreciated  by  studying  the  devel-
opment of  our  knowledge  concerning  the  cytotoxins  of  blood  serum.
As  a  prototype  of  these  substances  the  hsemolysins  occupy  a  promi-
nent place  in  this  volume.  The  view  that  the  haemolytic  inunune
bodies  are  amboceptors  has  been  proven  to  be  correct  in  every  case,
thus  conclusively  showing  that  Bordet's  sensitization  theory  is  un-
tenable. To  begin,  the  observations  of  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg,
that  the  action  of  bactericidal  sera  depends  not  only  on  the  absolute
but  on  the  relative  concentration  of  amboceptor  and  complement,
presented  conditions  which  could  not  be  harmonized  with  Borders
views.  On  the  other  hand,  they  were  readily  explained  in  accord-
ance with  the  side-chain  theory  by  assuming  that  the  complement
was  deflected  by  an  excess  of  amboceptor.    But  even  if  this  expla-


>  Centralbl.  f.  Physiologie,  Vol.  XIX,  No.  23.


^■€80  COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.

^H  nation  is  not  the  correct  one,  as  Gay  has  recently  stated,  it  would  'a^'^^

^M  no  way  affect  Ibe  soundness  of  the  amboceptor  theor>'.     The  exist-  ^

V  ence  of  amboceptors  is  con6rmed  by  so  many  experimental  consider-  ^

■  ations  that  it  is  no  longer  a  postulate  of  the  theorj',  but  is  practically

■  the  direct  expression  of  observed  pheuomena.     The  terra  amboceptor,

■  of  course,  is  used  merely  to  express  the  two-sided  affinity,  to  the
I  cell  on  the  one  hand  and  to  the  complement  on  the  other.      The

affinity  of  the  amboceptor  to  the  cell  was  demonstrated  by  the  com-
bining experiments  published  by  Morgenroth  and  myself:    and  the
I   direct  union  of  amboceptor  and  complement  is  confirmed  by  a  host
I   of  decisive  observations.     Of  these,  it  will  suffice  to  mention  the
teat-tube  demonstration  of  complementoids  which  occupy  the  com-
plementophile  groups  of  the  amboceptor.     This  demonstration  haa
;  been  effected  in  other  ways  (Fuhrmann,  Muir,  Browning,  and
I   Gay),  so  that  the  existence  of  complementoids  is  no  longer  evidenced
\  merely  by  the  possibility  of  producing  anticomplements  by  means  oE
inactivated  serum,  but  is  demonstrated  primarily  by  the  unmLstak-
I  able   interference   of    the   complementoids    in   hiemolytic    teat-tube
experiments.     It  is  not  necessary  that  complementoids  should  always
'  exert  an  inhibiting  action  on  hiEnioh*sis;  for  it  is  obvious  that  (changes
I  in  affinity  may  occur  in  consequence  of  external  influences,  physical,
chemical,  or  chronological  in  nature.     I  believe  that  changes  in  affinity,
I  «ther  positively  or  negatively,  are  of  the  highest  imjwrtance  in  cor-
rectly understanding  the  course  of  immunity  reactions,  although  I
do  not  deny  the  influence  of  certain  catalytic  factors  on  these  proc-
(von   Behring,   .Morgenroth,  Otto,  and  Saeh.s).     However,  no
general  rule  can  be  laid  down.     Experiments  are  constantly  bringing
forth  surprises,  but  by  diligent  empiricism  it  is  usually  ]H>EsibIe  to
bring  the  many  different  observatjons  into  harmony  with  a  single
point  of  view.

The  original  assumption,  that  amboceptor  and  complement  (at
least  in  the  case  of  hjemolysins)  exist  free  side  by  side,  and  that  tlie
complement  does  not  take  part  in  the  reaction  until  the  amboceptor
has  been  bound  by  the  cell  (owing  to  an  increase  in  the  affinity  of
the  complcmentophile  group), — this  assumption  has  not  proven  ten-

P.able  in  every  case.  In  addition  to  the  case  described  in  a  previous
chapter  by  Sachs  and  myself,  we  now  know  of  a  number  of  combi-
nations, dkcovered  by  Sachs,  in  which  the  amboceptor  alone  does
not  unite  with  the  receptor  of  red  blood-cells,  or  does  so  to  only  a
slight  degree.     By  combining  with  the  complement,  the  amboceptor


\


GENERAL  REVIEW  OF  THE  RECENT  WORK  IN  IMMUNITY.  581

'^•^s  the  affinity  of  its  cytophile  group  increased,  so  that  now  it  is  able
unite  with  the  cells.    Thus  far,  such  observations  have  been  made
^yon  normal  amboceptors;  and  this  fact  explains  why  the  numerous
Itempts  of  various  authors  to  separate  normal  hemolysins,  by  means
f  absorption  at  low  temperatures,  have  failed.^     The  amboceptors
btained  by  immunization,  on  the  other  hand,  regularly  possess  a
affinity  for  the  cell-receptor.     This  is  easily  understood  if  we
'^consider  their  mode  of  origin,  for  we  may  perhaps  see  in  this  a  selec-
^on  of  the  groups  with  the  highest  affinity.    Certainly  in  this  case
"the  exception  proves  the  rule;  for  the  mere  fact,  that  in  some  instances
the  amboceptor  does  not  unite  with  the  cell  until  it  has  first  com-
bined with  the  complement,  at  once  shows  that  we  cannot  be  dealing
with  a  sensitization.    On  the  contrary,  this  shows  that  the  ambo-
ceptor is  an  interbody  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.     These  condi-
tions have  been  most  clearly  brought  out  by  the  experiments  of
Preston  Kyes  on  cobra  venom.      The  researches  of  Flexner  and
Noguchi,  as  we  all  know,  showed  that  cobra  venom  by  itself  is  no
hemolysin,  but  plays  the  r61e  of  amboceptor  in  haemolysis.    The
most  important  of  the  activators  is  the  one  discovered  by  Kyes,
namely,  lecithin.    The  relation  between  snake  venom  and  lecithin  is
really  the  same  as  that  between  amboceptor  and  complement;  but
the  former  possess  one  great  advantage  for  chemical  analysis, — they
are  both  stable  substances,  and  thus  contrast  strongly  with  the  highly
susceptible  substances   found  in  blood  serum.      Hence  what  was
impossible  m  the  case  of  the  latter  could  readily  be  effected  with
cobra  venom.     Kyes,  it  will  be  remembered,  has  demonstrated,  ad
ocular,  the  direct  union  of  cobra  amboceptor  and  lecithin  comple-
ment, and  has  furthermore  succeeded  in  isolating  the  resulting  com-
bination, the  cobra-lecithid,  in  pure  form.^

Thus,  tot  the  first  time,  the  conclusion  was  reached  chemically

^  In  this  connection  I  should  also  like  to  mention  the  interesting  atypical
behavior  discovered  by  Donath  and  Landsteiner  in  the  amboceptor  reaction.
These  authors  observed  hsemolytic  autoamboceptors  in  the  serum  of  a  patient
suffering  from  paroxysmal  luemoglubinaria.  These  autoamboceptors,  how-
ever, only  united  with  the  bloods  at  low  temperature.

*  Kyes  has  recently  continued  his  studies  at  my  laboratory,  and  has  demon-
strated the  important  fact  that  in  this  formation  of  cobra-lecithid  there  is  a
true  chemical  synthesis.  The  course  of  this  synthesis  is  such  that  a  fatty  acid
radical  is  split  off  from  the  lecithin  molecule,  whereupon  the  residual  combina-
tion, which  corresponds  to  a  monostearyllecithin,  unites  with  the  cobra  am  bo-


5S2


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMTINITY.


which,  as  a  result  of  biological  experiences,  I  had  always  looked
forward  to.

The  correctneaa  of  the  amboceptor  theory  formulated  by  Motgen-
roth  and  myself  is  confirmed  by  another  important  link  in  the  chain
of  evidence.  As  far  back  as  1900,  in  the  Croonian  lecture,  I  stated
that,  according  to  the  amboceptor  theory,  three  antilylic  antibodies
were  possible.  In  addition  to  the  substances  which  act  as  anticom-
plements,  we  could  conceive  of  antiamboceptora  of  two  different
kinds.  One  of  these  inhibits  the  action  of  the  amboceptor  by  pre-
venting the  union  of  amboceptor  and  cell,  the  other  by  occupying  the
complementophile  groups.  So  far  as  the  confirmation  of  the  ambo-
ceptor theory  is  concerned,  it  ia  evident  that  the  demonstration  of
antiamboceptors  directed  against  the  complementophile  group  ia  by
far  the  most  important;  for,  owing  to  the  mode  of  origin,  the  devel-
opment of  cytophile  groujis  of  the  amboceptor  as  reaction  products
of  the  specific  counter-group  (the  cell-receptor)  is  self-evident.  It
was  therefore  particularly  gratifying  when  I  found  that  Bordet
had  recently  fumLihed  the  demonstration  that  the  anti amboceptor
developed  with  an  immune,  or  with  a  normal  serum,  is  usually  directed
against  the  complementophile  group.  This  discovery  verv'  prettily
demonstrates  that  the  mechanism  of  hEemolysin  action  proceeds
according  to  the  amboceptor  theory.  The  error  contained  in  our
earlier  conception,  that  anti-immune  bodies  were  usually  antibodies
directed  against  the  cytophile  group,  is  practically  only  an  error  in
the  localization  of  the  point  of  attack.  This  must  now  be  corrected
by  regarding  the  complementophile  group  as  the  point  attacked  by
the  anti  amboceptor.

We  know  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  antiamboceptors  by  im-
munizing with  normal  serum,  and  Pfeiffer  and  Friedberger  hara
shown  that  the  action  of  the  antiamboceptor  serum  extends  to  all
the  amboceptors  of  the  animal  species  whose  serum  was  used  for
inmiunization.  These  tacts  are  only  apparently  a  contradiction  of
the  specificity  of  amboceptors,  for  the  specificity  of  the  amboceplora
applies  only  to  the  cytophile  group.  On  the  other  hand,  we  must
assume  that  all  the  amboceptors  of  the  same  animal  species  are  at
least   partly  similar  in  structure  so   far  as   the   complementophile


ocptor.  Thia  of  course  destroyB  the  foiindat
are  ba^ed  on  the  luisiiniption  that  the  react
certain  statements  made  by  Bredig.


of  iVoguchi'a  calculatioae,  which
a  raveraible;    it  also  dispoaea  ol


A  GENERAL  REVIEW  OF  THE  RECENT  WORK  IN  IMMUNITY.  583

apparatus  is  concerned.  In  a  way,  therefore,  the  amboceptor  bears
the  stamp  of  the  animal  species  from  which  it  is  derived.  In  this
connection  I  have  already  expressed  my  views  in  the  article  entitled
"  The  Mechanism  of  the  Amboceptor  Action  and  its  Teleological  Sig-
nificance "  (Koch  Festschrift,  1903):  "In  general,  the  specific  ambo-
ceptors possess  a  miiform  structure  in  their  complementophile  por-
tions, whereas  they  differ  to  a  high  degree  in  their  cytophile  groups,
whose  physiological  function  is  the  absorption  of  foodstuffs. "

The  studies  of  antiamboceptors  have  demonstrated  that  this  con-
ception is  correct.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  specificity  of  the  com-
plementophile group  of  the  amboceptor,  a  specificity  based  on  the
animal  species,  at  once  leads  to  a  difference  in  the  amboceptors
obtained  from  different  species  by  means  of  the  same  immunizing
material.  In  our  Sixth  Communication  on  Hemolysins,  Morgenroth
and  I  published  certain  experiments  showing  that  by  means  of  an
antiamboceptor  we  had  been  able  to  demonstrate  the  diversity  of
the  amboceptors  produced  in  different  animal  species  by  injections
of  ox-blood.  This  statement  still  holds  good,  and  its  direct  conse-
quence demands  that  in  the  practical  application  of  bactericidal  sera,
we  should  mix  immune  sera  derived  from  different  animals.

In  view  of  Bordet's  observation,  however,  we  shall  have  to  revise
our  interpretation  in  so  far  as  the  site  of  this  differentiation  is  con-
cerned; the  difference  is  in  the  complementophile  group  instead  of
in  the  cytophile  group.  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  abandon  the
differentiation  of  partial  amboceptors  in  one  and  the  same  serum  ])y
means  of  antiamboceptors,  a  differentiation  which  we  proposed  in
the  study  on  hsemolysins.  It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that
the  pluralistic  conception  of  the  amboceptor  apparatus  is  thereby
overthro^^^l.  This  conception  is  supported  by  so  many  arguments
of  a  different  kind  that  the  existence  of  partial  amboceptors  can  })e
classed  as  one  of  the  demonstrated  facts  in  immunity.  I  may  remind
the  reader  that  by  means  of  mutual  elective  absorption  it  is  possible
to  differentiate  the  strictly  specific  portion  of  an  immune  serum
from  the  non-specific  components  which  give  rise  to  the  group  reac-
tions. By  this  means  the  presence  of  different  amboceptor  fractions
could  be  demonstrated  in  the  same  immune  serum.  The  observa-
tions made  by  Morgenroth  and  myself  on  isolysins  also  speak  strongly
in  favor  of  a  multiplicity  of  amboceptors.  In  these  the  possible
presence  of  antibodies  acting  on  the  complementophile  portion  of  the
amboceptor  is  absolutely  excluded.     Finally,  if  we  glance  at  the  con-


584


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


ditions  existing  among  bacteria,  we  find  the  eo-called  group  reactions
showing  that  the  receptor  apparatus  and  the  antisera  poBsess  a  highly
multiple  constitution.  This  fact,  as  is  well  known,  has  here  lieen  of
great  practical  value.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  plurality  of  the
amboceptors,  bo  far  aa  the  cytophile  group  is  concerned,  is  an  assured
fact;  the  differentiation  by  means  of  anti amboceptors  directed
against  the  cytophile  group  can  therefore  very  welt  be  foregone.
The  production  of  anti amboceptors  against  the  cytophile  group  seems
to  encounter  particular  difficulties,  for  the  complemen tophi le  group
always  finds  the  corresponding  counter  group  in  the  organism  more
readily  than  does  the  cytophile  group,  and  therefore  is  alone  bound
by  the  tissue  receptors.  It  is  possible  that  in  order  to  successfully
immunize  with  cytophile  groups,  it  will  be  necessary  to  isolate  these
groups.  The  latter  might  be  accomplished  by  neutralizing  the  com-
piementophile  group  with  the  corresponding  antibody,  or  by  destroy-
ing this  group  (  =  cytophilic  amboceptoids).

In  any  event  these  studies  confirm  the  correctness  of  the  ambo-
ceptor theory,  i.e.,  that  there  is  a  direct  combination  of  amboceptor
and  complement.  To  repeat,  therefore,  the  specificity  of  the  ambo-
ceptors applies:

(1)  To  the  receptor  employed  in  immunization,  and  this  mani-
fests it«elf  in  the  configuration  of  the  haptophore  group;  and

(2)  To  the  animal  species  from  which  the  amboceptor  is  deri\'ed.
The  latter  kind  of  specificity  shows  itself  in  the  structure  of  the  cora-
plementophile  apparatiLS,  which,  as  we  know,  consists  of  a  large
number  of  individual  complementophile  groups.  To  this  plurality
of  the  complementophile  groups  there  corresponds  a  plurality  of  com-
plements as  can  hardly  longer  be  questioned.  So  far  as  the  consti-
tution of  the  complement  is  concerned,  the  fact  that  it  is  made  up  of

a  hajitophore  and  a  toxophore  group  is  sufficiently  proven  by  test-    ■
tube   experiments,     The   indirect    method    first   employed   for   the
demonstration  of  the  haptophore  group,  namely,  by  the  production
of  anticomplements,  can  therefore  be  dispeased  with.

However,  I  am  convinced  that  just  as  normal  body-fluids  so  often
contain  anticomplements,  it  will  also  be  found  possible  to  produce
these  by  immunization.  But  as  Moreschi  has  well  pointed  out,  the
experiments  by  which  it  was  sought  to  demonstrate  the  production
of  anticomplements  are  not  alwolutely  conclusive.  Recent  studies
by  Gengou.  Moreschi,  and  Gay  have  shown  that  in  the  immunization
with  serum,  antibodies  directed  against  the  albuminous  constituents


istituents    ■


A  GENERAL  REVIEW  OF  THE  RECENT  WORK  IN  IBIMUNITY.  585


formed  which,  by  uniting  with  the  corresponding  albuminous
todies,  possess  the  property  of  exerting  anticomplementary  effects.
Cn  this  case,  therefore,  the  anticomplement  action  is  brought  about
oy  the  interaction  of  two  components,  one  present  in  the  serum  of
bhe  immunized  animal  and  the  other  in  the  serum  of  that   animal
species  whose  serum  was  used  for  immimization  (Moreschi).    It  is
clear,  of  course,  that  here  the  dissolved  albuminous  substances,  not
the  complements,  were  the  antigens.    This  being  the  case,  the  demon-
stration of  anticomplements   produced   by   immunization   becomes
extremely  difficult,  and  it  must  be  left  for  futiu^  investigations  to
.see  whether  it  is  at  all  possible  to  differentiate  these  substances  from
those  antibodies  against  albuminous  substances  which  exert  an  anti-
complement  action.    So  far  as  the  mechanism  of  the  described  anti-
complement  action  is  concerned,  I  do  not  think  that  the  observations
of  Moreschi  and  Gay,  that  absorption  of  complement  is  associated  with
precipitation,  necessarily  mean  that  precipitation  and  anticomplement
have  any  causal  relationship.    In  fact  it  seems  reasonable  to  assume,
in  accordance  with  Gengou's  first  explanations,  that  the  property  of
binding  the  complements  is  exercised  by  the  albuminous  bodies  sen-
sitized with  the  specific  amboceptor.     We  would  have  to  conceive
this  somewhat  in  this  fashion,  that  just  as  when  immunizing  with
cells,  agglutinins  and  amboceptors  are  formed,  so  also  when  inununiz-
ing  with  dissolved  albuminous  bodies  two  kinds  of  antibodies  are
formed,  precipitins  and  amboceptors.    If  the  latter,  however,  are
really  amboceptors  in  the  sense  of  Ehrlich  and  Morgenroth,  we  must
demand  that  they  will  have  the  same  properties  which  we  have  always
ascribed  to  the  amboceptor  type.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  experiment
shows  that  this  is  the  case.     These  albumin  amboceptors  also,  in  order
to  react  with  the  complements,  must  have  the  affinity  of  their  com-
plementophile  apparatus  raised,  only  in  the  present  case  this  is  effected
by  the  combination  of  the  amboceptor  with  the  susceptible  body,  the
albumin.     We  see,  therefore,  that  this  anticomplementary  action  cor-
responds to  the  deflection  of  complement  through  an  excess  of  im-
mune body,  first  described  by  M.  Neisser  and  Wechsberg.     Only  in
this  case  the  deflecting  amboceptor  is  of  a  different  kind,  and  needs
first  to  react  with  the  corresponding  receptor.

Through  the  researches  of  Wassermann  and  Schutze  and  of  Uhlen-
huth,  one  class  of  antibodies  against  dissolved  albumins,  namely,  the
precipitins,  has  been  used,  as  is  well  known  to  differentiate  albuminoas
bodies  of  various  origin.    These  have  thus  come  to  be  successfully


COLLECTED  STUDIES  IN  IMMUNITY.


employed  in  Lhe  forensic  demonstration  of  the  origin  of  blood-atains.
The  same  thing,  of  course,  was  possible  In  the  case  of  the  albunun
amboceptors.

This  fact  has  recently  been  taken  advantage  of  by  M.  Neisser  and
Sachs,*  who  have  devised  a  procedure  by  which,  by  deflecting  hipmo-
lytic  complements  by  means  of  albuminous  bodies  loaded  with  am-
boceptor, they  diagnosticate  human  blood,  etc.  The  studj-  of  im-
munity thus  furnishes  two  biological  methods  for  deciding  a  [xjint  of
vital  importance  in  forensic  medicine,  namely,  the  origin  of  blood-
stains. Considering  the  extreme  importance  of  tests  of  this  kind,  1
am  convinced  tliat  hereafter  it  will  be  well  to  use  this  method  in
addition  to  the  well-tried  Uhlenhuth-Wassermann  reaction.

This  brief  r&um^,  I  believe,  covere  the  chief  points  wliich  have
recently  come  up  tor  discussion,  and  it  is  indeed  gratifying  to  me  that
all  the  vital  questions  have  been  decided  in  favor  of  my  views.  I
have  gladly  applied  the  results  obtained  in  experimental  in^'estigtlr
tions  to  an  extension  of  my  views,  for  it  is  obvious,  considering  the
rudimentary  character  of  a  new  science,  that  any  successful  prosecu-
tion of  the  work  will  also  extend  the  theoretical  conceptions.  If  then,
in  spite  of  this,  all  the  facts  brought  to  light  fit  naturally  into  the
views  formulated  by  me,  I  regard  this  as  additional  evidence  tliat
these  views  are  not  so  much  a  theory  as  a  necessary  abstraction  of  the
observed  facta,  an  abstraction  which  is  necessaPi'  not  only  in  order  to
obtain  a  clear  and  harmonious  conception  of  all  the  various  observa-
tions, but  also  to  furnish  a  scientific  basis  for  a  further  successful
development  of  the  subject.

■  Berlin,  klin.  Wochenschr.  No.  44,  1905,  and  No.  3,  1006.


SHORT-TITLE     CATALOGUE

OF  THE

PUBLIOATIONS

OF

JOHN   WILEY   &   SONS,

New  York.
Lokdok:  chapman  &  HALL,  LiMmD.


ARRANGED  UNDER  SUBJECTS.


Descriptive  circulars  sent  on  applicatiun.  Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  (*;  are  sold
»t  net  prices  only,  a  dnub!e  asterisk  (**)  bonks  sold  under  the  rules  of  the  American
Publishers*  Association  at  ttet  prices  subject  to  an  extra  charge  for  postage.  All  books
are  bound  in  cloth  unless  otherwise  stated.


AGRICULTURE.

Armsbj's  Manual  of  Cattle-feeding xamo,  Sx  75

Priociples  of  Animal  Nutrition 8vo,  4  00

Budd  and  Hansen's  American  Horticultural  Manual:

Part  L  Propagation,  Culture,  and  Improvement. x3mo,  x  50

Part  II.  Systematic  Pomology. lamo,  x  50

Downing's  Fruits  and  Fruit-trees  of  America 8vo,  s  00

Elliott's  Engineering  for  Land  Drainage lamo,  i  50

Practical  Farm  Drainage lamo,  i  00

Green's  Principles  of  American  Forestry lamo,  i  50

Grotanfelfs  Principles  of  Modern  Dairy  Practice.     (Woll.) lamo,  3  00

Kemp's  Landscape  Gardening lamo,  a  so

Maynard's  Landscape  Gardening  as  Applied  to  Home  Decoration lamo,  x  50

^  McKay  and  Larsen's  Principles  and  Practice  of  Butter-making 8vo,  z  50

Sanderson's  Insects  Injurious  to  Staple  Crops lamo,  x  50

Insects  Injurious  to  Garden  Crops.     (In  preparation.)
Insects  Injuring  Fruits.     (In  preparation.)

Stockbridge's  Rocks  and  Soils 8vo,  3  so

Winton's  Microscopy  of  Vegetable  Foods 8vo,  7  50

WoU's  Handbook  for  Farmers  and  Dairymen x6mo,  z  50

ARCHITECTURE.

Baldwin's  Steam  Heating  for  Buildings lamo,  a  50

Bashore's  Sanitation  of  a  Country  House lamo,  x  00

Berg's  Buildings  and  Structures  of  American  Railroads 4to,  5  00

Birkmire's  Planning  and  Construction  of  American  Theatres 8vo,  3  00

Architectural  Iron  and  Steel 8to,  3  50

Compound  Riveted  Girders  as  Applied  in  Buildings 8vo,  a  00

Planning  and  Construction  of  High  Office  Buildings 8vo,  3  50

Skeleton  Construction  in  Buildings 8vo,  3  00

Brigg's  Modem  American  School  Buikiings 8vo,  4  00

Carpenter's  Heating  and  Ventilating  of  Buildings 8vo,  4  00

Freitag's  Architectural  Engineering 8vo,  3  50

Fireproofing  of  Steel  Buildings 8vo,  a  50

French  and  Ives's  Stereotomy 8vo,  a  50

1


Guhaid'B  Gulds  lo  Saollu;  BouK-iiiip«ticui ibi

Theatre  FliM  and  PwiUt lai

■Gleeoe's  SlructunlMettunics .    8

BoUf't  Caipenleis'  and  Joineis'  Handbook i8c

Johnson's  Stalici  hy  Atscbcaic  aad  Graphic  Utthodl. 8

Kiddei'sAichiiecti'andBulldtn'Pocliet-baak.  KenitteD Edition.  tCmo.D
II  Build  in)


neUUic

't  Stair-building.


:  Their  Occi


'THtise  on  Poandatian. , .


Ric bey's  Handboo


Bimia's  Modern  Slonc-cuttinf  and  Masonry.  ..,-.-.......  8^

icipHi  Species  ol  Wood .8».

't  Graphic  Sutics  with  Applications  (o  Tmun,  Beams,  and  Arcb


□d  Arehitccluial  Juiiipruilencg  .
IS  Preliminarr  to  Conslruclloa  li


md  Elfdrotfiii  ot  Iron  and  Slee


ARMY  AND  NAVY.


Btmidou's  Smokeless  Pi


lufi's  Teil-boDk  OTdi


le  Tlwotr  ol  the  Ctllutew


ChaK'i  Screw  P
ClDkc's  Gunne
Craic's  Aiimul


s  Poiariiini  Pbolo-chronocraph. .

j|  Law

le  Hililary  Law  of  United  Slates. .


De  Brack's  Caialrr  OutposB  Dutiet.
Dieti's  Soldier's  First  Aid  Handbook .

•  Dredge's  Modern  French  Artillei?
Durnnd's  Resistance  end  Propulsion  c
■  Djtfs  Handbook  ol  Light  Artillery.
EitBlrr's  Modern  High  Eipktsivei. . . .

•  Fiebcger'B  Teil-book  on  Field  Foi
'■  Catethim


'sEleoK


of  Probleiu

o  Elettroni

gnetic  Phcnonsoa.  Volt.  I.  and  n.  .8n>.  a

rli-

16100,  pioro.

*<  Cott  of  lUanfactarw—Aad  tht  AdminiftnliaB  of  Workaboyi.  .8to.  5  00

Ortaonco  and  Otmnonr.    a  vok. lamo.  5  00

ly^i  lafuitry  Drill  Roguktioiis. i8mo,  faptr,  10

I's  AdihttuttB*  Mamtil. 24mo,  i  00

ibo4y't  HoTml  Architoctara 8to.  7  so

**  Plio^i  Pncdcal  Ifarino  Sanreying. 8td,  a  50

PoiwoITi  Aniij  Oflcor't  Kwminfrr lamo,  4  00

Sharpo't  Art  of  Snbtifltiiig  ArmiM  in  War i8mo,  morocco  i  50

^  Tupm  and  Foolt't  Kanual  of  Bayonet  Ezercitei  and   Xiaslcetry  Fencing.

34mo,  leather,  50

*  Walka'e  Lecturei  on  EzploaiTet. Sro,  4  00

*  Whealer'e  Siege  Operationa  and  Military  Mining Bro,  2  00

Winthrop'a  Abridgment  of  Military  Law xamo,  2  50

WoodhnU't  Hotea  on  Military  Hygiene x6mo,  x  50

Tonng't  Simple  Elementa  of  Navigation x6mo»  morocco,  2  o


«


ASSAYING.

Fletcher*!  Practical  Instructiona  in  Quantitative  Aasaying  with  the  Blowpipe.

xamo,  morocco,

Forman'a  Mamial  of  Practical  Aasaying Sro,

Lodge's  Notes  on  Aasaying  and  Metallurgical  Laboratory  Experiments ....  8vo,

Low'a  Technical  Methods  of  Ore  Axialysis Sro,

Miller^  Manual  of  Assaying xamo,

Minet^  Production  of  Aluminum  and  its  Industrial  Use.     (Waldo. ) xamo,

O'Driscoll's  Notes  on  the  Treatment  of  Gold  Ores 8to,

Ricketts  and  Miller's  Notes  on  Assaying 8to,

Robine  and  Lenglen*s  Cyanide  Industry.     (Le  Clerc.) 8to,

Ulke's  Modem  Electrolytic  Copper  Refining 8vo,

Wilaon'a  Cyanide  Processes xamo,

Chlorination  Process xamo,

ASTRONOMY.

Comstock's  Field  Astronomy  for  Engineers 8to,

Craig's  Azimuth 4to,

Doolittle's  Treatise  on  Practical  Astronomy 8to,

Oore's  Elements  of  Geodesy 8vo,

Hayford's  Text-book  of  Geodetic  Astronomy 8vo,

Merriman's  Elements  of  Precise  Surveying  and  Geodesy 8to,

*  Michie  and  Harlow's  Practical  Astronomy. 8vo,

*  White's  Elements  of  Theoretical  and  Descriptive  Astronomy '. .  xamo,

BOTANY.

Davenport's  SUtistical  Methods,  with  Special  Reference  to  Biotogical  Variation.

1 6mo,  morocco,    x  as

Thom<<  and  Bennett's  Structural  and  Physiological  Botany x6mo,    a  as

Westermaier's  Compendium  of  General  Botany.     (Schneider.) 8vo,    a  00

CHEMISTRY.

Adriance's  Laboratory  Calculations  and  Specific  Gravity  Tables. xamo,  x  as

Allen's  Tables  for  Iron  Analysis 8vo,  3  00

Arnold's  Compendium  of  Chemistry.     (Mandel.) Small  8vo,  3  50

Austen's  Notes  for  Chemical  Students xamo,  x  50

Bemadou's  Smokeless  Powder.— Nitro-cellulose,  and  Theory  of  the  Cellulose

Molecule xamo,  a  50

*  Browning's  Introduction  to  the  Rarer  Elements 8vo,  i  so

8


X

SO

3

00

3

00

3

00

X

00

a

50

a

00

3

00

4

90

3

00

X

50

X

so

SO

SO

00

50

00

SO

3

00

a

00

m

ClMseo's  Ouamilati"  Chemieiil  Analysis  by  ElecUoljiii.    (tollnooil.).  8to,

QD

Cohn's  Indialors  and  T»st-papeis. ,  .  . .    IJmo,

Teit»«niiRMEents. .. .,.. Bn,

Cr.ft.-s  Short  Course  in  OuBlit.li».  Ch.miul  An.lyii..  fSc1l«dI«,).      tJOio.

SO

Dolezalik'B  Tbcoij  of  Ibc   Liad  Accomuliler  <Siorac«  Baticn')-        iVon

n

DretJis.i-.Ch«micilReKlioni  "(lltnia.).' .'.  .\  .'.'..'. .    ..'.....'....   iinjo!

EiBlri'i  Mode™  H!£h  EjplMives 8vo.

00

Fowltr's  Sewage  Woiks  AnolySH tim:'.

90

FresEmu«'i  Hasual  of  Oualiiiu've  Chemical  Analysis.     (Wtlli.) Svo,

Manual  of  QualilaliTe  Chemical  AnalTiis.  Pari  1,  DaKripIive.  iWell..)  8vo.

SysIeiD   of    Insuociion   in    Quantiiaiive    Chemical  AntlyiU.      (Cohn.l

'  vols Bvo.i

50                       1

SO                 1

Furman'i  Manual  of  Praelical  Assaying 8*0.

•  Gelman'i  Eieriiin  In  Pbyiical  Cbemislr; , .  ilmo.

Gili'^  Gas  and  Fuel  Analyais  for  EagLneers.  .  - .    ,.-.,,-..-,-.,.,----  lamo.

Gcolenfcll's  Principles  o(  Modern  Dairy  FracUce.     (Woll.) .    ijiro.

M

Hammamcn's  Teii-book  of  PliytioloilcaJ  CbemlaU;.     iHanild.) Svo,

Helm-.  Principles  of  Mmhematical  Chemitlrj.     (Honui.) iimo.

Hwing'a  Ready  Reference  Tables  (CoHTenion  Faelon) xtau),  amiotta.

SO

Hind's  Inorganic  Cheml.Try.  -,.,.,..,        . .    , ,      .  ^  -.....,..,..... .  $vo,

«.                1

*        Laboratory  Manual  for  Students .    ., lasn,

Holleman'a  Teil-hook  of  Inorganic  Chemislry.     (Cooper.). ,,     «»(..

Tert-book  Pf  Organic  ChimisUT.     iWaiker  »Ed  BolL) 8yo.

00

Keep's  Cast  Iron.  ...                                 Bro.

S"

Landauer's  Speclrum  Analnis.     iTlogle.) Sno.

»

Products.  Animal  Products,  and  natural  Vatcn Sto.

LaiMT-Cohn's  Pradical  Urinary  Analysis.     (Loreoi.).. . .    iimo.

Cbemislry.     iTiogle.) ...ijitP.

Leacb-s  The  Inspectiun  and  Analysis  of  Food  with  Special  Refererce  to  Stale

Control 8vo.

50

Lab's  ElecIrochemisCry  of  Organic  Compound..     (Loreni.  ^  ,                       8ro.

Lodge's  notes  on  AsHyini  uid  Uet«Uii>sical  Ubonlaiy  Bipeilmenli. ..  .8vo.

Low's  Technical  Hetbod  at  Ore  Analysis.      .        .  .                                         Byo.

,                           Lunie'a  Techno-chemical  AnatyBi..     iCotin,) umo

*  McKsy  und  Lacsen's  Principles  and  Practice  o(  Batlu-awkiDg               8*0.

JO

Mandel's  Handhooti  for  Bio-chemiial  Laboratory  . .            ijnro.

•  Manin-E  Laboratory  Guide  to  OuaUtalive  Analysis  with  Ihc  Bloin»pc.   ilmo,

6a

jd  Edition,  Rewrillen. ".. Bvo.

E«aininationoIWat<r.     (Chemical  and  Bacteriokciul.) iiiro.

Katthew's  The  Teilile  Fibres. .  .    ., Svo.

«

Miller-*  Manual  of  Assaying .lamo,

5o

Hl.ieCj  Elemenury  Tell. book  of  Che misiry,       .      .                    iimo.

Morgan*.  An  Outline  of  the  Tbeoiy  of  Solutions  and  its  Itcsulls.            .i.imo.

00

^^^^^^Hr

^

Horgmn's  Elementg  of  Physical  Chemittry lamo

*  Phyncal  Chemiitry  for  Electrical  Encineert zamo

Horse's  Calculations  used  in  Cane-sufar  Factories i6mo,  morocco

Xulliken's  General  Method  for  the  Identification  of  Pure  Organic  Compounds.

VoL  I Large  8vo

O'Brine's  Laboratory  Guide  in  Chemical  Analysis. 8to

O'DriscoU's  Notes  on  the  Treatment  of  Gold  Ores Svo

Ostwald's  Conversations  on  Chemistry.    Part  One.     (Ramsey.) lamo

Part  Two.     (TurnbulL) lamo

*  Penfield's  Notes  on  Determinative  Mineralogy  and  Record  of  Mineral  Tests

8vo,  paper

Pictet's  The  Alkaloids  and  their  Chemical  Constitution.     (Biddle.) 8to

Pinner's  Introduction  to  Organic  Chemistry.     (Austen.) lamo

Poole's  Calorific  Power  of  Fuels. 8vo

Prescott  and  Winslow's  Elements  of  Water  Bacteriology,  with  Special  Refer-
ence to  Sanitary  Water  Analysis lamo

•  Reisig's  Guide  to  Piece-dyeing 8vo

Richards  and  Woodman's  Air,  Water,  and  Food  from  a  Sanitary  Stand-
point  8vo

Ricketts  and  Rtissell's  Skeleton  Notes  upon  Inorganic  Chemistry.     (Part  ]

Non-metallic  Elements.) 8to,  morocco

Ricketts  and  Miller's  Notes  on  Assaying. 8to

Rideal's  Sewage  and  the  Bacterial  Purification  of  Sewage 8vo

Disinfection  and  the  Preservation  of  Food 8vo

Riggs's  Elementary  Manual  for  the  Chemical  Laboratory 8vo

Robine  and  Lenglen's  Cyanide  Industry.     (Le  Clerc.) 8vo

Rostoski's  Serum  Diagnosis.     (Bolduan.) lamo

Ruddiman's  Incompatibilities  in  Prescriptions 8vo

*  Whys  in  Pharmacy lamo

Sabin's  Industrial  and  Artistic  Technology  of  Paints  and  Varnish.  J 8vo

Salkowski's  Ph]rsioIogicaI  and  Pathological  Chemistry.     (Omdcrff.) 8vo

Schimpf's  Text-book  of  Volumetric  Analysis lamo

Essentials  of  Volumetric  Analysis lamo

♦  Qtialitative  Chemical  Analysis 8vo

Spencer's  Handbook  for  Chemists  of  Beet-sugar  Houses i6mo,  morocco

Handbook  for  Cane  Sugar  Manufacturers. i6mo,  morocco

Stockbridge's  Rocks  and  Soils Svo

.  *  TiUman's  Elementary  Lessons  in  Heat Svo

♦  Descriptive  General  Chemistry Svo

Treadwell's  Qualitative  Analsrsis.     (HalL) Svo

Cttantitative  Analysis.     (Hall. ) Svo

Tumeaure  and  Russell's  Public  Water-supplies Svo

Van  Deventer's  Physical  Chemistry  for  Beginners.     (Boltwood.) i2mo

*  Walke's  Lectures  on  Explosives Svo

Ware's  Beet-sugar  Manufacture  and  Refining Small  Svo,  cloth

Washington's  Manual  of  the  Chemical  Analysis  of  Rocks Svo

Wassermann's  Immune  Sera :  Haemolysins,  Cytotoxins,  and  Precipitins.    (Bol-
duan. ) lamo

Wells's  Laboratory  Guide  in  Qualitative  Chemical  Analjrsis Svo

Short  Course  in  Inorganic  Qualitative  Chemical  Analysis  for  Engineering

Students lamo

Text-book  of  Chemical  Arithmetic i2mo

Whipple's  Microscopy  of  Drinking-water Svo

Wilson's  Cyanide  Processes i  snio

Chlorination  Process lamo

Winton's  Microscopy  of  Vegetable  Foods Svo

Wulling's    Elementary    Course   in  Inorganic,  Pharmaceutical,  and  Medical

Chemistry lamo,

5


3

CO

z

50

z

50

5

00

a

00

a

CO

z

50

a

00

50

5

00

z

50

3

00

z

as

35

00

a  00

75
3  00

50
00

25

00
00
00
00
00
50
50

2S

25

00

00
50
50
00
00

00
00

50

00
00

0\'


3

A
I

4
z
a
z

3

a
a
I
z
3
3
a
z
3
3
4
5
I

4
4

a


z  00
z  50


z
z

3
I
I

7


50
as
50
50
50
50


a  00


CIVIL   EMGINEERIMG.


BRIUCES   ABD    I


»  Bmr'fl  Ancient  and  HrHlvm  £D£inecruif  uid  tbe  Tf

iTcenUidditigail.) 8vd

Comstock'i  FieW  Astronomy  tot  Enjloeen. 8»o

DB»ii'»  ElcT*Uoii  and  SUdia  Tables Bm

Slliott'I  EoeloKrlog  [or  Lund  Orainafe. iimo

Praetical  Farm  DralD*g>' timo

•Fiebeger'g  TrmtiK  on  Civil  EniinKring 8yo

?lainu'«  PhDIolapogiapbic  Mettiodi  and  Inilnunenti.   Std

FolweU'E  Sewerace.     (Dnignini  and  Uaintenaace, ) Sre

Fnltai'i  Arcbileclunl  Enfineiriag.     id  Edltfon.  RewritUo 8to

Francb  and  Ivei'i  SltieotonJi     , tro

Goodbue's  MuniclfMl  Improvemenls. , . .  .lama

Goodrich's  Economic  DiipoHl  ol  Towni' RefuK Svo

Gnre'i  Elemeols  of  Qeqde»» 8»o

HuTlord'i  TtMt-booli  ol  Geodetic  ABiionomy. 8vo

Howe'i  ReUinIng  Walls  lot  Esith. iima

JobOKjo'i  (J.  B.iTbeoiT  and  Praclice  of  Sur*eTiti|. Small  8to

Jobnson'i  <L.  J.  I  Sutlci  b^  Algebruc  noil  Graphic  Hetfaodi. Sro

Laplace's  Phi locophica I  Euaitoa  Prohabibliea.    (TniKottand  EmoiTJ.ilnia

HafaBD'i  TieatiBe  on  Civil  Engineering.     (1873.)     (Wood.l 8*0

•       DiMilptiTP  Ceomctty B*o

Merrioian'i  Elemoan  ol  Precise  Surmying  and  Gcodecy.  . 8vo

Meiriman  an4  BrookE'R  Handbook  lor  Surytron.  .  » i6mOi  morocco

Bugenl's  PUne  Surveying,  .  Bvo

Ogden-s  Sewer  Design iirao

Palton-i  Treatise  on  Civil  Enginetrint Sve  hoU  iMlber,

Recd'i  Topographical  Drawing  and  Skelcbing

Rideal's  Sewage  and  the  Bicteiial  Purification  of  Sewige. .
Siebett  and  Biggin's  Modern  StoDe-cuttiog  aod  Hasonrv.  . .
Smith's  Manual  of  Topographical  Dravlnr.  I  McMillan,  V  ,
Sondeiicker'a  Grapbic  Statics,  with  ApplicBtioBS  to  Trusses.  E


Taylor  1


itice  on  Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced,

St
minary  to  Construction  in  Englf  eering  and  Ai


Law  of  Operalioni

Lav  of  Conlralts,  .

Webb's  Problems  In  the  0se  and  Adjuatraent  of  EDCiDscrJnr  Instnimenli,
Wibon'a  Topographic  Survi


BRIDGES  AWD   ROOFS.  ^^H

'  on  the  Conetruction  of  Iron  Highvay  Bridga.  .Bro.^HV

4ls,p*ptt.    5^

■.tsa  in  Bridges  uid  Roof  Tnusei,  Arched  Ribi.  and

get 8vo,    3  SO


Snrr  and  Falk't  laSacnct  Lines  for  Bridgt  and  Roof  Computations 8to,  3  00

Design  and  Construction  ot  MstalHc  Bridges 8to,  5  00

Da  Bois's  Mechanics  ot  Engineering.    VoL  IL Small  4to.  10  00

Foster's  Treatise  on  Wooden  Trestle  Bridges. 4to,  5  00

Fowler's  Ordinary  Fonndations. 8to,  3  50

Greene**  Roof  Trusses. 8to.  1  as

Bridge  Trusses. 8vo,  a  50

Arches  in  Wood,  Iron,  and  Stone. 8to,  a  50

Howe's  Treatise  on  Arches. 8to,  4  00

Design  of  Simple  Roof-tmsses  in  Wood  and  StceL Sro,  a  00

Johnson,  Bryan,  and  Tomeaure's  Theory  and  Practice  in  the  Designing  of

Kodem  Framed  Structures. SmaU  4to,   10  00

■erriman  and  Jacoby's  Text-book  on  Roofs  and  Bridges:

Part  L    Otressm  in  Simple  Trusses. 8vo,  a  50

Part  IL    Giaphic  Statics. 8^0,  a  50

Part  nL    Bridge  Design 8to,  a  50

Part  IV.    Higher  Structures. 8vo,  a  50

Morison's  Memphis  Bridge 4to,  10  00

WaddelTs  De  Pontibus,  a  Pocket-book  for  Bridge  Engineers. .  i6mo,  morocco,  a  00

^Specifications  for  Steel  Bridges lamo,  50

Wright's  Designing  of  Draw-spans.    Two  parts  in  one  volume 8to,  3  5Q


HYDRAULICS.

Bazin's  Experiments  upon  the  Contraction  of  the  Liquid  Vein  Issuing  from

an  Orifice.     (Trautwine.) 8vo,  a  00

Bovey's  Treatise  on  Hydraulics 8vo,  5  00

Church's  Mechanics  of  Engineering 8vo,  6  00

Diagrams  of  Mean  Velocity  of  Water  in  Open  Channels paper,  x  50

Hydraulic  Motors 8vo,  2  00

Coffin's  Graphical  Solution  of  Hydraulic  Problems i6mo,  morocco,  a  50

Flather's  Dynamometers,  and  the  Measurement  of  Power lamo,  3  00

FohrelTs  Water-supply  Engineering 8vo,  4  00

FrizeU's  Water-power. '. 8vo,  5  00

Fuertes's  Water  and  Public  Health. lamo.  i  50

Water-filtration  Works i2mo,  a  50

Ganguillet  and  Kutter's  General  Formula  for  the  Uniform  Flow  of  Water  in

Rivers  and  Other  Channels.     (Hering  and  Trautwine.) 8vo,  4  00

Hazen's  Filtration  of  Public  Water-supply 8vo,  3  00

Hazlehurst's  Towers  and  Tanks  for  Water- works 8vo,  a  50

Herschers  115  Experiments  on  the  Carrying  Capacity  of  Large,  Riveted,  Metal

Conduits 8vo,  a  00

Mason's  Water-supply.     (Considered  Principally  from  a  Sanitary  Standpoint.)

8vo,  4  00

Merriman's  Treatise  on  Hydraulics 8vo,  5  00

*  Michie's  Elements  of  Analytical  Mechanics 8vo,  4  00

Schuyler's  Reservoirs  for  Irrigation,  Water-power,  and  Domestic  Water-
supply Large  8vo,  5  00

**  Thomas  and  Watt's  Improvement  of  Rivers.     (Post,  44c.  additional). 4to,  6  00

Tumeaure  and  Russell's  Public  Wster-supplies 8vo,  5  00

Wegmann's  Design  and  Construction  of  Dams 4to,  5  00

Water-supply  of  the  City  of  New  York  from  1658  to  1895. .4to,  10  00

Williams  and  Hazen's  Hydraulic  Tables 8vo,  x  50

Wilson's  Irrigation  Engineering Small  8vo,  4  00

Wolff's  Windmill  as  a  Prime  Mover 8vo,  3  00

Wood's  Turbines 8vo,  a  50

Elements  of  Analytical  Mechanics. 8vo,  3  00

7


^M                                                   MATERULS  OF   ENGINEERING.

m

^^^H                      Bftkcr's  TreatLBe  on  Uisonry  Con^tructioo.  ..,..,..,....,....,.,,,.,  ,Bvo

'"

^^U                               Konds  nnil  Paviments - . . . .    Svo

^H                       Black's  Dniled  Suiei  Public  WdcIu    01iU>ng4<a

^^H                       •  Bovey's  SUentUi  ol  Hsleriali  and  Thtarr  of  SIractuits. .  . ......   Sie

T  So

^^H                       Bjrrnt's  Higbwa):  Canstruetion .     Svo

^H                               InapMlion  of  the  Mitciialji  aad  Workmanship  Emplojed  in  Contttucllon

^^^L                     Church'n  Mechanics  of  EncioMrine Svo

6  "

^^^^^^^         Du  Boil's  Kectunics  of  EnginEefiog.     Vol  I.  .. .Small  4I0

^^^^^K        •EckcrsCcmenti.  LioiH,  und  Plas^en ,..8tD

6  00

^^^^^^^H       Johnson's  Materials  Dl  CanBimctioii, ..    ....      .    .    ..LugeBvo

^^^^^H       Fowler's  Ordinary  Fouada lions.    . .                     Bvo

^^^^^H       *  Greene's  Structural  Mechaniu. Sto

^^^^^H        Keep-sCaslIiun .    .       gvg

^^^^^H        Lanu's  Applied  MecHanici. Svo

^^^^^^^H        Marten's  Hanctbaoli  en  Teiting  UalariKh,     <Haiiain(,)     1  vols Swo

;"

^^^^^V        Hauler's  Technical  MecbanlcB.                 . .   8vo

^^^^^B         Henill'a  Slones  for  BulldlDg  and  Decoration.  .  .                    Bvo

1                     Herrlman's  Mechanics  al  Haleiiab Svo

Strength  of  Materials iiroo

Uetcalf's  Steel.     A  Manual  for  Steel-users. . .  .                                           iitno

Richardson's  Modern  Asphalt  Pavements Svo

Rockwell's  Roads  and  Pavements  in  France ilmo

'  >,

SaDin-a  Induslrial  and  Aninic  Techaolciio'  of  Paints  and  Taraliii... . ,       Bvo

\Z

Snow's  Principal  Species  of  Wood '.*.*,*.*,'.'.  .".'.'-*.'.  .".".'-.*.'.','.'.".*.*.  .Bvo

Spalding's  Hydraulic  Cement iimo

TeEl-book  00  Roads  and  PavefDcnta. ...-...,-.........-.,--,.  .umo

i"

TburstOD's  Materials  ol  Engineering.     J  Pails.. .....  Svo

Part  I.     Bon-meialUc  Materials  of  Engineering  and  Metallurgy. ...  Bvo

Part  II.     Iron  and  SteeL Bvo

Pan  m.     A  Treatise  on  Braises,  BroDZei,  and  Other  AUox  and  thel

Thurston's  Teit-hook  of  the  Materials  ol  Conitiuction .Svo

;E

Tinson's  Street  Pavements  and  Pavioa  Materials. Bvo

Waddell's  De  Pontihus.   (A  Pockel-book  for  Bridge  Engin«r».).  .i6n».  mor

Specificstions  (or  Steel  Bridges unw

1  »s

Wood's  (De  V. )  Treatise  on  ihe  Resistance  ol  Materials,  and  an  AwcBdii  0

the  PreservBtion  of  Timber Bvo

Wood's  (De  V.I  Elements  o(  Analytical  Mechanics Bvo

Wood's  (M.  P.)  Rustless  Coatings:    Corrosion  and  Electrotysls  of  Iron  on

^H          ^'"^ ""

*oo

^^^^M                                       RAILWAY  ENGUfEERING.

1   IS

^F                      Berg's  Bt-lldings  and  Structures  ol  American  Railroads 4to

^H                        Brook's  Handbook  of  Street  Railroad  Location ,      i6mo,  mofocto

1  so

^H                        Bull's  Civil  Engineer's  Field-book.           .    . ibmo.  morocca

^M                        CrandsH's  Transition  Curve i6mo.  moroeto

1  so

1    50

^H                        Sawson-B  "EoBineering"  and  Electric  Tracilon  Pocket-book    .  iGmo,  morocco

S  00

k

i

Dredge's  Higtory  of  the  Pennsyhrania  Railroad:  (1879) Paper,  5  00

^  Drinker'i  Tnniielliiic,  EzploeiTe  Compouads,  and  Rock  I>ri]!i.4to,  half  mor.,  as  00

Tfsher^  Tahle  of  Cnhlc  Yards Cardboard.  25

Godwin's  RaihtMul  Engineers'  Field-book  and  Explorers'  Guide. . .  i6mo.  mor.,  2  50

Howard's  Transition  Cunre  Field-book i6mo,  morocco,  i  50

Hudson's  Tables  for  Calculating  the  Cubic  Contents  of  Excavations  and  Em-
bankments.   8to,  I  00

MoUtor  and  Beard's  Manual  for  Resident  Engineers. x6mo,  i  00

Nagle's  Field  Manual  for  Railroad  Engineers x6mo,  morocco,  3  00

Philbtick's  Field  Manual  for  Engineers z6mo,  morocco,  3  00

Searles's  Field  Engineering z6mo,  morocco,  3  00

Railroad  Spiral i6mo,  morocco,  i  50

Tayfer's  Prismoidal  FormuUe  and  Earthwork 8vo,  i  50

*  Trautwine's  Method  of  Calculating  the  Cube  Contents  of  Excarations  and

Embankments  by  the  Aid  of  Diagrams 8vo,  a  00

The  Field  Practice  of  Laying  Out  Circular  Curves  for  Railroads.  -

xamo,  morocco,  a  50

Cross-section  Sheet Paper,  as

Webb's  Railroad  Construction z6mo,  morocco,  s  00

Wellington's  Economic  Theory  of  the  Location  of  Railways Small  8vo,  s  00


DRAWING.

Barr's  Kinematics  of  Machinery 8vo,

*  Bartlett's  Mechanical  Drawing 8vo,

*  "  "  "        Abridged  Ed 8vo,

CooUdge's  Manual  of  Drawing 8to,  paper

Coolidge  and  Freeman's  Elements  of  General  Drafting  for  Mechanical  Engi-
neers  Oblong  4to,

Durley's  Kinematics  of  Machines 8vo,

Emch's  Introduction  to  Projective  Geometry  and  its  Applications 8vo,

HilTs  Text-book  on  Shades  and  Shadows,  and  Perspective 8vo,

Jamison's  Elements  of  Mechanical  Drawing 8vo,

Advanced  Mechanical  Drawing 8vo,

Jones's  Machine  Design :

Part  I.     Kinematics  of  Machinery 8vo,

Part  n.     Form,  Strength,  and  Proportions  of  Parts 8vo,

MacCord's  Elements  of  Descriptive  Geometry 8vo,

Kinematics;  or,  Practical  Mechanism 8vo,

Mechanical  Drawing 4to,

Velocity  Diagrams 8vo,

MacLeod's  Descriptive  Geometry..     Small  8vo,

*  Mahan's  Descriptive  Geometry  and  Stone-cutting 8vo,

Industrial  Drawing.     (Thompson.) 8vo,

Moyer's  Descriptive  Geometry g\ro.

Reed's  Topographical  Drawing  and  Sketching 4to,

Raid's  Course  in  Mechanical  Drawing 8vo,

Text-book  of  Mechanical  Drawing  and  Elementary  liachine  Design. 8vo,

Robinson's  Principles  of  Mechanism 8vo,

Schwamb  and  Merrill's  Elements  of  Mechanism 8vo,

Smith's  (R.  S.)  Manual  of  Topographical  Drawing.     (McMillan.) 8vo,

Smith  (A.  W.)  and  liarx's  Machine  Design. 8vo,

Warren's  Elements  of  Plane  and  Solid  Free-hand  Geometrical  Drawing,  zamo.

Drafting  Instruments  and  Operations zamo,

Manual  of  Elementary  Projection  Drawing zamo.

Manual  of  Elementary  Problems  in  the  Linear  Perspective  of  Form  and

Shadow zamo.

Plane  Problems  in  Elementary  Geometry zamo,

0


2

50

3

00

50

00

50

00

50

00

50

00

50

00

00

CO

00

50

50

50

50

00

00

00

00

00

CO

50

00

00

as

50

00

as

d  PcrtpKti«e.


WaiTBn'i  PrimaiT  GeamalrT

ElomMiU  of  DcBcripUiB  GeDmeDj'i  Stud

Gsncral  Problcnu  of  Shid«  and  Shidav

ElemenU  of  Hachinc  Conitruction  and  Dnwloi.

Problcnu,  Theoiinu,  and  Etamplcs  in  DMctiptive  CaoraaliT. .
Wcblwch't    Kinemalica  .aad    Power    of    Tni


Whtlplt]''*  Pnctic*]  Imlructioii  la  the  Ait  of  Latter  EB(H*iDg.  .

Wilaon'i  (H.  M.l  Topogiaphie  Surroyine.

Witaon'l  IV.  T.)  Free-hand  PeripBcli™...

Wilion'atV.  T.)


'b  ElcmeDtarf  Count  la  Oocrlptivs  Ggometty Lubb  Svo


ELECTRICiry  ABD  PHYSICS.

If  s  Tail-book  of  Phnici.     (Uagie.'     ....
otes  on  the  Theory  ol  Elect


BottmMd.KSvo.


-modjnamicB


CliaSEd'g  Quantitative  Cbemlcal  Analj^i  by  Electrolysii.

Crehon  aad  Squier'i  PoluiiiDS  Ptaoto.chronograph .,    .      Svo

Damon's  "EnsioMfioi"  and  Eliciric  Traction  Pocket-book .  ifimo,  morocca
Doleialek*!   Theory   of   the    Lead   Accumulator   (Slarace    Baiter^).      iVai

Ende.) Iimo

iDd  Chcmislry.     [Buckch.) Svo

Id  Ibe  Heasuremenl  of  Power. . .  ;...,...  .iimo

Gilberfa  De  Magncic.     iMottelay.) Svo

Hanchetfs  Allernaling  Cuntnu  Eiplaiaed .Iimo

Bering's  Ready  Relerence  Tables  (Conveninn  Faclera) tSnu.  maraeco

Hohnan's  PteciBion  ol  MeasurementB.  .  . .8yo

Teleuopic   Uirror-aule  Hctbod,  AdjiulmeDle,  and  TmM !«[■■  3to

Kinzbruiuier'g  Teitiai  of  Continuoua^uireal  Hachinei. 8*0

Landauer'i  SjKctrua  AoalyBls.     (Tinile.) , .Svo

LcChatelletiHiEh-iempfiacureUEasuienienU,  (Boudouanl — Burgen.)  iitno.
Lob's  ElecDochemislry  of  Organic  Compouoda,     iLoreni.l...    .    .

•  Lyoni'i  Tintise  on  Electro  magnetic  Phenomena.  Vols.  L  and  n,  8*0.

•  Hichie's  Element!  of  Ware  Motion  ficlatlns  ID  Sound  and  Liibl....
Hiaudct'i  Blemenuiy  Tiealise  on  Electric  Batteries.     IFiabbsck.).    .  .  .  i

•  RoMnberi't  Electrical  Engineering.     (Haldane  Qe«— Kiuibniniui.).  .
[ie'a  Electrical  Urehloeiy.


Thur


■i  Elemi


todem  Electrolylic  Cop


LAW.

if  United  StalM. .Svo


lioni  PreUmlnary  to  Cooitruction  in  Bntiowrinc  u


•  «


MAHUFACTURES.

Bcniadou't  Smoktlen  Povdtr— Nitro-ceUulow  and  Th»orj  of  the  CeOiiloM

Molecule lamo,  2  50

BoUuid's  Iron  Founder. lamo,  a  50

founder,"  Supplement zamo,  a  50

>pedui  of  Founding  and  Dictionary  of  Foundry  Termt  Used  in  the

Practice  of  Moulding xamo,  3  00

*  Eckel's  Cements,  Limes,  and  Plasters 8to,  6  00

Eissler's  Modem  High  Explosives. 8vo,  4  00

Elfronfs  Enzymes  and  their  Applications.     (Prescott) 8to,  3  00

Fitzgerald's  Boston  Machinist zamo,  z  00

Ford's  Boiler  Making  for  Boiler  Makers. z8mo,  z  00

Hopkin's  Oil-chemists'  Handbook. 8vo,  3  00

Keep's  Cast  Iron. 8to,  a  50

Leach's  The  Inspection  and  Analysis  of  Food  with  Special  Reference  to  State

Control Large  8vo,  7  50

*  McKay  and  Larson's  Principles  and  Practice  of  Butter-making 8to,  z  50

Matthews's  The  Textile  Fibres. 8to,  3  50

Metcalf's  SteeL    A  Manual  for  Steel-users. zamo,  a  00

Metcalfe's  Cost  of  Manufactures — And  the  Administration  of  Workshops. 8to,  5  00

Meyer's  Modem  Locomotire  Construction 4to,  zo  00

Morse's  Calculations  used  in  Cane-sugar  Factories z6mo,  morocco,  z  50

*  Reisig's  Guide  to  Piece-dyeing 8to,  as  00

SaUn's  Industrial  and  Artistic  Technology  of  Paints  and  Varnish 8to,  3  00

Smith's  Press-working  of  Metals. 8vo,  3  00

Spalding's  Hydraulic  Cement zamo,  a  00

Spencer's  Handbook  for  Chemists  of  Beet-sugar  Houses. ....  z6mo,  iziorocco,  3  00

Handbook  for  Cane  Sugar  Manufacturers z6mo,  morocco,  3  00

Taylor  and  Thompson's  Treatise  on  Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced 8vo,  5  00

Thurston's  Manual  of  Steam-boilers,  their  Designs,  Construction  and  Opera-
tion  8vo,  5  00

*  WaDce's  Lectures  on  Explosives. 8to,  4  00

Ware's  Beet-sugar  Manufacture  and  Refining Small  8vo,  4  00

West's  American  Foundry  Practice zamo,  a  50

Moulder's  Text-book zamo,  a  50

WolfTs  Windmill  as  a  Prime  Mover 8vo,  3  00

Wood's  Rustless  Coatings:  Corrosion  and  Electrolysis  of  Iron  and  Steel.  .8vo,  4  00

MATHEMATICS.

Baker's  Elliptic  Functions 8vo,  z  50

*  Bass's  Elements  of  Differential  Calculus zamo,  4  00

Briggs's  Elements  of  Plane  Analytic  Geometry zamo,  z  00

Compton's  Manual  of  Logarithmic  Computations zamo,  z  50

Davis's  Introduction  to  the  Logic  of  Algebra 8vo,  z  50

*  Dickson's  College  Algebra Large  zamo,  z  50

*  Introduction  to  the  Theory  of  Algebraic  Equations Large  zamo,  z  as

Emch's  Introduction  to  Projective  Geometry  and  its  Applications 8vo,  a  so

Halsted's  Elements  of  Geometry 8vo,  z  7S

Elementary  Synthetic  Geometry 8vo,  z  so

Rational  Geometry zamo,  z  7S

*  Johnson's  (J.  B.)  Three-place  Logarithmic  Tables:  Vest-pocket  size. paper,  zs

zoo  copies  for  $  00

^                                                     Mounted  on  heavy  cardboard,  8X  xo  inches,  as

zo  copies  for  a  00

Johnson's  (W.  W.)  Elementary  Treatise  on  Differential  Calculus. . Small  8vo,  3  00

Elementary  Treatise  on  the  Integral  Calculus Small  8vo,  z  50

11


Johnsoa-i  (W.  W.)  CutTO  Tmcing  in  Canoiin  CiwiidiMtei ijido

,

SmaU  Std

Johnson'.  1 W.  W. )  Tbwry  of  Error,  ud  the  H.thod  of  Leml  Sqiuuei  i  jno

,

8.Woodw«d 0CU.O,  Mth     I

Ko.  3.  Synthetic  ProjcEtlve  GcomelrT.  by  George  Bruce  BbIiIhI.                  4

bolie  Functions,  by  Jamet  HcM.hon.     Nd.  S-  H«monic  Func-                 *

tion..  bT  WiUiiun  E.  Byerlr.     Ho.  6,  Gniuninn-a  SpMC  Ajulr.ie.
bT  EdwKd  W.  Hyde.     Bo.  T.  Prob.bility  md  Theory  of  Errors.

by    Alenndrr     Mactirlane.     No.    0.  Differential    Equalioas.   by                 .

.

by  ThDmu  S.  Fidu.                                                                                                  4

Mjniinan'B  Method  of  Leasl  Squares ,. 8ni

DiHmntiil  and  Integral  Calculus.     1  vola.  in  on. SniU  Byo

I

MECHANICAL   ENGmEERIWG.
UATBRIALS  OF  EHGIHEEIUnG,  STEAH-EKOIIfES  tXD  BOIL£R&


*.-

Abfidied


CuriKnter's  EiperimenUl  Engineering &^

Heating  and  Ventilating  Buildingi Si

Cory's  Smoke  Suppreuion  in  Pliali  u«inc  BltuminoB*  CoaL     (In  Prepua-

Uon.l
Clerk's  Gas  and  Oil  Engine SniaU  8to

ts  of  General  Drafting  tor  Hedunical  En-
gineers  --.-.-,-,...,. Oblong  410,

Cromwell's  Treatise  on  Toolhed  Gearing

TreatiK  an  Belt*  and  Pullers

Durley's  Kinematic*  of  Uachlnes

Flalher'a  Dynamo  meters
Hope  Di


Id  Fuel


lalysis


r  EnglnHT*.  ■  .


Button's  The  Gas  Encine 8vo.

Jamison's  Mechanical  Drawing 8vo,

Jones's  Machine  Design :

Part  L     Blinematics  of  Machinery 8to,

Part  IL     Form,  Strength,  and  Proportions  of  Parts. 8vo,

Kent's  Mechanical  Engineers'  Pocket-book i6mo,  morocco,

Kerr's  Power  and  Power  Transmission 8vo,

Leonard's  Machine  Shop,  Toob,  and  Methods 8to,

*  Loreni's  Modem  Refrigerating  Machinery.    (Pope,  Haven,  and  Dean. ) . .  8to,
MacCord's  Kinematics;  or*  Practical  Mechanism. 8to,

Mechanical  Drawing 4to,

Velocity  Diagrams 8to,

MacFarland's  Standard  Reduction  Factors  for  Oases. 8to,

Mahan's  Industrial  Drawing.     (Thompson.) 8to,

Poole's  Calorific  Power  of  Fuels. 8vo,

Reid's  Course  in  Mechanical  Drawing 8to,

Text-book  of  Mechanical  Drawing  and  Elementary  Machine  Design. 8vo,

Richard's  Compressed  Air zamo,

Robinson's  Principles  of  Mechanism 8vo,

Schwamb  and  Merrill's  Elements  of  Mechanism 8vo,

Smith's  (O.)  Press-working  of  Metab 8vo,

Smith  (A.  W.)  and  Man's  Machine  Design 8to,

Thurston's  Treatise  on  Friction  and  Lost  Work  in  Machinery  and  Mill
Work 8vo,

Animal  as  a  Machine  and  Prime  Motor,  and  the  Laws  of  Energetics.  z2mo,

Warren's  Elements  of  Machine  Construction  and  Drawing 8to,

Weisbach's   Kinematics   and   the   Power   of   Transmission.     (Herrmann —
Klein.) 8vo,

Machinery  of  Transmission  and  Oovemors.     (Herrmann — Klein.).  .8vo,

Wolflf's  Windmill  as  a  Prime  Mover. 8vo,

Wood's  Turbines 8to,


5

oo

a

50

I

50

3

oo

5

oo

3

oo

4

oo

4

oo

5

oo

4

oo

z

so

z

50

3

50

3

00

2

00

3

00

z

50

3

00

3

oo

3

00

3

00

3

00

z

00

7

50

5

00

5

00

3

00

a

50

MATERIALS  OP  ENGINEERING.

*  BoTey's  Strength  of  Materiab  and  Theory  of  Structures. 8vo,  7  50

Burr's  Elasticity  and  Resistance  of  the  Materiab  of  Engineering.    6th  Edition.

Reset 8vo,  7  50

Church's  Mechanics  of  Engineering 8vo,  6  00

*  Greene's  Structural  Mechanics 8vo,  2  50

Johnson's  Materiab  of  Construction 8vo,  6  00

Keep's  Cast  Iron 8vo,  2  50

Lanza's  Applied  Mechanics 8vo,  7  50

Martens's  Handbook  on  Testing  Materiab.     (Henning.) 8vo,  7  50

Maurer's  Technical  Mechanics 8to,  4  00

Merriman's  Mechanics  of  Materiab 8vo,  5  00

Strength  of  Materiab zamo,  z  00

Metcalf's  Steel.     A  manual  for  Steel-users Z2mo,  a  00

Sabin's  Industrial  and  Artistic  Technology  of  Paints  and  Varnish 8vo,  3  00

Smith's  Materiab  of  Machines zamo,  z  00

Thurston's  Materiab  of  Engineering 3  vols.,  8to,  8  00

Part  II.     Iron  and  SteeL 8to,  3  50

Part  III.     A  Treatise  on  Brasses,  Bronzes,  and  Other  AUoys  and  their

Constituents 8vo,  a  50

Text-book  of  the  Materiab  of  Construction 8to,  5  00

Wood's  (De  V.)  Treatise  on  the  Resistance  of  Materiab  and  an  Appendix  on

tue  Preservation  of  Timber 8vo»  a  00

13


1

,8«.
.8>o

8mo
8to

Sto

.Svo

.8to
.Bto
,4lo
uno

.8.0

Sto

8»o

Sto

.S10

Sto

.Bto
.Svo

.Bto

Sto

81c
8to
.8vo
.Bm

.8to
Svo

.evD
8.0

1

1

I  50

1   JO

10  at
>  so

1  so
a  so

1    OS

1  50
I  50

3  SO
I  so

5  00

1  so

i

■ Wood-1  <«.  P.)  RiuUaa  CoUiatt:    Corroiioo  .od  EleeltolTiU  o»  In.

^^H                           steah-engihes  akd  boilers.

Camof*  Hiflettioiu  on  ihc  Halivt  Pontr  of  He»l     (ThoraWo.)

Da»H>a-|  ■■  Eoginecrinc  "  und  Electric  IrmclioD  PodMl-book, . . .  iGow

Ooss's  LMomoIiv*  Sjaiks.         ,

Beo«nwBr's  Indic.for  Pmciice  and  Sl>un-«iiciM  Eeoaomr

Tsblo  of  the  Ptopertiei  of  Siiunted  Steun  «D«  Otbai  Vapon  . . .

Pisy's  Twenty  Yttrt  with  Uu  lodicalor. , .        . Lari

(Oslirbere.t

Thonue's  Sltam-turbinea     ....      .    .

Tliut»lDn-s  H»ndr  T.biM. .

P«I  I,     BistDTT.  Slmcture.  ■nd  Tlmory

Banitbook  o(  Engine  and  Boiler  Tiiali,  and  tbe  Uh  of  UU  bidlcatc

Manual  of  Steam-hoile™.  theL.  DeMgns.  Consiniciion,  and  Opatatlon , . ,

Weisbach's  Heat.  Sleam.  and  Steam-engiEM.     (Du  Boil.)

Whilham'i  Slcain-eniine  Dusign

MECHAHICS   AHD  MACHlUfeRY.

Notes  and  E.ampiti  in  Hechaoici

ComploD'.  Firm  Leuoqi  in  Metal- working.  ...

Complon  and  De  Groodl't  Tbe  Speed  Lathe ,

1                                                                                                ^''

Cromwell's  Treatite  on  Toothed  Grearing zamo,  i  so

Treatise  on  Belts  and  Puneys. iamo»  '  so

Dana's  Text-book  of  Elementary  Mechanics  for  Colleges  and  Schools. . lamo,  i  50

Dingey's  Machinery  Pattern  Making lamo,  a  00

Dredge's  Record  of  the  TransporUtion  EzhibiU  BuiMing  of  the  WorU's

Columbian  Exposition  of  1893 4to  half  morocco»  5  00

Da  Bois's  Elementary  Principles  of  Mechanics:

VoL     L     Kinematics 8to.  3  50

VoL    II.    SUtics 8vo,  4  00

Mechanics  of  Engineering.    VoL    L Small  4to,  7  50

VoL  IL Small  4to,  10  00

Durley's  Kinematics  of  Machines. 8to.  4  00

Fitzgerald's  Boston  Machinist i6mo,  i  00

Flather's  Dynamometers,  and  the  Measurement  of  Power xamo*  3  00

Rope  Driring xamot  a  00

Goss's  Locomotive  Sparks 8to,  a  00

*  Greene's  Structural  Mechanics. 8to,  a  so

Hall's  Car  Lubrication. lamo,  z  00

Holly's  Art  of  Saw  Filing z8mo,  75

James's  Kinematics  of  a  Point  and  the  Rational  Mechanics  of  a  Particle.

Small  8to,  a  00

*  Johnson's  (W.  W.)  Theoretical  Mechanics. lamo,  3  00

Johnson's  (L.  J.)  Statics  by  Graphic  and  Algebraic  Methods. Sto*  a  00

Jones's  Machine  Design :

Part   I.     Kinematics  of  Machinery 8to,  i  50

Part  n.     Form,  Strength,  and  Proportions  of  Parts. 8to,  3  00

Kerr's  Power  and  Power  Transmission. 8vo,  a  00

Lanza's  Applied  Mechanics 8to,  7  50

Leonard's  Machine  Shop,  Tools,  and  Methods 8vo,  4  00

*  Lorenz's  Modem  Refrigerating  Machinery.     (Pope,  HaveUf  and  Dean.). 8to,  400
MacCord's  Kinematics;  or,  Practical  Mechanism. 8to,  5  00

Velocity  Diagrams 8vot  i  50

Maurer's  Technical  Mechanics 8to,  4  00

Merriman's  Mechanics  of  Materials Svo,  5  00

*  Elements  of  Mechanics lamo*  z  00

*  Michie's  Elements  of  Analirtical  Mechanics. 8vo,  4  00

Reagan's  Locomotires:  Simple,  Compound,  and  Electric xamo,  a  50

Reid's  Course  in  Mechanical  Drawing 8to,  a  00

Text-book  of  Mechanical  Drawing  and  Elementary  Machine  Design. 8vo,  3  00

Richards's  Compressed  Air lamo,  i  50

Robinson's  Principles  of  Mechanism. 8to,  3  00

Ryan,  Norris,  and  Hoxie's  Electrical  Machinery.    VoL  1 8vo,  a  50

Schwamb  and  Merrill's  Elements  of  Mechanism. 8to,  3  co

Sinclair's  Locomotire-engine  Running  and  Management. lamo,  a  00

Smith's  (0.)  Press-working  of  Metals 8to,  3  00

Smith's  (A.  W.)  Materials  of  Machines xamo»  z  00

Smith  (A.  W. )  and  Marx's  Machine  Design. 8to,  3  00

Spangler,  Greene,  and  liarshaL's  Elements  of  Steam-engineering 8to,  3  00

Thurston's  Treatise  on  Friction  and  Lost  Work  in    Machinery  and    Mill

Work 8vo,  3  00

Animal  as  a  Machine  and  Prime  Motor,  and  the  Lawc  of  Energetics.

zamo,  X  00

Warren's  Elements  of  Machine  Construction  and  Drawing 8vo,  7  50

Weisbach's  Kinematics  and  Power  of  Transmission.   (Herrmann — Klein.  ).8vo,  5  00

Machinery  of  Transmission  and  Governors.      (Herrmann — Klein. ).8vo,  5  00

Wood's  Elements  of  Analytical  Mechanics. 8vo,  3  00

Principles  of  Elementary  Mechanics. zamo,  z  as

Turbines. 8vo,  a  50

The  WorU's  Columbian  Exposition  of  z8q3 4to,  z  00

15


METALLURGY.


Eticsten's  UeUUurgr  <>(  Silver,  Gold,  oi


••  IIm's  LmiJ-
Kecp-a  Co.
KuDhardt'


Iron.


.olOi


LeChitellii'iHlgh-

HetcalTB  StecL  A  HuuKl  tc
Minel'!  Production  ol  Alumli
Robins  and  Unslcn's  Cyaold
Smiih-B  Uaiectils  ot  Uachloe
I  of  Engii


PoiUie  a  ccali  additiDiuL). . ,
:  Drtning  la  Euioix


SKcV-UHn

im  and  ill  lodutuial  Uh.     (Wilde.). .
Induttrj.     (Le  Clerc.)


Pari    II.

Part  HI,

Com

Ulko-i  Hodcll


In  Three  ParlB. 8

A  Treailse  oa  BiasuB,  Broniei.  and  Olhtr  AUon  and  tl

ilutnW..,    .  S

Eleclialj^ic  Copptr  ReflninB Bto.


MINERALOGY.


si  Virignia.


-Pockrl-lKioliti


Sto,


'e  Uintniatj.     (PenReld.). .

Clieiter's  Caialopje  of  Minetali

Clolb,
DicIlonaiT  of  the  namei  of  Uinet
Daca'i  Syiitm  of  MinrtaloBy. . .

Fitir  Apjirnilii  lo  Dinn's  Hew  "  S
Teit-book  of  Mineralogy.
Mlnitato  and  How  lo  Sludy  Then

Catalogue  of  American  Loraliiln  of  Hinerali. .Large  Sio.

Uannal  of  Mlreralagy  and  Pe ttognphy

cal  Addreates  on  Technical  Subtecti. .


Eakle'i  Mineral
Eeleiton's  Calnlc


i[  Mine


ock-foTmlni  Mine
Their  Occurricce


■h.  ISaith.).Sm«U»i


*  Penfleld'i  Holea  on  Delerminalire  Hlnerj

Ro«obii»ch's   Microscopical  Phytiogiaphy   c
(Iddinge.l

•  TlUnjau'i  Teil-book  of  lioporlanl  Minerals  a


!  Sock-making  Hlncr*^


fieard't  Ventilallcm  ol  Hlnei umo.

Boyd's  Reaoureei  of  South»«t  VlrginU f  *o,

Map  of  Southweal  Virginia Pocket-book  (oim

Douglas's  ODlechnlcAlAddreSKBonT«hnlcalSubJMt(. ,11100

•  Drlnker'a  Tunneling.  Eiplmive  Compounds,  and  Roc  i  Drills,  4U,lil.  mat.,

Eisslir'a  Modern  High  EiptoiiTes. 8*s

IB


SO

J  00        I


Goodyear's  Coal-mines  of  the  Western  Coast  of  the  United  States. iamo»  a  go.

Ihlsenc's  Manual  of  Mining 8to,  5  00

**  nes's  Lead-smeltinc.     (Poetafe  9c.  additional) lamo,  a  50

Ktinhardf  s  Practice  of  Ore  Dressing  in  Europe 8vo,  i  50

O'DriscoO's  Hotes  on  the  Treatment  of  Gold  Ores. ^o,  a  00

Robine  and  Lenglen's  Cyanide  Industry.     (Le  Clerc.) 8to,  4  00

*  Walke's  Lectures  on  Ezplosires. 8vo,  4  00

Wilson's  Cyanide  Processes. xamo,  z  50

Chlorination  Process. ! zamo,  i  50

Hydraulic  and  Placer  Mining lamo,  2  00

Treatise  on  Practical  and  Theoretical  Mine  Ventilation. lamo,  i  35


SANITARY  SCIENCE.

Bashore's  Sanitation  of  a  Country  House lamo,

Folwell's  Sewerage.     (Designing,  Construction,  and  Maintenance.) 8vo,

Water-supply  Engineering 8vo,

Fowler's  Sewage  Works  Analirses lamo,

Fuertes's  Water  and  Public  Health lamo,

Water-fihratiop  Works lamo,

Gerhard's  Guide  to  Sanitary  House-inspection i6mo,

Goodrich's  Economic  Disposal  of  Town's  Refuse Demy  8to,

Hazen's  Filtration  of  Public  Water-supplies 8to,

Leach's  The  Inspection  and  Analysis  of  Food  with  Special  Reference  to  State

Control 8vo,

Mason's  Water-supply.  (Considered  principally  from  a  Sanitary  Standpoint)  8to,

Examination  of  Water.     (Chemical  and  Bacteriological.) i2mo,

Ogden's  Sewer  Design lamo,

Prescott  and  Wlnslow's  Elements  of  Water  Bacteriology,  with  Special  Refer-
ence to  Sanitary  Water  Analysis i2mo,

*  Price's  Handbook  on  Sanitation i2mo,

Richards's  Cost  of  Food.     A  Study  in  Dietaries X2mo,

Cost  of  Living  as  Modified  by  Sanitary  Science z2mo,

Cost  of  Shelter 1 2mo,

Richards  and  Woodman's  Air.  Water,  and  Food  from  a  Sanitary  Stand-
point  8vo,

*  Richards  and  Williams's  The  Dietary  Computer Svo,

Rideal's  Sewage  and  Bacterial  Purification  of  Sewage Svo,

Turneaure  and  Russell's  Public  Water-supplies Svo,

Von  Behring's  Suppression  of  Tuberculosis.     (Bclduan.) z2mo,

Whipple's  Microscopy  of  Drinking-water Svo,

Winton's  Microscopy  of  Vegetable  Foods Svo,

WoodhuU's  Notes  on  Military  Hygiene i6mo,

*  Personal  H/glene i2mo,


MISCELLANEOUS.

De  Fursac's  Manual  of  Psychiatry.     (Rosanoff  and  Collins.).  . .  .Large  X2mo,  2  50
Emmons's  Geological  Guide-took  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Excursion  of  the

International  Congress  of  Geologists Large  fvo,  i  50

Fcrrel's  Popular  Treatise  on  the  Winds Svo  4  00

Haines's  American  Railway  Management i2mo,  2  50

Mott's  Fallacy  of  the  Present  Theory  of  Sound i6mo,  x  00

Ricketts's  History  of  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute.  X824-1894.  .Small  Svo,  3  oc

Rostoski's  Serum  Diagnosis.     (Bolduan.) i2mo.  i  00

Rotherham's  Emphasized  New  Testament Large  Svo,  2  00

17


I

eo

3

00

4

00

a

00

X

50

a

50

z

00

3  50

3

00

7  50

4

00

I

25

2

00

I

as

X

50

I

00

I

00

I

00

2

00

I

50

3

50

5

00

I

00

3

50

7

50

I

50

I

00

Steel's  Treatise  on  the  Diaeuet  of  the  Dog. 8to.  3  50

The  World's  Columbian  Exposition  of  xSga 4to,  z  00

Von  Behring's  Suppression  ot  Tuberculosis.    (BoUuan.) lamo,  z  00

Winslow's  Elements  of  Applied  Microscopy xamo.  z  50

Worcester  end  Atkinson.     Small  Hospitals.  Establishment  and  Maintenance;

Suggestions  for  Hospital  Architecture:  Plains  for  Small  Hospital.  lamo*  z  25


HEBREW  AlTD  CHALDEE  TEXT-BOOKS.

Onen's  Elementary  Hebrew  Grammar. zamo,  i  as

Hebrew  Chrestomathy 8to,  2  00

Gesenius's  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Lexicon  to  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.

(Tregelles.) Small  4to,  half  morocco,  5  00

Letteris's  Hebrew  Bibte. Svo.  a  as

18


LANE  MEDICAL  LIBRARY

STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  MEDICAL  CEPfTER

STANFORD.  CALIFORNIA  94J0J

FOR  RENEWAL:  PHONE  723-6691

DATE  DUE


APR  Z  1  ZOIIO
MAR  3  0  2W[
