For Lancelot Andrewes (T. S. Eliot, 1928)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1929 Faber edition (https://archive.org/details/bwb_O8-BQD-580)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 

https://archive.org/details/owb_O8-BQD-580 

COLLEGE OF SAN MATEO LIBRARY 

3 9367 03053217 8 

a cay " ny 
af ae 
eo 

FOR 
LANCELOT ANDREWES 
ESSAYS ON STYLE AND ORDER 

BY 
ES. ELIOT 

¥ * 
* * 
* “Thou, * 
* * 
ae Lord, Who walkest in the midst * 
* * 
* ~— of the golden candlesticks, remove not, 
* 
* 

we pray Thee, our candlestick out its 

* 
* 
* 
place; but set in order the things which 4 
* 

*K 

* are wanting among us, and strengthen 
* 

* those which remain, and are * 
* * 
x ready to die.” * 

* 4 x 
* * 

GARDEN CITY, N. Y. 
Lo2% 
DOUBLEDAY, DORAN 

AND COMPANY, INC. 

Copyright, 1928, 1929 
By Thomas Stearns Eliot 
Copyright, 1927, 1928 
By The Dial Publishing Company, Inc. 
Copyright, 1928 
By The Forum Publishing Company 
All Rights Reserved 
Printed in the United States at 
The Country Life Press 
Garden City, N. Y. 

First Edition 

PREFACE 

Hab I WISHED TO PUBLISH A VOLUME OF COL- 
lected literary essays, this book would have 
been much bigger. The reader may be puzzled 
to know why I selected these articles and in this 
order. I wished to indicate certain lines of 
development, and to disassociate myself from 
certain conclusions which have been drawn 
from my volume of essays, The Sacred Wood. 
To make my present position clear I have three 
small books in preparation which will not be 
ready for a considerable time. Meanwhile, I 
have made bold to unite these occasional essays 
merely as an indication of what may be cx- 
pected, and to refute any accusation of playing 
*possum. The general point of view may be 
described as classicist in literature, royalist in 
politics, and anglo-catholic in religion. I am 
quite aware that the first term is completely 
vague, and easily lends itself to clap-trap; I 
am aware that the second term is at present 
without definition, and easily leads itself to 
what is almost worse than clap-trap, I mean 

[ vii ] 

PREFACE 

temperate conservatism; the third term does 
not rest with me to define. The uncommon 
reader who is interested by these scattered 
papers may possibly be interested by the small 
volumes which I have in preparation: The 
School of Donne, The Outline of Royalism, and The 
Principles of Modern Heresy. 

I wish to acknowledge my obligation to the 
editors of The Times Literary Supplement, Theology, 
The Dial (New York), and The Forum (New 
York), in which reviews these essays appeared. 

A lta fl he 

( viii ] 

CONTENTS 

I LANCELOT ANDREWES 3 
I JOHN BRAMHALL 27 
UI NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 47 
IV _- FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 69 
Vv BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME gI 
VI THOMAS MIDDLETON 109 

vil A NOTE ON RICHARD CRASHAW 129 

VUI THE HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT I4I1 

THe RicoT REVEREND FATHER IN Gop, LANCE- 
lot Bishop of Winchester, died on September 25, 
1626. During his lifetime he enjoyed a dis- 
tinguished reputation for the excellence of his 
sermons, for the conduct of his diocese, for his 
ability in controversy displayed against Cardi- 
nal Bellarmine, and for the decorum and de- 
votion of his private life. Some years after 
Andrewes’s death, Lord Clearendon, in his 
History of the Rebellion, expressed regret that 
Andrewes had not been chosen instead of 
Abbott to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, for 
thus affairs in England might have taken a 
different course. By authorities on the history of 
the English Church Andrewes is still accorded 
a high, perhaps the highest, place; among per- 
sons interested in devotion his ‘‘Private Prayers” 
are not unknown. But among those persons 
who read sermons, if they read them at all, as 
specimens of English prose, Andrewes is little 
known. His sermons are too well built to be 
readily quotable; they stick too closely to the 
point to be entertaining. Yet they rank with 
the finest English prose of their time, of any 
time. Before attempting to remove the remains 

[3] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of his reputation to a last resting place in the 
dreary cemetery of literature, it is desirable to 
remind the reader of Andrewes’s position in 
history. 

The Church of England is the creation not 
of the reign of Henry VIII or of the reign of 
Edward VI, but of the reign of Elizabeth. The 
via media which is the spirit of Anglicanism was 
the spirit of Elizabeth in all things; the last of 
the humble Welsh family of Tudor was the first 
and most complete incarnation of English 
policy. The taste or sensibility of Elizabeth, 
developed by her intuitive knowledge of the 
right policy for the hour and her ability to 
choose the right men to carry out that policy, 
determined the future of the English Church. 
In its persistence in finding a mean between 
Papacy and Presbytery the English Church 
under Elizabeth became something repre- 
sentative of the finest spirit of England of the 
time. It came to reflect not only the personality 
of Elizabeth herself, but the best community of 
her subjects of every rank. Other religious im- 
pulses, of varying degrees of spiritual value, 

[4] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

were to assert themselves with greater vehe- 
mence during the next two reigns. But the 
Church at the end of the reign of Elizabeth, 
and as developed in certain directions under 
the next reign, was a masterpiece of ecclesi- 
astical statesmanship. The same authority that 
made use of Gresham, and of Walsingham, and 
of Cecil, appointed Parker to the Archbishopric 
of Canterbury; the same authority was later to 
appoint Whitgift to the same office. 

To the ordinary cultivated student of civiliza- 
tion the genesis of a Church is of little interest, 
and at all events we must not confound the 
history of a Church with its spiritual meaning. 
To the ordinary observer the English Church 
in history means Hooker and Jeremy Taylor 
—and should mean Andrewes also: it means 
George Herbert, and it means the churches of 
Christopher Wren. This is not an error: a 
Church is to be judged by its intellectual fruits, 
by its influence on the sensibility of the most 
sensitive and on the intellect of the most in- 
telligent, and it must be made real to the eye by 
monuments of artistic merit. The English 

[5] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Church has no literary monument equal to 
that of Dante, no intellectual monument equal 
to that of St. Thomas, no devotional monu- 
ment equal to that of St. John of the Cross, no 
building so beautiful as the Cathedral of Mo- 
dena or the basilica of St. Zeno in Verona. 
But there are those for whom the City churches 
are as precious as any of the four hundred odd 
churches in Rome which are in no danger of 
demolition, and for whom St. Paul’s, in com- 
parison with St. Peter’s, is not lacking in 
decency; and the English devotional verse of 
the seventeenth century—admitting the one 
difficult case of conversion, that of Crashaw— 
finer than that of any other country or religion 
at the time. 

The intellectual achievement and the prose 
style of Hooker and Andrewes came to com- 
plete the structure of the English Church as the 
philosophy of the thirteenth century crowns 
the Catholic Church. To make this statement 
is not to compare the “Laws of Ecclesiastical 
Polity” with the “Summa.” The seventeenth 
century was not an age in which the Churches 

[6] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

occupied themselves with metaphysics, and 
none of the writings of the fathers of the Eng- 
lish Church belongs to the category of specu- 
lative philosophy. But the achievement of 
Hooker and Andrewes was to make the English 
Church more worthy of intellectual assent. No 
religion can survive the judgment of history 
unless the best minds of its time have collabo- 
rated in its construction; if the Church of 
Elizabeth is worthy of the age of Shakespeare 
and Jonson, that is because of the work of 
Hooker and Andrewes. 

The writings of both Hooker and Andrewes 
illustrate that determination to stick to essen- 
tials, that awareness of the needs of the time, 
the desire for clarity and precision on matters 
of importance, and the indifference to matters 
indifferent, which was the general policy of 
Elizabeth. These characteristics are illustrated 
in the definition of the Church in the second 
book of the “Ecclesiastical Polity.” (“The 
Church of Christ which was from the beginning 
is and continueth until the end.”) And in both 
Hooker and Andrewes—the latter the friend 

[7] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

and intimate of Isaac Casaubon—we find also 
that breadth of culture, an ease with humanism 
and Renaissance learning, which helped to 
put them on terms of equality with their Conti- 
nental antagonists and to elevate their church 
above the position of a local heretical sect. They 
were fathers of a national Church and they 
were Europeans. Compare a sermon of An- 
drewes with a sermon by another earlier master, 
Latimer. It is not merely that Andrewes knew 
Greek, or that Latimer was addressing a far 
less cultivated public, or that the sermons of 
Andrewes are peppered with allusion and quo- 
tation. It is rather that Latimer, the preacher of 
Henry VIII and Edward VI, is merely a 
Protestant; but the voice of Andrewes is the 
voice of a man who has a formed visible 
Church behind him, who speaks with the old 
authority and the new culture. It is the differ- 
ence of negative and positive: Andrewes is the 
first great preacher of the English Catholic 
Church. 

The sermons of Andrewes are not easy read- 
ing. They are only for the reader who can ele- 

[8] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

vate himself to the subject. The most -onspicu- 
ous qualities of the style are three: ordonnance, 
or arrangement and structure, precision in the 
use of words, and relevant intensity. The last 
remains to be defined. All of them are best 
elucidated by comparison with a prose which is 
much more widely known, but to which I be- 
lieve that we must assign a lower place—that 
of Donne. Donne’s sermons, or fragments from 
Donne’s sermons, are certainly known to hun- 
dreds who have hardly heard of Andrewes; and 
they are known precisely for the reasons because 
of which they are inferior to those of Andrewes. 
In the introduction to an admirable selection 
of passages from Donne’s sermons, which was 
published a few years ago by the Oxford Press, 
Mr. Logan Pearsall Smith, after “trying to ex- 
plain Donne’s sermons and account for them in 
a satisfactory manner,”’ observes: 

And yet in these, as in his poems, there remains 
something baffling and enigmatic which still eludes 
our last analysis. Reading these old hortatory and 
dogmatic pages, the thought suggests itself that 
Donne is often saying something else, something 

[9] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

poignant and personal, and yet, in the end, in- 
communicable to us. 

We may cavil at the word ‘“‘incommunicable,” 
and pause to ask whether the incommunicable 
is not often the vague and unformed; but the 
statement is essentially right. About Donne 
there hangs the shadow of the impure motive; 
and impure motives lend their aid to a facile 
success. He is a little of the religious spellbinder, 
the Reverend Billy Sunday of his time, the 
flesh-creeper, the sorcerer of emotional orgy. 
We emphasize this aspect to the point of the 
grotesque. Donne had a trained mind; but 
without belittling the intensity or the profundity 
of his experience, we can suggest that this ex- 
perience was not perfectly controlled, and that 
he lacked spiritual discipline. 

But Bishop Andrewes is one of the community 
of the born spiritual, one 

che in questo mondo, 
contemplando, gusto di quella pace. 
Intellect and sensibility were in harmony; and 
hence arise the particular qualities of his style. 

[ 10 ] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Those who would prove this harmony would 
do well to examine, before proceeding to the 
sermons, the volume of Preces Private. This 
book, composed by him for his private de- 
votions, was printed only after his death; a few 
manuscript copies may have been given away 
during his lifetime—one bears the name of 
William Laud. It appears to have been written 
in Latin and translated by him into Greek; 
some of it is in Hebrew; it has been several times 
translated into English. The most recent edition 
is the translation of F. E. Brightman, with an 
interesting introduction, in 1903 (Methuen). 
They are almost wholly an arrangement of 
Biblical texts, and of texts from elsewhere in 
Andrewes’s immense theological reading. Canon 
Brightman has a paragraph of admirable criti- 
cism of these prayers which deserves to be 
quoted in full: 

But the structure is not merely an external 
scheme or framework: the internal structure is as 
close as the external. Andrewes develops an idea 
he has in his mind: every line tells and adds some- 
thing. He does not expatiate, but moves forward: 

[11] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

if he repeats, it is because the repetition has a real 
force of expression; if he accumulates, each new 
word or phrase represents a new development, a 
substantive addition to what he is saying. He as- 
similates his material and advances by means of it. 
His quotation is not decoration or irrelevance, but 
the matter in which he expresses what he wants to 
say. His single thoughts are no doubt often sug- 
gested by the words he borrows, but the thoughts 
are made his own, and the constructive force, the 
fire that fuses them, is his own. And this internal, 
progressive, often poetic structure is marked out- 
wardly. The editions have not always reproduced 
this feature of the Preces, nor perhaps is it possible 
in any ordinary page to represent the structure 
adequately; but in the manuscript the intention is 
clear enough. The prayers are arranged, not merely 
in paragraphs, but in lines advanced and recessed, 
so as in a measure to mark the inner structure and 
the steps and stages of the movement. Both in 
form and in matter Andrewes’s prayers may often 
be described rather as hymns. 

The first part of this excellent piece of criticism 
may be applied equally well to the prose of 
Andrewes’s sermons. The prayers themselves, 
which, as Canon Brightman seems to hint, 
should take for Anglicans a place beside the 

[12] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Exercises of St. Ignatius and the works of St. 
Francois de Sales, illustrate the devotion to 
private prayer (Andrewes is said to have 
passed nearly five hours a day in prayer) and 
to public ritual which Andrewes bequeathed 
to William Laud; and his passion for order in 
religion is reflected in his passion for order in 
prose. 

Readers who hesitate before the five large 
volumes of Andrewes’s sermons in The Library 
of Anglo-Catholic Theology may find their intro- 
duction more easy through the Seventeen Sermons 
on the Nativity, which were published separately 
in a small volume by Griffith, Farran, Okeden 
and Welsh, in The Ancient and Modern Library 
of Theological Literature, and which can still be 
picked up here and there. It is an additional 
advantage that these sermons are all on the 
same subject, the Incarnation; they are the 
Christmas Day sermons preached before King 
James between 1605 and 1624. And in the ser- 
mons preached before King James, himself a 
theologian, Andrewes was not hampered as he 
sometimes was in addressing more popular 

[ 13] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

audiences. His erudition had full play, and his 
erudition is essential to his originality. 

Bishop Andrewes, as was hinted above, tried 
to confine himself in his sermons to the eluci- 
dation of what he considered essential in dogma; 
he said himself that in sixteen years he had 
never alluded to the question of predestination, 
to which the Puritans, following their conti- 
nental brethren, attached so much importance. 
The Incarnation was to him an essential dogma, 
and we are able to compare seventeen develop- 
ments of the same idea. Reading Andrewes on 
such a theme is like listening to a great Hellenist 
expounding a text of the “Posterior Analytics”’: 
altering the punctuation, inserting or removing 
a comma or a semi-colon to make an obscure 
passage suddenly luminous, dwelling on a single 
word, comparing its use in its nearer and in its 
most remote contexts, purifying a disturbed or 
cryptic lecture-note into lucid profundity. 
To persons whose minds are habituated to feed 
on the vague jargon of our time, when we have 
a vocabulary for everything and exact ideas 
about nothing—when a word half-understood, 

[14] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

torn from its place in some alien or half- 
formed science, as of psychology, conceals 
from both writer and reader the utter meaning- 
lessness of a statement, when all dogma is in 
doubt except the dogmas of sciences of which 
we have read in the newspapers, when the 
language of theology itself, under the influence 
of an undisciplined mysticism of popular 
philosophy, tends to become a language of 
tergiversation—Andrewes may seem pedantic 
and verbal. It is only when we have saturated 
ourselves in his prose, followed the movement 
of his thought, that we find his examination of 
words terminating in the ecstasy of assent. 
Andrewes takes a word and derives the world 
from it; squeezing and squeezing the word 
until it yields a full juice of meaning which 
we should never have supposed any word to 
possess. In this process the qualities which 
we have mentioned, of ordonnance and pre- 
cision, are exercised. 

Take, almost at random, a passage from 
Andrewes’s exposition of the text “That there 
is born unto you this day a Saviour, Which is 

[15] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Christ the Lord, in the City of David” (Luke ii, 
10, 11). Any passage that we can choose must 
be torn violently from its context. 

Who is it? Three things are said of this Child by 
the Angel. (1) He is “‘a Saviour.” (2) ‘Which is 
Christ.” (3) ‘“‘Christ the Lord.” Three of his titles, 
well and orderly inferred one of another by good 
consequence. We cannot miss one of them; they be 
necessary all. Our method on earth is to begin with 
great; in heaven they begin with good first. 

First, then, “a Saviour’’; that is His name, Jesus, 
Soter; and in that Name His benefit, Salus, “‘saving 
health or salvation.”” Such a name as the great 
Orator himself saith of it, Soter, hoc quantum est? 
Ita magnum est ut latino uno verbo exprimi non possit. 
“This name Saviour is so great as no one word can 
express the force of it.” 

But we are not so much to regard the ecce how 
great it is, as gaudium what joy is in it; that is the 
point we are to speak to. And for that, men may 
talk what they will, but sure there is no joy in the 
world to the joy of a man saved; no joy so great, no 
news so welcome, as to one ready to perish, in case 
of a lost man, to hear of one that will save him. In 
danger of perishing by sickness, to hear of one will 
make him well again; by sentence of the law, of 
one with a pardon to save his life; by enemies, of 
one that will rescue and set him in safety. Tell any 

[ 16 ] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of these, assure them but of a Saviour, it is the best 
news he ever heard in his life. There is joy in the 
name of a Saviour. And even this way, this Child 
is a Saviour too. Potest hoc facere, sed hoc non est opus 
Ejus. ‘““This He can do, but this is not His work”; 
a farther matter there is, a greater salvation He 
came for. And it may be we need not any of these; 
we are not presently sick, in no fear of the law, in 
no danger of enemies. And it may be, if we were, 
we fancy to ourselves to be relieved some other way. 
But that which He came for, that saving we need 
all; and none but He can help us to it. We have 
therefore all cause to be glad for the Birth of this 
Saviour. 

And then, after this succession of short sentences 
—no one is more master of the short sentence 
than Andrewes—in which the effort is to find 
the exact meaning and make that meaning live, 
he slightly but sufficiently alters the rhythm in 
proceeding more at large: 

I know not how, but when we hear of saving or 
mention of a Saviour, presently our mind is carried 
to the saving of our skin, of our temporal state, of 
our bodily life, and farther saving we think not of. 
But there is another life not to be forgotten, and 
greater the dangers, and the destruction more to 

[ard 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

be feared than of this here, and it would be well 
sometimes we were remembered of it. Besides cur 
skin and flesh a soul we have, and it is our better 
part by far, that also hath need of a Saviour; that 
hath her destruction out of which, that hath her 
destroyer from which she would be saved, and 
those would be thought on. Indeed our chief thought 
and care would be for that; how to escape the wrath, 
how to be saved from the destruction to come, 
whither our sins will certainly bring us. Sin it is will 
destroy us all. 

In this extraordinary prose, which appears to 
repeat, to stand still, but is nevertheless pro- 
ceeding in the most deliberate and orderly 
manner, there are often flashing phrases which 
never desert the memory. In an age of adven- 
ture and experiment in language, Andrewes is 
one of the most resourceful of authors in his 
devices for seizing the attention and impressing 
the memory. Phrases such as “Christ is no wild- 
cat. What talk ye of twelve days?” or ‘‘the word 
within a word, unable to speak a word,”’ do not 
desert us; nor do the sentences in which, before 
extracting all the spiritual meaning of a text, 
Andrewes forces a concrete presence upon us. 

[ 18 ] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Of the wise men come from the East: 

It was no summer progress. A cold coming they 
had of it at this time of the year, just the worst time 
of the year to take a journey, and specially a long 
journey in. The ways deep, the weather sharp, the 
days short, the sun farthest off, in solstitio brumali, 
“the very dead of winter.” 

Of “the Word made flesh,” again: 

I add yet farther; what flesh? The flesh of an 
infant. What, Verbum infans, the Word an infant? 
The Word, and not be able to speak a word? How 
evil agreeth this! This He put up. How born, how 
entertained? In a stately palace, cradle of ivory, 
robes of estate? No; but a stable for His palace, a 
manger for His cradle, poor clouts for His array. 

He will not hesitate to hammer, to inflect, 
even to play upon a word for the sake of driving 
home its meaning: 

Let us then make this so accepted a time in itself 
twice acceptable by our accepting, which He will 
acceptably take at our hands. 

We can now better estimate what is this that 

we have called relevant intensity, for we have 
had enough of passages from Andrewes to 

[19 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

recognize the extremity of his difference from 
Donne. 

Everyone knows a passage from a sermon of 
Donne’s, which is given by Mr. Pearsall Smith 
under the title of “I am Not all Here.” 

I am here speaking to you, and yet I consider by 
the way, in the same instant, what it is likely you 
will say to one another, when I have done, you are 
not all here neither; you are here now, hearing me, 
and yet you are thinking that you have heard a 
better sermon somewhere else of this text before; 
you are here, and yet you think you could have 
heard some other doctrine of downright Predesti- 
nation and Reprobation roundly delivered somewhere 
else with more edification to you; you are here, 
and you remember yourselves that now yee think 
of it: This had been the fittest time, now, when 
everybody else is at church, to have made such a 
private visit; and because you would bee there, you 
are there, 

after which Mr. Pearsall Smith very happily 
places the paragraph on “Imperfect Prayers”: 

A memory of yesterday’s pleasures, a feare of to- 
morrow’s dangers, a straw under my knee, a noise 
in mine eare, a light in mine eye, an anything a 

[ 20 ] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

nothing, a fancy, a Chimera in my braine, troubles 
me in my prayer. So certainely is there nothing, 
nothing in spirituall things, perfect in this world. 

These are thoughts which would never have 
come to Andrewes. When Andrewes begins his 
sermon, from beginning to end you are sure 
that he is wholly in his subject, unaware of 
anything else, that his emotion grows as he pene- 
trates more deeply into his subject, that he is 
finally ‘‘alone with the Alone,” with the mys- 
tery which he is seeking to grasp more and more 
firmly. One is reminded of the words of Arnold 
about the preaching of Newman. Andrewes’s 
emotion is purely contemplative; it is not 
personal, it is wholly evoked by the object of 
contemplation, to which it is adequate; his 
emotion is wholly contained in and explained by 
its object. But with Donne there is always the 
something else, the “baffling” of which Mr. 
Pearsall Smith speaks in his introduction. 
Donne is a “personality” in a sense in which 
Andrewes is not: his sermons, one feels, are a 
“means of self-expression.” He is constantly 
finding an object which shall be adequate to his 

[21] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

feelings; Andrewes is wholly absorbed in the 
object and therefore responds with the adequate 
emotion. Andrewes has the gout pour la vie 
spirttuelle, which is not native to Donne. On the 
other hand, it would be a great mistake to 
remember only that Donne was called to the 
priesthood by King James against his will, and 
that he accepted a benefice because he had no 
other way of making a living. Donne had a 
genuine taste both for theology and for re- 
ligious emotion; but he belonged to that class 
of persons, of which there are always one or 
two examples in the modern world, who seek 
refuge in religion from the tumults of a strong 
emotional temperament which can find no 
complete satisfaction elsewhere. He is not wholly 
without kinship to Huysmans. 

But Donne is not the less valuable, though 
he is the more dangerous for this reason. Of 
the two men, it may be said that Andrewes is 
the more medieval, because he is the more 
pure, and because his bond was with the 
Church, with tradition. His intellect was satis- 
fied by theology and his sensibility by prayer 

[ 22 ] 

LANCELOT ANDREWES 

and liturgy. Donne is the more modern—if we 
are careful to take this word exactly, without 
any implication of value, or any suggestion 
that we must have more sympathy with Donne 
than with Andrewes. Donne is much less the 
mystic; he is primarily interested in man. He is 
much less traditional. In his thought Donne 
has, on the one hand, much more in common 
with the Jesuits, and, on the other hand, much 
more in common with the Calvinists, than has 
Andrewes. Donne many times betrays the 
consequences of early Jesuit influence and of his 
later studies in Jesuit literature; in his cunning 
knowledge of the weaknesses of the human 
heart, his understanding of human sin, his skill 
in coaxing and persuading the attention of the 
variable human mind to Divine objects, and in 
a kind of smiling tolerance among his menaces 
of damnation. He is dangerous only for those 
who find in his sermons an indulgence of their 
sensibility, or for those who, fascinated by 
“personality” in the romantic sense of the word 
—for those who find in “personality” an 
ultimate value—forget that in the spiritual 

[ 23 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

hierarchy there are places higher than that of 
Donne. Donne will certainly have always more 
readers than Andrewes, for the reason that his 
sermons can be read in detached passages and 
for the reason that they can be read by those 
who have no interest in the subject. He has 
many means of appeal, and appeals to many 
temperaments and minds, and, among others, 
to those capable of a certain wantonness of the 
spirit. Andrewes will never have many readers 
in any one generation, and his will never be the 
immortality of anthologies. Yet his prose is not 
inferior to that of any sermons in the language, 
unless it be some of Newman’s. And even the 
larger public which does not read him may do 
well to remember his greatness in history—a 
place second to none in the history of the for- 
mation of the English Church. 

[24] 

% * 
% % 
* * 
* ok 
* II. * 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

* * a 
* * 
* * 
% * 

% 
% 
¥ x ex eK * 

ye 0 ae Ow bast a ai 
Pp Met Lane Name ss, 

oh 
4 9 
; 

2 le 

s 

years 

oT 
ihe 
: » 
v 
7 

hin ewnang eal 
i Letom fe ad dy ERIE 
. - pha 
iawn 

a I 

ie Me ngewe 

a tay 

‘ 
ae 
: 

fi ~y 
.* 

> 

Joun BraMHALL, BisHop oF DERRY UNDER 
Charles I and Primate of Ireland under Charles 
II, is not at all an easy subject for a biography. 
He was a great man; but either by defect of 
genius or by ill-luck he is not known as he 
should be known, and his works are not read 
as they should be read. Indeed, it is largely ill 
luck. Not only were his immense energy and 
ability divided among a number of important 
actions, so that he has never become the sym- 
bolical representative of anything; but some of 
his most important activity was exerted upon 
causes which are now forgotten. As Bishop of 
Derry, as the lieutenant of Wentworth and 
Laud, he did much to reform and establish the 
Irish Church and to bring it into conformity 
with the English Church; he saw his work largely 
undone by Cromwell; as Primate of Ireland 
during the first years of Charles II, and in his 
old age, he set to work to build it up again. Had 
his labours been in England instead of Ireland 
he might now be better remembered. His 
middle years were spent in exile; and perhaps 
it is the work he performed during these years, 
often in illness, danger, and vicissitudes, that 

127] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

should earn him particular gratitude from his 
Church. This is a chapter of Church history 
which is too little known; few people realize 
how near in those times the English Church 
came to perishing utterly, or realize that had 
the Commonwealth survived a few years longer 
the Church would have fallen into a disorder 
from which it might never have recovered. 
During the exile Bramhall was the stoutest in- 
heritor of the tradition of Andrewes and Laud. 

Dr. Sparrow-Simpson has treated the history 
of Bramhall’s career in Ireland and his activities 
abroad during the Commonwealth fully, but 
with a proper sense of proportion.! He leaves 
himself space to devote several chapters to 
Bramhall’s controversial writings; he is specially 
to be praised for the skill with which he had 
digested these writings and condensed and 
organized so much various information into two 
hundred and fifty-one pages. With the purely 
historical matter I am not competent to deal; 
Bramhall’s life includes an important part of the 

1Archbishop Bramhall. By W. J. Sparrow-Simpson, D.D. (In 
the English Theologians Series.) S.P.C.K. 

[ 28 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

history of the Church and the history of Eng- 
land. But there is still much interest to be found 
in Bramhall’s writings, and some of them are 
very much to the point at the present day. One 
part of his work that is of particular importance 
is his controversy with Hobbes. It is sometimes 
cited by historians of philosophy, but has never 
received the attention it deserves. Bramhall, as 
Dr. Sparrow-Simpson points out, had by no 
means the worst of the argument, and the whole 
debate, with the two striking and opposed per- 
sonalities engaged in it, throws light upon the 
condition of philosophy and theology at that 
time. The most important of the questions of 
issue are two: the freedom of the will and the 
relation between Church and State. 

Thomas Hobbes was one of those ex- 
traordinary little upstarts whom the chaotic 
motions of the Renaissance tossed into an 
eminence which they hardly deserved and have 
never lost. When I say the Renaissance I mean 
for this purpose the period between the decay of 
scholastic philosophy and the rise of modern 
science. The thirteenth century had the gift 

[ 29 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of philosophy, or reason; the later seventeenth 
century had the gift of mathematics, or science; 
but the period between had ceased to be rational 
without having learned to be scientific. There 
was nothing particularly new about the de- 
terminism of Hobbes; but he gave to his de- 
terminism and theory of sense perception a new 
point and piquancy by applying it, so to speak, 
almost to topical questions; and by his meta- 
phor of Leviathan he provided an ingenious 
framework on which there was some peg or 
other to hang every question of philosophy, 
psychology, government, and economics. 
Hobbes shows considerable ingenuity and 
determination in his attempt to carry out his 
theory of the Will rigorously to explain the 
whole and every aspect of human behaviour. 
It is certain that in the end he lands himself 
in sophistries. But at the time of Hobbes and 
Bramhall, and indeed ever since until recently, 
it was impossible that a controversy on this 
subject should keep to the point. For a philoso- 
pher like Hobbes has already a mixed attitude, 
partly philosophic and partly scientific; the 
{ 30 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

philosophy being in decay and the science im- 
mature. Hobbes’s philosophy is not so much a 
philosophy as it is an adumbration of the uni- 
verse of material atoms regulated by laws of 
motion which formed the scientific view of the 
world from Newton to Einstein. Hence there is 
quite naturally no place in Hobbes’s universe 
for the human will; what he failed to see is that 
there is no place in it for consciousness either, 
or for human beings. So his only philosophical 
theory is a theory of sense perception, and his 
psychology leaves no place in the world for this 
theory of government. His theory of government 
has no philosophic basis: it is merely a collection 
of discreet opinions, prejudices, and genuine 
reflections upon experience which are given a 
spurious unity by a shadowy metaphysic. 

The attitude of Hobbes toward moral phi- 
losophy has by no means disappeared from 
human thought; nor has the confusion between 
moral philosophy and a mechanistic psychology. 
There is a modern theory, closely akin to that 
of Hobbes, which would make value reside 
entirely in the degree of organization of natural 

[31] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

impulses. I cite the following passage from an 
important book by one of the most acute of 
younger psychologists: 

Anything is valuable which will satisfy an 
appetency without involving the frustration of some 
equal or more important appetency; in other words, 
the only reason which can be given for not satisfying 
a desire is that more important desires will thereby 
be thwarted. Thus morals become purely pru- 
dential, and ethical codes merely the expression 
of the most general schemes of expediency to which 
an individual or a race has attained.! 

And Mr. Bertrand Russell, in his book, What 
I Believe, p. 43, sings the same tune: 

The practical need of morals arises from the 
conflict of desires, whether of different people or 
of the same person at different times or even at one 
time. A man desires to drink, and also to be fit for 
his work next morning. We think him immoral if 
he adopts the course which gives him the smaller 
total satisfaction of desire. 

The difficulty with such theories? is that 
they merely remove the inherently valuable a 
1Richards, Principles of Literary Criticism, p. 48. 

2A thoroughgoing “ Behaviourism,” as of Professor Watson, 
is a different affair. 
[ 32] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

further degree; just as Hobbes’s Theory of Will 
removes freedom from the individual con- 
sidered as the object of psychology, but really 
implies the reality of freewill in society. It will 
be remembered that Hobbes wished to main- 
tain the activity of human legislation in his 
deterministic universe; so he considered that 
law acts as a deterrent force. He did not con- 
sider that if human laws themselves are created 
by the same necessity under which human 
beings act when encouraged or deterred by the 
laws, then the whole system ceases to have any 
meaning, and all values, including his own 
value of good government, disappear. 

It is not to be expected that the arguments 
advanced by Bramhall against this position 
should appear very powerful when opposed to 
the reasonings of modern disciples of Hobbes. 
But in their own time and place they were ex- 
cellent. I disregard that part of Bramhall’s 
reasoning which consists in showing that 
Hobbes’s system was incompatible with Chris- 
tianity. Hobbes was here in a very weak posi- 
tion of which the Bishop with praiseworthy 

[33] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

slyness took full advantage. Hobbes was un- 
doubtedly an atheist and could hardly have 
been unconscious of the fact; but he was no 
Spinoza, and would hardly have been willing 
to sacrifice his worldly prospects for the sake of 
establishing consistency in his argument. There- 
fore he has always the worst of the debate. But 
this is a minor point. Bramhall was able to meet 
Hobbes also on his own ground. His method of 
attack illustrates very clearly his type of mind. 
It was not a subtle mind: it had not the refine- 
ment necessary to make a scholastic meta- 
physician, nor was it the mind of a doctor of the 
Church who could develop and explicate the 
meaning of a dogma. It was essentially common 
sense and right instinct, a mind not gifted to 
discover truth but tenacious to hold it. It was 
typical of the best theological minds of that age. 
Hobbes suffers from not only a tactical but a 
real disadvantage in his confusion of the spheres 
of psychology and ethics. Bramhall is single- 
minded; he does not penetrate the real philo- 
sophical incoherence of Hobbes’s position; but 
he touches the point of practical importance 

[ 34] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

and implies the profounder objection to Hobbes 
when he says simply that Hobbes makes praise 
and blame meaningless. “If a man be born 
blind or with one eye, we do not blame him for 
it; but if a man have lost his sight by his in- 
temperance, we blame him justly.” This ob- 
jection is finally unanswerable. 

I have asserted that Hobbes’s psychological 
analysis of the human mind has no rational 
connection with his theory of the State. But 
it has, of course, an emotional connection; one 
can say that both doctrines belong naturally 
to the same temperament. Materialistic de- 
terminism and absolutist government fit into 
the same scheme of life. And this theory of the 
State shows the same lack of balance which is a 
general characteristic of philosophers after the 
Renaissance. Hobbes merely exaggerates one 
aspect of the good State. In doing so he de- 
veloped a particularly lamentable theory of the 
relation between Church and State. 

There is no question to which a man like 
Hobbes can give a less satisfactory answer than 
that of Church and State. For Hobbes thought 

[35] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

in extremes, and in this problem the extreme is 
always wrong. In the relation of Church and 
State, a doctrine when pushed to the extreme 
may even be transformed to the opposite of it- 
self. Hobbes has something in common with 
Suarez. 

Bramhall’s position on this subject is char- 
acteristic of his sense of realities and his ability 
to grasp what was expedient. He had also what 
Hobbes lacked, the historical sense, which is a 
gift not only of the historian, but of the efficient 
lawyer, statesman, or theologian. His account 
of the relations of the English kings with the 
Papacy, from the earliest times, and his se- 
lection of parallels from the history of conti- 
nental Europe, show both wide knowledge 
and great skill in argument. His thinking is a 
perfect example of the pursuit of the via media, 
and the va media is of all ways the most difficult 
to follow. It requires discipline and self-control, 
it requires both imagination and hold on reality. 
In a period of debility like our own, few men 
have the energy to follow the middle way in 
government; for lazy or tired minds there is 

[ 36 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

only extremity or apathy: dictatorship or com- 
munism, with enthusiasm or with indifference. 
An able Conservative writer, Mr. Keith Feiling, 
in his England under the Tudors and Stewarts, refers 
to Hobbes as “the acutest thinker of the age.”’ 
It would be equally true to say that he is the 
most eminent example in his age of a particu- 
larly lazy type of thinker. At any rate, the age 
owes a very great part of its distinction, both in 
England and in France, to thinkers of wholly 
the opposite type to Hobbes. 

The French Church in the time of Louis XIV 
(“‘al fut gallicain, ce siecle, et janseniste”’) resembled 
the English Church under the Stuarts in several 
respects. In both countries a strong and auto- 
cratic civil Government controlled and worked 
with a strongly national Church. In each 
country there was a certain balance of power; 
in France between the throne and the papacy; 
in England an internal balance of power be- 
tween strong personalities. There was much in 
common between Bramhall and Bossuet. But 
between Bramhall and Hobbes there is no 
sympathy whatever. Superficially their theories 

[37] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of the kingship bear some resemblance to each 
other. Both men were violently hostile to de- 
mocracy in any form or degree. Both men be- 
lieved that the monarch should have absolute 
power. Bramhall affirmed the divine right of 
kings: Hobbes rejected this noble faith, and 
asserted in effect the divine right of power, how- 
ever come by. But Bramhall’s view is not so 
absurdly romantic, or Hobbes’s so soundly 
reasonable, as might seem. To Bramhall the 
king himself was a kind of symbol, and his as- 
sertion of divine right was a way of laying upon 
the king a double responsibility. It meant that 
the king had not merely a civil but a religious 
obligation toward his people. And the kingship 
of Bramhall is less absolute than the kingship of 
Hobbes. For Hobbes the Church was merely a 
department of the State, to be run exactly as the 
king thought best. Bramhall does not tell us 
clearly what would be the duties of a private 
citizen if the king should violate or overturn the 
Christian religion, but he obviously leaves a 
wide expedient margin for resistance or justi- 
fied rebellion. It is curious that the system of 

[ 38 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

Hobbes, as Dr. Sparrow-Simpson has observed, 
not only insists on autocracy but tolerates 
unjustified revolution. Hobbes’s theory is in 
some ways very near to that of Machiavelli, 
with this important exception, that he has 
none of Machiavelli’s profound observation 
and none of Machiavelli’s limiting wisdom. 
The sole test and justification for Hobbes is in 
the end merely material success. For Hobbes 
all standards of good and evil are frankly 
relative. 

It is extraordinary that a philosophy so es- 
sentially revolutionary as that of Hobbes, and 
so similar to that of contemporary Russia, 
should ever have been supposed to give any 
support to Toryism. But its ambiguity is largely 
responsible for its success. Hobbes was a revo- 
lutionary in thought and a timid conservative 
in action; and his theory of government is con- 
genial to that type of person who is conserva- 
tive from prudence but revolutionary in his 
dreams. This type of person is not altogether 
uncommon. In Hobbes there are symptoms of 
the same mentality as Nietzsche: his belief in 

[ 39 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

violence is a confession of weakness. Hobbes’s 
violence is of a type that often appeals to 
gentle people. His specious effect of unity be- 
tween a very simple theory of sense perception 
and an equally simple theory of government 
is of a kind that will always be popular because 
it appears to be intellectual but is really 
emotional, and therefore very soothing to lazy 
minds. 

Bramhall’s abilities of thought and language 
are nowhere better displayed than in his Just 
Vindication of the English Church. As for the 
language of Bramhall, I think that Dr. Sparrow- 
Simpson does him less than justice. It is true 
that he employs in his vocabulary the most 
extraordinary confections of Latinity, but the 
catalogue of some of these expressions which 
Dr. Sparrow-Simpson gives would lead one to 
believe that they occur in every sentence. And 
although Bramhall is not an easy writer, his 
phrases are lucid and direct and occasionally 
have real beauty and rhythm. A theologian 
of his powers, at that period of English prose, 
a man trained on the theology and the style of 

[ 40 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

Bishop Andrewes, could hardly fail to write 
prose of distinction. 

Every sudden passionate heat or misunderstand- 
ing or shaking of charity amongst Christians, 
though it were even between the principal pastors 
of the Church, is not presently schism. As that be- 
tween Saint Paul and Barnabas in the Acts of the 
Apostles—who dare say that either of them were 
schismatic? or that between Saint Hierome and 
Ruffinus, who charged one another mutually with 
heresy; or that between Saint Chrysostom and 
Epiphanius, who refused to join in prayers; Saint 
Chrysostom wishing that Epiphanius might never 
return home alive, and Epiphanius wishing that 
Saint Chrysostom might not die a Bishop; both 
which things, by the just disposition of Almighty 
God, fell out according to the passionate and un- 
charitable desires of these holy persons; who had 
Christian charity still radicated in their hearts, 
though the violent torrent of sudden passion did 
for a time beat down all other respects before it. 

This is rather heavy going, and the word 
“radicated” is one of those blemishes to which 
Dr. Sparrow-Simpson calls attention; but the 
style has distinction. In prose style, as well as 
in theology, Bramhall is a link between the 

[41 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

generation of Andrewes and the generation of 
Jeremy Taylor. The prose of Bramhall is great 
prose only in the sense that it is good prose of a 
great epoch. I cannot believe that Bramhall was 
a great preacher. Andrewes and Donne and 
Taylor had a poetic sensibility; that is to say, 
they had the sensitiveness necessary to record 
and to bring to convergence on a theological 
point a multitude of fleeting but universal feel- 
ing. Their words linger and echo in the mind 
as Bramhall’s never do; we forget Bramhall’s 
phrases the moment we turn away from Bram- 
hall’s subject. 

But for ordonnance, logical arrangement, for 
mastery of every fact relevant to a thesis, Bram- 
hall is surpassed only by Hooker; and I am not 
sure that in the structure of the Just Vindication 
of the English Church he does not surpass even 
Hooker. And this book is no‘antiquity; it is a 
work which ought to be studied by anyone to 
whom the relation of Church and State is an 
actual and importunate problem. There could 
hardly be a greater difference than that be- 
tween the situation during the first half of the 

[ 42 ] 

JOHN BRAMHALL 

seventeenth century and the situation to-day. 
Yet the differences are such as to make the work 
of Bramhall the more pertinent to our problems. 
For they are differences in relation to a funda- 
mental unity of thought between Bramhall, and 
what he represents, and ourselves. 

[43] 

eid Oh a? ae E 
eof ST 
? TH i many 4 are! : D at aoe 
jae Wy set renhn-esnee'l oe 
a oie pine cut pauls: et hy 

7 > ve in ae Lecipr by fayod = irs 29 

7 Oh wet ok oF fps harass uy 
+ Me hed (le @: } - * 
7) ‘ 
- a 7 . : 
: 7 a! = 
bs : mm) e i a 
ah) : 
_ ot £ 
> 7 -_ q 
= pane - — ; 
C vary : 
7 i a ~ 
: ff 7 Le 
: a 9 
a i ne. - a 
% i 
* 
¥ os - 
aw f . 
a 
; >e ae toe 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

3 * * 
* * 
* * 
% * 

was Pela! 
* ek x x * 

i 

a; 

ASV AR? ie 

if . b a i li A j 
4 1 Vy ¥ A Net 
" ; aA 2 I a iy ay " 
A ra va eT } _ 

08 | ee heey 

“BECAUSE THIS IS TO BE ASSERTED IN GENERAL 
of men, that they are ungrateful, fickle, false, 
cowards, covetous, and as long as you succeed 
they are yours entirely.” This sentence, and 
similar sentences torn from their context, have 
rankled and worried the minds of men for four 
hundred years: the words of a retired, in- 
offensive, quiet Florentine patriot occupied in 
chopping trees and conversing with peasants on 
his meagre estate. Machiavelli has been the 
torment of Jesuits and Calvinists, the idol of 
Napoleons and Nietzsches, a stock figure for 
Elizabethan drama, and the exampler of a 
Mussolini or a Lenin. Machiavelli has been 
called a cynic; but there could be no stronger 
inspiration to “cynicism” than the history of 
Machiavelli’s reputation. No history could 
illustrate better than that of the reputation of 
Machiavelli the triviality and the irrelevance of 
influence. His message has been falsified by 
persistent romanticism ever since his death. 
To the humbug of every century Machiavelli 
has contributed. And yet no great man has been 
so completely misunderstood. He is always 
placed a little askew. He does not belong with 

[ 47 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Aristotle, or with Dante, in political theory; he 
attempted something different. He does not 
belong with Napoleon, and still less with Nietz- 
sche. His statements lend themselves to any 
modern theory of the State, but they belong 
with none. 

On the occasion of Niccolo Machiavelli’s 
anniversary, we should concern ourselves not so 
much with the history of his influence—which 
is merely the history of the various ways in 
which he has been misunderstood—as with the 
nature of his thought and the reasons why it 
should have had such influence. 

“So that in the first place I put for a general 
inclination of all mankind a perpetual and rest- 
less desire of power after power, that ceaseth 
only in death.” Such words of Hobbes seem 
at first to be uttered in the same tone as those 
quoted from Machiavelli; and the two names 
have often been brought together; but the 
spirit and purpose of Hobbes and of Machia- 
velli are wholly different. The Prince is often 
taken in the same sense as Leviathan. But 
Machiavelli is not only not a philosopher of 

[ 48 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

politics in the sense of Aristotle and Dante, he is 
still less a philosopher in the sense of Hobbes. 
He has the lucidity of Aristotle and the patriot- 
ism of Dante, but with Hobbes he has little in 
common. Machiavelli is wholly devoted—to his 
task of his own place and time; yet by surrender- 
ing himself to the cause of his particular State, 
and to the greater cause of the united Italy 
which he desired, he arrives at a far greater 
impersonality and detachment than Hobbes. 
Hobbes is not passionately moved by the 
spectacle of national disaster; he is interested 
in his own theory; and we can see his theory as 
partly an outcome of the weaknesses and dis- 
tortions of his own temperament. In the state- 
ments of Hobbes about human nature there is 
often an over-emphasis, a touch of spleen arising 
probably from some perception of the weakness 
and failure of his own life and character. This 
over-emphasis, so common in a certain type of 
philosopher since Hobbes’s time, may be rightly 
associated with cynicism. For true cynicism is a 
fault of the temperament of the observer, not a 
conclusion arising naturally out of the con- 

[ 49 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

templation of the object; it is quite the reverse 
of “facing facts.” In Machiavelli there is no 
cynicism whatever. No spot of the weaknesses 
and failures of his own life and character mars 
the clear glass of his vision. In detail, no doubt, 
where the meanings of words suffer a slight 
alteration, we feel a conscious irony; but his 
total view was unimpaired by any such emo- 
tional colour. Such a view of life as Machia- 
velli’s implies a state of the soul which may be 
called a state of innocence. A view like Hobbes’s 
is slightly theatrical and almost sentimental. The 
impersonality and innocence of Machiavelli is 
so rare that it may well be the clue to both his 
perpetual influence over men and the perpetual 
distortion which he suffers in the minds of men 
less pure than himself. 

We do not mean that Machiavelli is wholly 
cold and impassive. On the contrary, he pro- 
vides one more piece of evidence that great 
intellectual power arises from great passions. 
Machiavelli was not only a patriot, but his 
patriotic passion is the motor of his mind. It 
is all very well for writers like Lord Morley 

[ 50 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

to present Machiavelli as a stealthy inhuman 
surgeon, indifferent to moral exhortation and 
caring only for his clinical examination. Lord 
Morley had not, like Machiavelli, seen his 
country torn and ravaged, humiliated not only 
by foreign invaders, but by foreign invaders 
brought in by factious native princes. The 
humiliation of Italy was to Machiavelli a 
personal humiliation, and the origin of his 
thought and his writing. 

This intense nationalism by no means sup- 
pressed or distorted in Machiavelli the other 
moral or spiritual values. Only, he is in his 
writings occupied with these from one point 
of view always, occupied with them always in 
their relation to the State. His conception of 
the State is a large and generous one. He is the 
adviser of the Prince only because he cares 
passionately for the good of the common- 
wealth. For a man like Napoleon—who himself 
spoke highly of Machiavelli, and whose sense of 
reality made Machiavelli very sympathetic to 
him—Machiavelli could have felt only aversion; 
a foreign usurper and a violent egotist Na- 

[51] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

poleon would have seemed to him. And Machia- 
velli is not interested in the modern idea of 
Empire; a united Italy was the limit of his 
vision; and indeed we often feel, in reading the 
most important of his works, the Dzscourses on 
the Decades of Livy, that he has far more ad- 
miration for Republican Rome than for Im- 
perial Rome. His first thought always is for 
peace and prosperity and the happiness of the 
governed; but he knows quite well that this 
happiness does not reside merely in peace and 
wealth. It depends upon, and in turn supports. 
the virtue of the citizens. Civic virtue cannot 
exist without a measure of liberty, and he is 
constantly concerned with what relative liberty 
is obtainable. 

It seldom happens that the demands of a free 
people are either unreasonable or prejudicial to 
liberty, as they commonly proceed either from 
actual oppression, or the dread of it; but if that 
apprehension should prove groundless, it is no 
difficult matter to pacify them by a public confer- 
ence, where they are always ready to listen to any 
man of worth and authority that shall think fit to 
harangue them: for though the people may some- 

[52] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

times be in an error, as Tully says, they are open to 
better information, and soon convinced, when a 
person of whose veracity and integrity they have 
a good opinion undertakes to show them their mis- 
take. 

Machiavelli’s attitude toward religion and 
toward the religion of his country has often 
been the object of misunderstanding. His at- 
titude is that of a statesman, and is as noble as 
that of any statesman, qua statesman. In fact, 
it could be no other than it is. He is opposed 
neither to religion nor to the Catholic Church. 
He saw quite clearly, as he could hardly have 
avoided seeing, the corruption of the Church 
and the baseness of the eminent ecclesiastics 
with whom he had to do. And in the Mandra- 
gora, his brilliant comedy, he makes excellent 
fun of the more petty corruptions of the priest- 
hood. He saw, on the one hand, the extent to 
which the Church and the powerful individual 
nobles of the Church had contributed to the 
dissension and desolation of his country. But he 
maintained steadily that an established Church 
was of the greatest value to a State. 

[53 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

All these things being considered, I conclude, 
that the introduction of Religion at Rome by Numa 
was one of the causes that chiefly contributed to 
its grandeur and felicity: for Religion produced 
good order, and good order is generally attended 
with good fortune and success in any undertaking. 
And, as a strict observance of Divine worship and 
religious duties always tends to the aggrandizement 
of a State, so a neglect and contempt of them may 
be reckoned amongst the first causes of its ruin. 
For, where there is no fear of God, it must either 
fall to destruction, or be supported by the reverence 
shown to a good Prince; which indeed may sustain 
it for a while, and supply the want of Religion in 
his Subjects. But as human life is short, the Govern- 
ment must of course sink into decay when the virtue 
that upheld and informed it is extinct. 

And later (in the Discourses) he says still more 
positively, in words which Archbishop Laud 
would have approved: 

The rulers of all States, whether Kingdoms or 
Commonwealths, who would preserve their govern- 
ments firm and entire, ought above all things to 
take care that Religion is held in the highest vene- 
ration, and its ceremonies at all times uncorrupted 
and inviolable; for there is no surer prognostic of 

[54] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

impending ruin in any State, than to see Divine 
worship neglected or despised. 

And he goes on to show, in the same chapter, 
how the neglect of religion, occasioned by the 
vagaries of the Church of Rome, had contrib- 
uted to the ruin of Italy. It is quite possible 
that an established National Church, such as 
the Church of England, might have seemed to 
Machiavelli the best establishment for a Chris- 
tian commonwealth; but that a religious es- 
tablishment of some kind is necessary to a 
nation he is quite sure. If his words were true 
then they are true now. As for Machiavelli’s 
“personal” religion, it seems to have been as 
genuine and sincere as that of any man who is 
not a specialist in devotion but intensely a 
specialist in statesmanship; and he died with 
the ministrations of a priest about him. He 
saw quite clearly and knew instinctively that 
the efforts of a man like Savonarola could 
bring no good; his real objection was not to the 
spirit of Savonarola so much as to the contra- 
diction between the methods of Savonarola 

[55] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

and good statesmanship. But with a destructive 
mind like that of Voltaire the essentially con- 
structive mind of Machiavelli could have felt 
no community. 

In several chapters of The Prince and in the 
Art of War it is quite clear that in considering 
warfare Machiavelli is concerned always with 
the positive and the constructive. In warfare, 
and in military government and occupation, he 
is interested as much in the moral forces as in 
the technical devices. In his remarks on coloni- 
zation, on the manner of occupying a foreign 
territory, and in his repeated admonitions 
against the use of mercenary troops he is always 
holding up for admiration the patriot prince 
and the patriot citizenry. For the prince who 
is merely a general he has little patience; of an 
empire like that of Napoleon he would have 
said at the outset that it could not last. You 
cannot govern people for ever against their will; 
and some foreign peoples you cannot rule at 
all; but if you have to govern an alien and 
inferior people—a people inferior in the art of 
government—then you must use every means 

[ 56 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

to make them contented and to persuade them 
that your government is to their interest. Liberty 
is good; but more important is order; and the 
maintenance of order justifies every means. But 
his soldiers should be citizen soldiers, fighting 
for something really valuable; and the prince 
must be a statesman always, and a warrior only 
when necessary. 

Noaccount of Machiavelli’s views can be more 
than fragmentary. For though he is construc- 
tive he is not a system builder; and his thoughts 
can be repeated but not summarized. It is 
perhaps a character of his amazing exactness 
of vision and statement that he should have no 
“system”; for a system almost inevitably re- 
quires slight distortions and omissions, and 
Machiavelli would distort and omit nothing. 
But what is more curious is that no account of 
recapitulation of his thought seems to give any 
clue either to his greatness or to his great and 
grotesque reputation. When we first read him 
we receive the impression neither of a great 
soul nor of a demoniac intellect; but merely of 
a modest and honest observer setting down 

[57] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

matters of fact and comments so true as to be 
platitudinous. Only after slow absorption and 
the repeated contrasts which strike the mind 
between such honesty and the common decep- 
tions, dishonesties, and tergiversations of the 
human mind in general does his unique great- 
ness reach us. We do not imply that Machia- 
velli’s thought is a solitary exception. A French 
writer, M. Charles Benoist, has devoted a 
volume to Le machiavélisme avant Machiavel. 
There are parallels in his own time. Machia- 
velli could hardly have known Commynes, but 
the mind and the vision of the great Belgian 
diplomat who served Louis of France so long 
and so well are closely akin to those of Machia- 
velli. But Machiavelli, apart from his difference 
of method, is a far purer and more intense spirit. 

The passionate nationalism of Machiavelli 
was hardly likely to be understood in his own 
time; least of all by his compatriots. But the 
honesty of his mind is such as is hardly under- 
stood at any time. From the first his writings 
seem to have fascinated and terrified Europe. 
From the fascination people could not escape; 

[58] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

from the terror they escaped by turning him 
into a myth of terror. Even in Italy, as Char- 
bonnel shows in La pensee italienne au XVI siécle, 
his thought was immediately distorted. Popes 
and princes seem to have taken from his books 
what they wanted, but not what Machiavelli 
wanted to convey. But as his work penetrated 
farther abroad the greater became the distor- 
tion. In France, and especially among the 
Huguenots, it aroused the most violent re- 
joinders. He was treated as hardly more than 
a clever sycophant giving tips to tyrants on the 
best ways of oppressing their subjects. In 
France not only religious partisans but the 
politiques—notably Jean Bodin—fell foul of him. 
Bodin could not get over Machiavelli’s praise 
of Cesar Borgia in The Prince; although, to any- 
one who reads the book without prejudice, it 
should be quite clear in what respects and with 
what reservations Machiavelli bestows his 
praise. In England Thomas Cromwell and 
others admired his work, though it is quite un- 
likely that they understood him better. But the 
general impression of Machiavelli in England 

[59] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

was due to French influence, to the translation 
of the Contre-Machiavel of Gentillet. At every 
remove Machiavelli suffered. The civilization 
of France was in some respects below that of 
Italy, and the civilization of England had cer- 
tainly not caught up with the civilization of 
France. You have only to compare the develop- 
ment of prose style in the three languages. 
Machiavelli is a master of prose style of any 
age; his prose is mature. There is nothing com- 
parable in France until Montaigne, and Mon- 
taigne is not a classique for French criticism. 
And there is nothing comparable in England 
till Hobbes and Clarendon. But by that time, 
when the civilization of the three countries was 
much on a level, there is some deterioration 
everywhere. Montaigne is inferior to Machia- 
velli, and Hobbes is inferior to Montaigne. The 
dramatization of Machiavelli in England had 
been catalogued by Edward Meyer in his 
Machiavelli and the Elizabethan Drama, and 
recently discussed more philosophically by 
Mr. Wyndham Lewis in his extremely interest- 
ing study of Shakespeare, The Lion and the Fox. 

[ 60 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

The figure of Richard III is the testimony of the 
impression made by Machiavelli, and the falsity 
of this impression. 

We have therefore to inquire what there is 
about Machiavelli to impress the mind of 
Europe so prodigiously and so curiously, and 
why the European mind felt it necessary to 
deform his doctrine so absurdly. There are 
certainly contributing causes. The reputation 
of Italy as the home of fantastic, wanton and 
diabolical crime filled the French, and still 
more the English, imagination as they are now 
filled by the glories of Chicago or Los Angeles, 
and predisposed imagination toward the crea- 
tion of a mythical representative for this 
criminality. But still more the growth of 
Protestantism—and France, as well as England, 
was then largely a Protestant country— 
created a disposition against a man who ac- 
cepted in his own fashion the orthodox view 
of original sin. Calvin, whose view of humanity 
was far more extreme, and certainly more false, 
than that of Machiavelli, was never treated 
to such opprobrium; but when the inevitable 

[61 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

reaction against Calvinism came out of Calvin- 
ism, and from Geneva, in the doctrine of 
Rousseau, that, too, was hostile to Machiavelli. 
For Machiavelli is a doctor of the mean, and the 
mean is always insupportable to partisans of the 
extreme. A fanatic can be tolerated. The failure 
of a fanaticism such as Savonarola’s ensures its 
toleration by posterity, and even approving 
patronage. But Machiavelli was no fanatic; he 
merely told the truth about humanity. The 
world of human motives which he depicts is 
true—that is to say, it is humanity without the 
addition of superhuman Grace. It is therefore 
tolerable only to persons who have also a defi- 
nite religious belief; to the effort of the last 
three centuries to supply religious belief by 
belief in Humanity the creed of Machiavelli 
is insupportable. Lord Morley voices the 
usual modern hostile admiration of Machiavelli 
when he intimates that Machiavelli saw very 
clearly what he did see, but that he saw only 
half of the truth about human nature. What 
Machiavelli did not see about human nature 
is the myth of human goodness which for 

[ 62 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

liberal thought replaces the belief in Divine 
Grace. 

It is easy to admire Machiavelli in a senti- 
mental way. It is only one of the sentimental 
and histrionic poses of human nature—and 
human nature is incorrigibly histrionic—to 
pose as a “realist,” a person of “‘no nonsense,” 
to admire the “brutal frankness” or the “‘cyni- 
cism” of Machiavelli. This is a form of self- 
satisfaction and self-deception, which merely 
propagates the Jew of Malta-Nietzsche myth 
of Machiavelli. In Elizabethan England the 
reputation of Machiavelli was merely manipu- 
lated unconsciously to feed the perpetually 
recurring tendency to Manichzan heresy: the 
desire for a devil to worship. The heretical 
impulses remain fairly constant; they recur in 
the Satan of Milton and the Cain of Byron. 
But with these indulgences of human frailties 
Machiavelli has no traffic. He had none of the 
instinct to pose; and therefore human beings, 
in order to accept him at all, had to make him 
into a dramatic figure. His reputation is the 
history of the attempt of humanity to protect 

[ 63 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

itself, by secreting a coating of falsehood, 
against any statement of the truth. 

It has been said, in a tone of reproach, that 
Machiavelli makes no attempt “to persuade.” 
Certainly he was no prophet. For he was con- 
cerned first of all with truth, not with per- 
suasion, which is one reason why his prose is 
great prose, not only of Italian but a model of 
style for any language. He is a partial Aristotle 
of politics. But he is partial not because his 
vision is distorted or his judgment biased, or 
because of any lack of moral interest, but be- 
cause of his sole passion for the unity, peace, 
and prosperity of his country. What makes him 
a great writer, and for ever a solitary figure, is 
the purity and single-mindedness of his pas- 
sion. No one was ever less ‘Machiavellian’ 
than Machiavelli. Only the pure in heart can 
blow the gaff on human nature as Machiavelli 
has done. The cynic can never do it; for the 
cynic is always impure and sentimental. But it 
is easy to understand why Machiavelli was not 
himself a successful politician. For one thing, 
he had no capacity for self-deception or self- 

[ 64 ] 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

dramatization. The recipe dors ton sommeil de 
brute is applied in many forms, of which Calvin 
and Rousseau give two variations; but the 
utility of Machiavelli is his perpetual summons 
to examination of the weakness and impurity of 
the soul. We are not likely to forget his political 
lessons, but his examination of conscience may 
be too easily overlooked. 

[65] 

% Ox 
x * * Key 
* % 
* *% 
* * 
* * 

IV. * 

FRANCIS HERBERT 
BRADLEY 

IT Is UNUSUAL THAT A BOOK SO FAMOUS AND SO 
influential should remain out of print so long 
as Bradley’s Ethical Studies.1 The one edition 
appeared in 1876: Bradley’s refusal to reprint it 
never wavered. In 1893, in a footnote in Appear- 
ance and Reality, and in words characteristic of 
the man, he wrote: “I feel that the appearance 
of other books, as well as the decay of those 
superstitions against which largely it was 
directed, has left me free to consult my own 
pleasure in the matter.”’ The dates of his three 
books, the Ethical Studies in 1876, the Principles 
of Logic in 1883, and Appearance and Reality in 
1893, leave us in no doubt that his pleasure was 
the singular one of thinking rather than the 
common one of writing books. And Bradley 
always assumed, with what will remain for 
those who did not know him a curious blend 
of humility and irony, an attitude of extreme 
diffidence about his own work. His Ethical 
Studies, he told us (or told our fathers), did not 
aim at “the construction of a system of Moral 
Philosophy.” The first words of the preface to 

1Ethical Studies. By F. H. Bradley, O.M., LL.D. Second 
Edition. (Oxford: Clarendon Press. London: Milford.) 

[ 69 J 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

his Principles of Logic are: ““The following work 
makes no claim to supply any systematic treat- 
ment of logic.” He begins the preface to Appear- 
ance and Reality with the words: “I have de- 
scribed the following work as an essay in 
metaphysics. Neither in form nor extent does it 
carry out the idea of a system.” The phrase for 
each book is almost the same. And many readers 
having in mind Bradley’s polemical irony and 
his obvious zest in using it, his habit of dis- 
comfiting an opponent with a sudden profes- 
sion of ignorance, of inability to understand, 
or of incapacity for abstruse thought, have con- 
cluded that this is all a mere pose—and even a 
somewhat unscrupulous one. But deeper study 
of Bradley’s mind convinces us that the modesty 
is real, and his irony the weapon of a modest 
and highly sensitive man. Indeed, if this had 
been a pose it would never have worn so well as 
it has. We have to consider, then, what is the 
nature of Bradley’s influence and why his 
writings and his personality fascinate those 
whom they do fascinate; and what are his claims 
to permanence. 

[70] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

Certainly one of the reasons for the power he 
still exerts, as well as an indubitable claim to 
permanence, is his great gift of style. It is for his 
purposes—and his purposes are more varied 
than is usually supposed—a perfect style. Its 
perfection has prevented it from cutting any 
great figure in prose anthologies and literature 
manuals, for it is perfectly welded with the 
matter. Ruskin’s works are extremely readable 
in snippets even for many who take not a 
particle of interest in the things in which Ruskin 
was so passionately interested. Hence he sur- 
vives in anthologies, while his books have fallen 
into undue neglect. Bradley’s books can’ never 
fall into this neglect because they will never rise 
to this notoriety; they come to the hands only of 
those who are qualified to treat them with 
respect. But perhaps a profounder difference 
between a style like Bradley’s and a style like 
Ruskin’s is a greater purity and concentration 
of purpose. One feels that the emotional in- 
tensity of Ruskin is partly a deflection of some- 
thing that was baffled in life, whereas Bradley, 
like Newman, is directly and wholly that which 

[71] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

he is. For the secret of Bradley’s style, like that 
of Bergson—whom he resembles in this if in 
nothing else—is the intense addiction to an 
intellectual passion. 

The nearest resemblance in style, however, 
is not Ruskin but Matthew Arnold. It has not 
been sufficiently observed that Bradley makes 
use of the same means as Arnold, and for 
similar ends. To take first the most patent 
resemblance, we find in Bradley the same type 
of fun as that which Arnold has with his young 
friend Arminius. In The Principles of Logic there 
is a celebrated passage in which Bradley is 
attacking the theory of association of ideas ac- 
cording to Professor Bain, and explains how on 
this principle an infant comes to recognize a 
lump of sugar: 

A young child, or one of the lower animals, is 
given on Monday a round piece of sugar, eats it and 
finds it sweet. On Tuesday it sees a square piece 
of sugar, and proceeds to eat it... . Tuesday’s sen- 
sation and Monday’s image are not only separate 
facts, which, because alike, are therefore not the 
same; but they differ perceptibly both in quality 

[ 72 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

and environment. What is to lead the mind to take 
one for the other? 

Sudden at this crisis, and in pity at distress, there 
leaves the heaven with rapid wing a goddess 
Primitive Credulity. Breathing in the ear of the 
bewildered infant she whispers, The thing which 
has happened once will happen once more. Sugar 
was sweet, and sugar will be sweet. And Primitive 
Credulity is accepted forthwith as the mistress of 
our life. She leads our steps on the path of experi- 
ence, until her fallacies, which cannot always be 
pleasant, at length become suspect. We wake up 
indignant at the kindly fraud by which the goddess 
so long has deceived us. So she shakes her wings, and 
flying to the stars, where there are no philosophers, 
leaves us here to the guidance of—I cannot think 
what. 

This sort of solemn banter is exactly what an 
admirer of Arnold is ready to enjoy. But it is not 
only in his fun, or in his middle style, that 
Bradley is like Arnold; they are alike in their 
purple passages. The two following may be 
compared. By Arnold: 

And yet, steeped in sentiment as she lies, spread- 
ing her gardens to the moonlight, and whispering 
from her towers the last enchantments of the Middle 

[ 73 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Age, who will deny that Oxford, by her ineffable 
charm, keeps ever calling us nearer to the true 
goal of all of us, to the ideal, to perfection—to 
beauty, in a word, which is only truth seen from 
another side—nearer, perhaps, than all the science 
of Tibingen. Adorable dreamer, whose heart has 
been so romantic! who hast given thyself so prodi- 
gally, given thyself to sides and to heroes not mine, 
only never to the Philistines! home of lost causes, 
and forsaken beliefs, and unpopular names, and 
impossible loyalties! what example could ever so 
inspire us to keep down the Philistine in ourselves, 
what teacher could ever so save us from that bond- 
age to which we are all prone, that bondage which 
Goethe, in his incomparable lines on the death of 
Schiller, makes it his friend’s highest praise (and 
nobly did Schiller deserve the praise) to have left 
miles out of sight behind him—the bondage of 
“was uns alle bandigt, das Gemeine !”” 

The passage from The Principle of Logic is not so 
well known: 

It may come from a failure in my metaphysics, 
or from a weakness of the flesh which continues to 
blind me, but the notion that existence could be 
the same as understanding strikes as cold and 
ghost-like as the dreariest materialism. That the 
glory of this world in the end is appearance leaves 
the world more glorious, if we feel it is a show of 

[ 74] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

some fuller splendour; but the sensuous curtain is 
a deception and a cheat, if it hides some colourless 
movement of atoms, some spectral woof of im- 
palpable abstractions, or unearthly ballet of blood- 
less categories. Though dragged to such conclusions 
we cannot embrace them. Our principles may be 
true, but they are not reality. They no more make 
that Whole which commands our devotion than 
some shredded dissection of human tatters zs that 
warm and breathing beauty of flesh which our 
hearts found delightful. 

Any one who is at all sensitive to style will recog- 
nize the similarity of tone and tension and beat. 
It is not altogether certain that the passage 
from Bradley is not the better; at any rate such 
a phrase as Arnold’s “ineffable charm”’ has not 
worn at all well. 

But if the two men fought with the same 
weapons—and fundamentally, in spite of Brad- 
ley’s assault upon Arnold, for the same causes 
—the weapons of Bradley had behind them a 
heavier force and a closer precision. Exactly 
what Bradley fought for and exactly what he 
fought against have not been quite understood; 
understanding has been obscured by the dust of 

[75] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Bradley’s logical battles. People are inclined 
to believe that what Bradley did was to de- 
molish the logic of Mill and the psychology of 
Bain. If he had done that, it would have been a 
lesser service than what he has done; and if he 
had done that it would have been less of a 
service than people think, for there is much that 
is good in the logic of Mill and the psychology 
of Bain. But Bradley did not attempt to de- 
stroy Mill’s logic. Any one who reads his own 
Principles will see that his force is directed 
not against Mill’s logic as a whole but only 
against certain limitations, imperfections and 
abuses. He left the structure of Mill’s logic 
standing, and never meant to do anything else. 
On the other hand, the Ethical Studies are not 
merely a demolition of the Utilitarian theory of 
conduct but an attack upon the whole Utili- 
tarian mind. For Utilitarianism was, as every 
reader of Arnold knows, a great temple in 
Philistia. And of this temple Arnold hacked at 
the ornaments and cast down the images, 
and his best phrases remain for ever gibing and 
scolding in our memory. But Bradley, in his 

[ 76 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

philosophical critique of Utilitarianism, under- 
mined the foundations. The spiritual descend- 
ants of Bentham have built anew, as they al- 
ways will; but at least, in building another 
temple for the same worship, they have had to 
apply a different style of architecture. And this 
is the social basis of Bradley’s distinction, and 
the social basis is even more his claim to our 
gratitude than the logical basis: he replaced a 
philosophy which was crude and raw and 
provincial by one which was, in comparison, 
catholic, civilized, and universal. True, he was 
influenced by Kant and Hegel and Lotze. But 
Kant and Hegel and Lotze are not so despic- 
able as some enthusiastic medievalists would 
have us believe, and they are, in comparison 
with the school of Bentham, catholic and civil- 
ized and universal. In fighting the battles that 
he fought in the ’seventies and ’eighties Brad- 
ley was fighting for a European and ripened and 
wise philosophy, against an insular and imma- 
ture and cranky one; the same battle that 
Arnold was fighting against the British Banner, 
Judge Edmonds, Newman Weeks, Deborah 

[77] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Butler, Elderess Polly, Brother Noyes, Mr. 
Murphy, the Licensed Victuallers and the 
Commercial Travellers. 

It is not to say that Arnold’s work was vain 
if we say that it is to be done again; for we must 
know in advance, if we are prepared for that 
conflict, that the combat may have truces but 
never a peace. If we take the widest and wisest 
view of a Cause, there is no such thing as a 
Lost Cause because there is no such thing as a 
Gained Cause. We fight for lost causes because 
we know that our defeat and dismay may be 
the preface to our successors’ victory, though 
that victory itself will be temporary; we fight 
rather to keep something alive than in the 
expectation that anything will triumph. If 
Bradley’s philosophy is to-day a little out of 
fashion, we must remark that what has super- 
seded it, what is now in favour, is, for the most 
part, crude and raw and provincial (though 
infinitely more technical and scientific) and 
must perish in its turn. Arnold turned from mid- 
century Radicalism with the reflection “A new 
power has suddenly appeared.” There is always 

[ 78 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

a new power; but the new power destined to 
supersede the philosophy which has super- 
seded Bradley will probably be something at the 
same time older, more patient, more supple 
and more wise. The chief characteristics of 
much contemporary philosophy are newness 
and crudeness, impatience, inflexibility in one 
respect and fluidity in another, and irresponsi- 
bility and lack of wisdom. Of wisdom Bradley 
had a large share; wisdom consists largely of 
scepticism and uncynical disillusion; and of 
these Bradley had a large share. And scepticism 
and disillusion are a useful equipment for 
religious understanding; and of that Bradley 
had a share too. 

Those who have read the Ethical Studies will 
be ready with the remark that it was Bradley, 
in this book and in the year 1876, who knocked 
the bottom out of Literature and Dogma. But that 
does not mean that the two men were not on 
the same side; it means only that Literature and 
Dogma is irrelevant to Arnold’s main position 
as given in the Essays and in Culture and Anarchy, 
that the greatest weakness of Arnold’s culture 

[79 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

was his weakness in philosophical training, and 
that in philosophical criticism Bradley exhibits 
the same type of culture that Arnold exhibited 
in political and social criticism. Arnold had 
made an excursion into a field for which he was 
not armed. Bradley’s attack upon Arnold does 
not take up much space, but Bradley was 
economical of words; it is all in a few para- 
graphs and a few footnotes to the “Concluding 
Remarks”’: 

But here once more “culture” has come to our 
aid, and has shown us how here, as everywhere, the 
study of polite literature, which makes for meek- 
ness, makes needless also all further education; and 
we felt already as if the clouds that metaphysic 
had wrapped about the matter were dissolving in 
the light of a fresh and sweet intelligence. And, as 
we turned towards the dawn, we sighed over poor 
Hegel, who had read neither Goethe nor Homer, 
nor the Old and New Testaments, nor any of the 
literature which has gone to form “culture,” but, 
knowing no facts, and reading no books, nor ever 
asking himself “‘such a tyro’s question as what being 
really was,” sat spinning out of his head those fool- 
ish logomachies which impose on no person of re- 
finement. 

[ 80 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

Here is the identical weapon of Arnold, sharp- 
ened to a razor edge and turned against Arnold. 

But the “stream” and the “tendency” having 
served their turn, like last week’s placards, now fall 
into the background, and we learn at last that “‘the 
Eternal” is not eternal at all, unless we give that 
name to whatever a generation sees happen, and 
believes both has happened and will happen—just 
as the habit of washing ourselves might be termed 
“the Eternal not ourselves that makes for cleanli- 
ness,” or “Early to bed and early to rise” the 
‘Eternal not ourselves that makes for longevity,” 
and so on—that “‘the Eternal,”’ in short, is nothing in 
the world but a piece of literary clap-trap. The con- 
sequence is that all we are left with is the assertion 
that “righteousness” is “salvation” or welfare, and 
that there is a “law” and a “‘Power”’ which has some- 
thing to do with this fact; and here again we must 
not be ashamed to say that we fail to understand 
what any one of these phrases means, and suspect 
ourselves once more to be on the scent of clap-trap. 

A footnote continues the Arnold-baiting in a 
livelier style: 

“Ts there a God?” asks the reader. “‘Oh yes,” re- 
plies Mr. Arnold, “and I can verify him in experi- 
ence.” “And what is he then?” cries the reader. 
‘‘Be virtuous, and as a rule you will be happy,” is 

[ 8: J 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

the answer. “Well, and God?” ‘‘That is God,” says 
Mr. Arnold; “there is no deception, and what 
more do you want?”’ I suppose we do want a good 
deal more. Most of us, certainly the public which 
Mr. Arnold addresses, want something they can 
worship; and they will not find that in an hypo- 
stasised copy-book heading, which is not much 
more adorable than “Honesty is the best policy,” 
or ‘‘Handsome is that handsome does,”’ or various 
other edifying maxims, which have not yet come 
to an apotheosis. 

Such criticism is final. It is patently a great 
triumph of wit and a great delight to watch 
when a man’s methods, almost his tricks of 
speech, are thus turned against himself. But 
if we look more closely into these words and 
into the whole chapter from which they are 
taken, we find Bradley to have been not only 
triumphant in polemic but right in reason. 
Arnold, with all his great virtues, was not al- 
ways patient enough, or solicitous enough of 
any but immediate effect, to avoid incon- 
sistency—as has been painstakingly shown by 
Mr. J. M. Robertson. In Culture and Anarchy, 
which is probably his greatest book, we hear 

[ 82] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

something said about “the will of God”; but 
the “will of God” seems to become superseded 
in importance by “‘our best self, or right reason, 
to which we want to give authority’; and this 
best self looks very much like Matthew Arnold 
slightly disguised. In our own time one of the 
most remarkable of our critics, one who is 
fundamentally on most questions in the right, 
and very often right quite alone, Professor 
Irving Babbitt, has said again and again that 
the old curbs of class, of authoritative govern- 
ment, and of religion must be supplied in 
our time by something he calls the “inner 
check.” The inner check looks very much 
like the “best self”? of Matthew Arnold; and 
though supported by wider erudition and 
closer reasoning, is perhaps open to the same 
objections. There are words of Bradley’s, and 
in the chapter from which we have already 
quoted, that might seem at first sight to sup- 
port these two eminent doctrines: 

How can the human-divine ideal ever be my will? 
The answer is, Your will it never can be as the will 

[ 83 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of your private self, so that your private self should 
become wholly good. To that self you must die, and 
by faith be made one with that ideal. You must 
resolve to give up your will, as the mere will of this 
or that man, and you must put your whole self, 
your entire will, into the will of the divine. That 
must be your one self, as it is your true self; that you 
must hold to both with thought and will, and all 
other you must renounce. 

There is one direction in which these words— 
and, indeed, Bradley’s philosophy as a whole 
—might be pushed, which would be dangerous; 
the direction of diminishing the value and 
dignity of the individual, of sacrificing him to 
a Church or a State. But, in any event, the 
words cannot be interpreted in the sense of 
Arnold. The distinction is not between a “‘pri- 
vate self” and a “public self? or a “higher 
self,” it is between the individual as himself and 
no more, a mere numbered atom, and the 
individual in communion with God. The dis- 
tinction is clearly drawn between man’s “‘mere 
will” and “‘the will of the Divine.” It may be 
noted also that Bradley is careful, in indicating 
the process, not to exaggerate either will or 

[ 84 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

intellect at the expense of the other. And in all 
events it is a process which neither Arnold nor 
Professor Babbitt could accept. But if there is 
a ‘will of God,” as Arnold, in a hasty moment, 
admits, then some doctrine of Grace must be 
admitted too; or else the “will of God” is just 
the same inoperative benevolence which we 
have all now and then received—and resented 
—from our fellow human beings. In the end 
it is a disappointment and a cheat. 

Those who return to the reading of Ethical 
Studies, and those who now, after reading the 
other works of Bradley, read it for the first 
time, will be struck by the unity of Bradley’s 
thought in the three books and in the collected 
Essays. But this unity is not the unity of mere 
fixity. In the Ethical Studies, for instance, he 
speaks of the awareness of the self, the knowl- 
edge of one’s own existence as indubitable and 
identical. In Appearance and Reality, seventeen 
years later, he had seen much deeper into the 
matter; and had seen that no one “fact” of 
experience in isolation is real or is evidence of 
anything. The unity of Bradley’s thought is 

[ 85 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

not the unity attained by a man who never 
changes his mind. If he had so little occasion 
to change it, that is because he usually saw 
his problems from the beginning in all their 
complexity and connexions—saw them, in other 
words, with wisdom—and because he could 
never be deceived by his own metaphors— 
which, indeed, he used most sparingly—and was 
never tempted to make use of current nostrums. 

If all of Bradley’s writings are in some sense 
merely “‘essays,”” that is not solely a matter of 
modesty, or caution, and certainly not of in- 
ference, or even of ill-health. It is that he per- 
ceived the contiguity and continuity of the 
various provinces of thought. “Reflection on 
morality,” he says, “leads us beyond it. It leads 
us, in short, to see the necessity of a religious 
point of view.” Morality and religion are not 
the same thing, but they cannot beyond a cer- 
tain point be treated separately. A system of 
ethics, if thorough, is explicitly or implicitly a 
system of theology; and to attempt to erect a 
complete theory of ethics without a religion is 
none the less to adopt some particular attitude 

[ 86 ] 

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY 

toward religion. In this book, as in his others, 
Bradley is thoroughly empirical, much more 
empirical than the philosophies that he op- 
posed. He wished only to determine how much 
of morality could be founded securely without 
entering into the religious questions at all. As 
in Appearance and Reality he assumes that our 
common everyday knowledge is on the whole 
true so far as it goes, but that we do not know 
how far it does go; so in the Ethical Studies 
he starts always with the assumption that our 
common attitude toward duty, pleasure, or 
self-sacrifice is correct so far as it goes—but 
we do not know how far it does go. And in this 
he is all in the Greek tradition. It is funda- 
mentally a philosophy of common sense. 
Philosophy without wisdom is vain; and in 
the greater philosophers we are usually aware 
of that wisdom which for the sake of em- 
phasis and in the most accurate and profound 
sense could be called even worldly wisdom. 
Common sense does not mean, of course, either 
the opinion of the majority or the opinion of 
the moment; it is not a thing to be got at with- 

[ 87 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

out maturity and study and thought. The lack 
of it produces those unbalanced philosophies, 
such as Behaviourism, of which we hear a 
great deal. A purely “scientific” philosophy 
ends by denying what we know to be true; and, 
on the other hand, the great weakness of 
Pragmatism is that it ends by being of no use 
to anybody. Again, it is easy to underestimate 
Hegel, but it is easy to overestimate Bradley’s 
debt to Hegel; in a philosophy like Bradley’s 
the points at which he stops are always impor- 
tant points. In an unbalanced or uncultured 
philosophy words have a way of changing their 
meaning—as sometimes with Hegel; or else 
they are made, in a most ruthless and piratical 
manner, to walk the plank: the words which 
Professor J. B. Watson drops overboard, and 
which we know to have meaning and value, 
are almost innumerable. But Bradley, like 
Aristotle, is distinguished by his scrupulous 
respect for words, that their meaning should be 
neither vague nor exaggerated; and the tend- 
ency of his labours is to bring British phi- 
losophy closer to the great Greek tradition. 
[ 88 ] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR 
TIME 

* * *x 
* * 
* 
* # 

* 
* 
ee 

Gd & a 

NIGP eRe Pit oro 
Ni I Gs Cs eli 
heinsivees epi pale 
i Lae VRSePryp eats 

eh Gs axe mle: areas 
oA ' _ nll =< po aig i 

& tesco Fad ih 9 ae 
“Gen eer setery, 
ae a 10S VOW se HRS 
te = 4 os he aon i i 
OR er Weih 4y ar oral i2 eke, 
ie, EF): a8 DR =e ier oa 

i 2 oe ooeee 
a, : ” ; az a ~ “<t Heg Ok 

7 = in oe a ea a Pin i ; i ' 
La is “ey Ss Uy 9 ea ee ‘ : 

bad On, SOI, 4 

‘) ga@ wee gpa yap? =e hee 

i Be tes ed 2 es 

co \F p/h thee A 
an ' 

eo 

Mr. SYMONS HAS MADE A GOOD TRANSLATION, 
in the Symons style. If our point of view to-day 
was the point of view of thirty years ago, or 
even of twenty years ago, we should call it a 
good translation. To read Mr. Symons now, 
is to realize how great a man is Baudelaire, who 
can appear in such a different form to the 
*nineties and to the nineteen-twenties. In the 
translation of Mr. Symons, Baudelaire becomes 
a poet of the ’nineties, a contemporary of Dow- 
son and Wilde. Dowson and Wilde have 
passed, and Baudelaire remains; he belonged to 
a generation that preceded them, and yet he 
is much more our contemporary than are they. 
Yet even the ’nineties are nearer to us than the 
intervening generation—I date in literary gen- 
erations; and the fact that they were interested 
in Baudelaire indicates some community of 
spirit. Since the generation—the literary gen- 
eration—of Mr. Symons and the ’nineties, an- 
other generation has come and gone—the 
literary generation which includes Mr. Bernard 
Shaw, and Mr. Wells, and Mr. Lytton Strachey. 

1Baudelaire, Prose and Poetry. Translated by Arthur Symons. 
Albert and Charles Boni. 

[or] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

This generation, in its ancestry, “skipped” the 
*nineties: it is the progeny of Huxley, and Tyn- 
dall, and George Eliot, and Gladstone. And 
with this generation Baudelaire has nothing to 
do; but he had something to do with the 
*nineties, and he has a great deal to do with us. 

But the present volume should perhaps, even 
in fairness, be read as a document explicatory 
of the ’nineties, rather than as a current inter- 
pretation of Baudelaire. In an interesting pref- 
ace—too short—Mr. Symons avows that the 
Fleurs du Mal “in regard to my earliest verses, 
was at once a fascination and an influence, and 
because from that time onward his fascination 
has been like a spell to me, and because that 
masterpiece has rarely, if ever, been equalled, 
has rarely, if ever, been surpassed.” Mr. Sym- 
ons is himself, we must remember, no mean 
poet; he is typical of the ’nineties; this influence 
of Baudelaire upon Mr. Symons was manifestly 
genuine and profound. Why is Baudelaire so 
different now? We can learn something about 
Baudelaire, and about the ’nineties, and about 
ourselves. 

[ 92 ] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

Mr. Symons’s preface is very interesting: it is 
perhaps the most important part of the book. 
What is interesting is the attitude, so completely 
of his epoch, toward “vice.” For Mr. Symons 
there is, at least en principe, a ritual, an hier- 
archy, a liturgy, of “vice” or “sin.” Here is a 
whole paragraph so significant that I beg to 
give it entire: 

In the poetry of Baudelaire, with which the 
poetry of Verlaine is so often compared [i.e. com- 
pared by Mr. Symons and his friends—we no longer find 
much in common] there is a deliberate science of 
sensual and sexual perversity which has something 
curious in its accentuation of vice with horror, 
in its passionate devotion to passions. Baudelaire 
brings every complication of taste, the exasperation 
of perfumes, the irritant of cruelty, the very odours 
and coloursof corruption, to the creation and adorn- 
ment of a sort of religion, in which an Eternal Mass 
is served before a veiled altar. There is no con- 
fession, no absolution, not a prayer is permitted 
which is not set down on the ritual. . . . ““To culti- 
vate one’s hysteria” I have written “‘so calmly, 
and to affront the reader (Hypocrite lecteur, mon 
semblable, mon frére) as a judge rather than a peni- 
tent; to be a casuist in confession; to be so much a 
moralist, with so keen and so subtle a sense of the 

[93 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

ecstasy of evil: that has always bewildered the 
world, even in his own country, where the artist is 
allowed to live as experimentally as he writes. 
Baudelaire lived and died solitary, secret, a con- 
fessor of sins who had never told the whole truth, le 
mauvais moine of his own sonnet, an ascetic of pas- 
sion, a hermit of the Brothel.” 

This paragraph is of extraordinary interest for 
several reasons. Even in its cadences it conjures 
up Wilde and the remoter spectre of Pater. It 
conjures up also Lionel Johnson with his 
“life is a ritual.” It cannot get away from re- 
ligion and religious figures of speech. How dif- 
ferent a tone from that of the generation of 
Mr. Shaw,! and Mr. Wells, and Mr. Strachey, 
and Mr. Ernest Hemingway! And how differ- 
ent from our own! Mr. Symons seems to us like 
a sensitive child, who has been taken into a 
church, and has been entranced with the effi- 
gies, and the candles, and the incense. Such 
rugs and jugs and candle lights! 

1Of course Mr. Shaw and Mr. Wells are also much occupied 
with religion and Ersatz-Religion. But they are concerned 
with the spirit, not the letter. And the spirit killeth, but the 
letter giveth life. 

[ 94 ] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

And indeed the age of Mr. Symons was the 
“golden age” of one kind of child, as the age 
of Mr. Shaw was the age of another kind of 
child. If you take his paragraph to pieces, you 
will find much that is wrong; though if you 
swallow it whole, you will digest something that 
is right. ‘“Passtonate devotion to passions”: no man 
was ever less the dupe of passions than Baude- 
laire; he was engaged in an attempt to explain, 
to justify, to make something of them, an en- 
terprise which puts him almost on a level with 
the author of the “Vita Nuova.” “‘The irritant 
of cruelty’’—did Baudelaire “bring”’ it, or did he 
not merely examine it (there are some important 
paragraphs in Mon Coeur Mis a Nu). Whoever 
heard of a Mass before a veiled altar? And 
hysteria! was any one ever less hysterical, more 
lucid, than Baudelaire?! There is a difference 
between hysteria and looking into the Shadow. 
And when Mr. Symons says, a few pages later, 
that Baudelaire’s “impeccable” work is “the 

1It is true that Baudelaire says “‘7’ai cultive mon hystérie.”” But 
it is one thing for him to say it of himself, another for Mr. 
Symons to say it about him. 

[95] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

direct result of his heredity and of his nerves” 
I can only protest violently. If any work is to 
be described as the “‘direct”’ result of heredity 
and nerves—and “‘direct’’ here can only suggest 
that heredity and nerves sufficiently account 
for the work—then I cannot agree that such 
work is impeccable. We cannot be primarily 
interested in any writer’s nerves (and remember 
please that “‘nerves”’ used in this way is a very 
vague and unscientific term) or in any one’s 
heredity except for the purpose of knowing to 
what extent that writer’s individuality distorts 
or detracts from the objective truth which he 
perceives. If a writer sees truly—as far as he 
sees at all—then his heredity and nerves do 
not matter.1 What is right in Mr. Symons’s 
account is the impression it gives that Baude- 
laire was primarily occupied with religious 
values. What is wrong is the childish attitude 
of the ’nineties toward religion, the belief— 
which is no more than the game of children 
dressing up and playing at being grown-ups 

1There is a better, and very interesting, account of Baude- 
laire’s heredity in Leon Daudet’s book, L’Hérédo. 

[96] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

—that there is a religion of Evil, or Vice, or 
Sin. Swinburne knew nothing about Evil, or 
Vice, or Sin—if he had known anything he 
would not have had so much fun out of it. 
For Swinburne’s disciples, the men of the ’nine- 
ties, Evil was very good fun. Experience, as a 
sequence of outward events, is nothing in it- 
self; it is possible to pass through the most 
terrible experiences protected by histrionic 
vanity; Wilde, through the whole of the experi- 
ences of his life, remained a little Eyas, a child- 
actor. On the other hand, even to act an im- 
portant thing is to acknowledge it; and the 
childishness of the nineties is nearer to reality 
than the childishness of the nineteen-hundreds. 
But to Baudelaire, alone, these things were 
real. 

Mr. Symons appears a more childish child 
than Huysmans, merely because a childish 
Englishman—bred a Protestant—always ap- 
pears more childish than a childish Frenchman 
—bred a Roman. Huysmans’s fee-fi-fo-fum de- 
cor of medievalism has nothing on Mr. Sym- 
ons’s “veiled altar.’”’ Huysmans, by the way, 

[97] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

might have been much more in sympathy with 
the real spirit of the thirteenth century if he 
had thought less about it, and bothered less 
about architectural lore and quotations from 
philosophers whom he may have read but cer- 
tainly did not understand: he is much more 
“‘medieval” (and much more human) when he 
describes the visit of Madame Chantelouve 
to Durtal than when he talks about his 
Cathedral. 

I have already suggested that Mr. Symons, 
as a translator, turns Baudelaire into a contem- 
porary of Symons. To say this is at once a very 
high compliment—for the work of translation 
is to make something foreign, or something re- 
mote in time, live with our own life, and no 
translator can endow his victim with more 
abundant life than he possesses himself—and 
a warning. It is not a warning against Mr. 
Symons as translator. Mr. Symons is as true a 
translator as Mr. Symons can be. That is to 
say that his translation is, from his own point 
of view, almost perfect; we have no suggestions 
to make to Mr. Symons himself. Only, it is 

[ 98 ] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

what Baudelaire means to Mr. Symons’s gen- 
eration; it is not what Baudelaire means to us. 
For one thing, we now are much better quali- 
fied to appreciate the very traditional character 
of Baudelaire’s verse; we are nearer to Racine 
than is Mr. Symons; and if we translated 
Baudelaire ourselves we should bring out just 
those resemblances to Racine, which disappear 
completely in Mr. Symons’s translation. It is 
a pity that Mr. Symons has not translated some 
of the poems in which this affinity with Racine 
is most apparent. The poet who wrote 

Andromaque, des bras d’un grand époux tombée, 
Vil bétail, sous la main du superbe Pyrrhus ... 

De Vancien Frascati vestale enamourée... 

Nos Pylades la-bas tendent leurs bras vers nous. 
‘*Pour rafraichir ton coeur nage vers ton Electre!” ... 

is not remote from the poet who wrote of “La 
fille de Minos et Pasiphae. . .”’ We can, however, 
call attention to passages where it seems to us 
that Mr. Symons has enveloped Baudelaire in 
the Swinburnian violet-coloured London fog 

[ 99 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of the ’nineties. His paraphrase of “L’ Invitation 
au Voyage”’ is significant. 

My child and my star, 
Let us wander afar... 

Baudelaire wrote 

Mon enfant, ma soeur, 
Songe a la douceur 
Dvaller la-bas vivre ensemble. 

The word soeur here is not, in my opinion. 
chosen merely because it rhymes with douceur; 
it is a moment in that sublimation of passion 
toward which Baudelaire was always striving; 
it needs a commentary out of his Correspond- 
ence, for instance the astonishing letter to Marie 
X... cited by Charles Du Bos.! (On this whole 
subject Du Bos, whose essay on Baudelaire is 
the finest study of Baudelaire that has been 
made, has some admirable words: ce desir con- 
templatif qui n’a besoin que de la présence, et qui 
ne possede vraiment que parce quil ne possede pas.) 

1Charles Du Bos, Approximations, p. 219. 
[ 100 } 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

And further on, in the same poem, when we 
come to the magnificent lines 

La, tout n’est qu’ordre et beauté, 
Luxe, calme et volupté 

we are surprised to receive from Mr. Symons 

There all is beauty, ardency, 
Passion, rest and luxury. 

The only one of these words that is right is 
“‘beauty.”’ Baudelaire did not, we may be sure, 
take these substantives at random, nor did he 
arrange them at random. It is not for nothing 
that he put ordre first; and if Mr. Symons had 
understood notre Baudelaire he would not have 
substituted—“‘ardency”’! But order is positive, 
chaos is defect, and we imagine that Mr. 
Symons was not trying to avoid Order—he 
simply did not recognize it. We can see that 
Mr. Symons, trained in the verbal school of 
Swinburne, is simply anxious to get a nice 
sounding phrase; and we infer that all that he 
found in Baudelaire was a nice sounding phrase. 

[ 101 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

But Baudelaire was not a disciple of Swinburne: 
for Baudelaire every word counts. 

Here is another passage where Mr. Symons 
seems to me merely to have made a smudgy 
botch. It is striking because it is Baudelaire 
in his most sardonic, bathetic vein—something 
which might be called strictly “modern,” and 
which should therefore (considering that Mr. 
Symons belongs to a younger generation than 
Baudelaire) have appealed to Mr. Symons. 
These are well-known lines from the “Voyage 
a Cythere.” 

Quelle est cette ile triste et noire? C’est Cythere, 
Nous dit-on, un pays fameux dans les chansons, 

Eldorado banal de tous les vieux garcons. 
Regardez, apres tout, c’est une pauvre terre. 

Mr. Symons astounds us with the following: 

What is this sad dark Isle? It is Cythera whose birth 
Was famed in songs, made famous as the fashions 
Of the most ancient and adulterous passions: 

It is a beautiful and a barren earth. 

Here Mr. Symons’s “‘stretchéd metre,” always 
reminiscent of Cynara, fits Baudelaire’s delib- 

[ 102 } 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

erately broken alexandrines better than it does 
in many places (in many of the poems, one feels 
that Pope would have been better fitted than 
Mr. Symons). But such a mistranslation can- 
not be merely a confession of impotence to 
translate the words of Baudelaire into English; 
it expresses an impotence to feel the moods of 
Baudelaire—they can be expressed in English 
just as well as in French—an impotence to use 
words definitely, to use words at all unless they 
are the few poor counters of habitual and lazy 
sentiment. Fashions and Passions—how well we 
know them! 

The important fact about Baudelaire is that 
he was essentially a Christian, born out of his 
due time, and a classicist, born out of his due 
time. In his verse technique, he is nearer to 
Racine than to Mr. Symons; in his sensibility, 
he is near to Dante and not without sympathy 
with Tertullian. But Baudelaire was not an 
esthetic or a political Christian; his tendency 
to “ritual,”? which Mr. Symons, with his highly 
acute but blind sensibility, has observed, springs 
from no attachment to the outward forms of 

[ 103 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Christianity, but from the instincts of a soul that 
was naturaliter Christian. And being the kind of 
Christian that he was, born when he was, he 
had to discover Christianity for himself. In 
this pursuit he was alone in the solitude which 
is only known to saints. To him the notion of 
Original Sin came spontaneously; and the need 
for prayer. 

Tout chez Baudelaire est fonction de son génie; or il 
n’y a rien dont ce génie puisse moins se passer que de Dieu, 
—d’un Dieu qui plutét qu’objet de foi est réceptacle de 
priéres,—jirai jusqu’d dire d’un Dieu qu’on puisse prier 
sans crotre en lui. . . . Cet incoercible besoin de priére au 
sein méme de l’incrédulité,—signe majeur d’une dme 
marquée de christianisme, qui jamais ne lui échappera 
tout a fait. La notion de péché, et plus profondement encore 
le besoin de priére, telles sont les deux réalités souterraines 
qui paraissent appartenir ad des gisements enfouis bien 
plus avant que ne l’est la foi elle-méme. On se rappelle le 
mot de Flaubert: “‘Fe suis mystique au fond et je ne crots 
a@ rien”; Baudelaire et lui se sont toujours fraternellement 
compris. 

So far Charles Du Bos. Other essays, not so 
satisfactory as that of M. Du Bos, but recent 
and explanatory of Baudelaire, as he is now 

[ 104 ] 

BAUDELAIRE IN OUR TIME 

understood, are ‘‘Notre Baudelaire’ by Stan- 
islas Fumet, and “La Vie Douloureuse de 
Baudelaire”? by Francois Porché. 

And Baudelaire came to attain the greatest, 
the most difficult, of the Christian virtues, the 
virtue of humility. Only by devoted study of 
the man and his work and his life can we ap- 
preciate the significance of that great passage 
in Mon Coeur Mis a Nu: 

Faire tous les matins ma priére a Dieu, réservoir de 
toute force et de toute justice, d mon pére, a Martette et 
a Poé, comme intercesseurs; les prier de me communiquer 
la force nécessaire pour accomplir tous mes devoirs, et 
d’octroyer a ma mére une vie assez longue pour jouir de ma 
transformation; travailler toute la journée, ou du moins 
tant que mes forces me le permettront; me fier a Dieu, 
c’est-d-dire a la Fustice meme, pour la réussite de mes 
projets; faire, tous les soirs, une nouvelle priére, pour 
demander a Dieu la vie et la force pour ma mére et pour 
moi, faire, de tout ce que je gagnerai, quatre parts,—une 
pour la vie courante, une pour mes créanciers, une pour mes 
amis et une pour ma mére;—obéir aux principes de la 
plus stricte sobriété, dont le premier est la suppression de 
tous les excitants, quels qu’ils sotent. 

[ 105 ] 

shied Sgn eee 
> *semante Ctebl, « jvdes -— 

of i ee Le 
_ - ey Oe Sheersked annie 
- oe. GP gt) @ ee Ow) So Onn 
QV WN ig ettaa< soa “ 
er 44 OP Ras (end * 
(eo ts, “at YD OSes «fl = | 

a 7 A088 emt) os 
~ ¢ os : - : Dare 

ae on eee ee ee ee 
a See) ree 2 ene Gy ee ee SE 
Nee One ds yo & LAs a a 4eoc= wi i? 

. oo uF coe of 5 es 
wO ais Pel I& - wane 2 Ss 
—Oe (=i) ae Put, SP Wad © 2) sites . 
ete O=~ & 6 O24 eG 
a t fe ~cG ¢ 6 Gaeany 
— a, is + RK “a _ : 
i, Papen: Jenals $ 
a es - wis AR A heed 
a mi? PS oo Veh aT Soh 
j 3 a = | . ‘ 
oT > 7 = a 
<i ni A, 66) Ge fe Hen 

% x 
Pie es ie 
*% * 
¥ * 

* VI. * 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

* - . 
a3 ¥ 
* * 
* * 

* 
*% 
ue es ee: 

Tuomas MIDDLETON, THE DRAMATIC WRITER, 
was not very highly thought of in his own 
time; the date of his death is not known; we 
know only that he was buried on July 4, 1627. 
He was one of the more voluminous, and one 
of the best, dramatic writers of his time. But 
it is easy to understand why he is not better 
known or more popular. It is difficult to imag- 
ine his “‘personality.”” Several new personalities 
have recently been fitted to the name of Shake- 
speare; Jonson is a real figure—our imagination 
plays about him discoursing at the Mermaid, 
or laying down the law to Drummond of Haw- 
thornden; Chapman has become a breezy Brit- 
ish character as firm as Nelson or Wellington; 
Webster and Donne are real people for the more 
intellectual; even Tourneur (Churton Collins 
having said the last word about him) is a “‘per- 
sonality.” But Middleton, who collaborated 
shamelessly, who is hardly separated from 
Rowley, Middleton, who wrote plays so diverse 
as Women Beware Women and A Game at Chesse 
and The Roaring Girl, Middleton remains merely 
a collective name for a number of plays—some 

[ 109 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

of which, like The Spanish Gypsy, are patently 
by other people.! 

If we write about Middleton’s plays we must 
write about Middleton’s plays, and not about 
Middleton’s personality. Many of these plays 
are still in doubt. Of all the Elizabethan dram- 
atists Middleton seems the most impersonal, the 
most indifferent to personal fame or perpetuity, 
the readiest, except Rowley, to accept collab- 
oration. Also he is the most various. His great- 
est tragedies and his greatest comedies are as 
if written by two different men. Yet there seems 
no doubt that Middleton was both a great comic 
writer and a great tragic writer. There are a 
sufficient number of plays, both tragedies and 
comedies, in which his hand is so far unques- 
tioned, to establish his greatness. His greatness 
is not that of a peculiar personality, but of a 
great artist or artisan of the Elizabethan epoch. 
We have among others The Changeling, Women 
Beware Women, and A Game at Chesse; and we 
have The Roaring Girl and A Trick to Catch the 

tMr. Dugdale Sykes has written authoritatively on this 

subject. 
[ 110 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

Old One. And that is enough. Between the 
tragedies and the comedies of Shakespeare, 
and certainly between the tragedies and the 
comedies of Jonson, we can establish a relation; 
we can see, for Shakespeare or Jonson, that 
each had in the end a personal point of view 
which can be called neither comic nor tragic. 
But with Middleton we can establish no such 
relation. He remains merely a name, a voice, 
the author of certain plays, which are all of 
them great plays. He has no point of view, is 
neither sentimental nor cynical; he is neither 
resigned, nor disillusioned, nor romantic; he 
has no message. He is merely the name which 
associates six or seven great plays. 

For there is no doubt about The Changeling. 
Like all of the plays attributed to Middleton, 
it is long-winded and tiresome; the characters 
talk too much, and then suddenly stop talking 
and act; they are real and impelled irresistibly 
by the fundamental motions of humanity to 
good or evil. This mixture of tedious discourse 
and sudden reality is everywhere in the work of 
Middleton, in his comedy also. In The Roaring 

ee ca | 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Girl we read with toil through a mass of cheap 
conventional intrigue, and suddenly realize 
that we are, and have been for some time with- 
out knowing it, observing a real and unique 
human being. In reading The Changeling we 
may think, till almost the end of the play, that 
we have been concerned merely with a fantastic 
Elizabethan morality, and then discover that 
we are looking on at an impassionate exposure 
of fundamental passions of any time and any 
place. The usual opinion remains the just 
judgment: The Changeling is Middleton’s great- 
est play. The morality of the convention seems 
to us absurd. To many intelligent readers this 
play has only an historical interest, and only 
serves to illustrate the moral taboos of the Eliza- 
bethans. The heroine is a young woman who, 
in order to dispose of a fiancé to whom she is 
indifferent, so that she may marry the man she 
loves, accepts the offer of an adventurer to 
murder the affianced, at the price of becoming 
the murderer’s mistress. Such a plot is, to a 
modern mind, absurd; and the consequent 
tragedy seems a fuss about nothing. But The 

[ 112 } 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

Changeling is not merely contingent for its ef- 
fect upon our acceptance of Elizabethan good 
form or convention; it is, in fact, no more de- 
pendent upon the convention of its epoch than 
a play like A Doll’s House. Underneath the con- 
vention there is the stratum of permanent 
truth to human nature. The tragedy of The 
Changeling is an eternal tragedy, as permanent 
as CEdipus or Anthony and Cleopatra; it is the 
tragedy of the not naturally bad but irrespon- 
sible and undeveloped nature, caught in the 
consequences of its own action. In every age 
and in every civilization there are instances of 
the same thing: the unmoral nature, suddenly 
trapped in the inexorable toils of morality— 
of morality not made by man but by Nature— 
and forced to take the consequences of an act 
which it had planned light-heartedly. Beatrice 
is not a moral creature; she becomes moral only 
by becoming damned. Our conventions are not 
the same as those which Middleton assumed for 
his play. But the possibility of that frightful 
discovery of morality remains permanent. 
The words in which Middleton expresses 

[ 113 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

his tragedy are as great as the tragedy. The proc- 
ess through which Beatrice, having decided 
that De Flores is the instrument for her pur- 
pose, passes from aversion to habituation, re- 
mains a permanent commentary on human 
nature. The directness and precision of De 
Flores are masterly, as is also the virtuousness 
of Beatrice on first realizing his motives— 

Why, ’tis impossible thou canst be so wicked, 
Or shelter such a cunning cruelty, 

To make his death the murderer of my honour! 
Thy language is so bold and vicious, 

I cannot see which way I can forgive it 

With any modesty 

—a passage which ends with the really great 
lines of De Flores, lines of which Shakespeare 
or Sophocles might have been proud: 

Can you weep Fate from its determined purpose? 
So soon may you weep me. 

But what constitutes the essence of the tragedy 
is something which has not been sufficiently 
remarked; it is the habituation of Beatrice to 

[ 114 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

her sin; it becomes no longer sin but merely 
custom. Such is the essence of the tragedy of 
Macbeth—the habituation to crime, the dead- 
ening of all moral sense. And in the end Bea- 
trice, having been so long the enforced con- 
spirator of De Flores, becomes (and this is 
permanently true to human nature) more his 
partner, fis mate, than the mate and partner 
of the man for the love of whom she consented 
to the crime. Her lover disappears not only 
from the scene but from her own imagination. 
When she says of De Flores, 

A wondrous necessary man, my lord, 

her praise is more than half sincere; and at 
the end she belongs far more to De Flores— 
toward whom, at the beginning, she felt strong 
physical repulsion—than to her lover Alsemero. 
It is De Flores, in the end, to whom she belongs 
as Francesca to Paolo: 

Beneath the stars, upon yon meteor 

Ever hung my fate, ’mongst things corruptible; 
I ne’er could pluck it from him; my loathing 
Was prophet to the rest, but ne’er believed. 

[115 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

And De Flores’s cry is perfectly sincere and in 
character: 

I loved this woman in spite of her heart; 

Her love I earned out of Piracquo’s murder... 
Yes, and her honour’s prize 

Was my reward; I thank life for nothing 

But that pleasure; it was so sweet to me, 
That I have drunk up all, left none behind 
For any man to pledge me. 

The tragedy of Beatrice is not that she has lost 
Alsemero, for whose possession she played; it 
is that she has won De Flores. Such tragedies 
are not limited to Elizabethan times: they hap- 
pen every day and perpetually. The greatest 
tragedies are occupied with great and permanent 
moral conflicts: the great tragedies of Eschy- 
lus, of Sophocles, of Corneille, of Racine, of 
Shakespeare have the same burden. In poetry, 
in dramatic technique, The Changeling is inferior 
to the best plays of Webster. But in the moral 
essence of tragedy it is safe to say that in this 
play Middleton is surpassed by one Elizabethan 
alone, and that is Shakespeare. In some re- 
spects in which Elizabethan tragedy can be 

[ 116 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

compared to French or to Greek tragedy The 
Changeling stands above every tragic play of its 
time, except those of Shakespeare. 

The genius which blazed in The Changeling 
was fitful but not accidental. The best tragedy 
after The Changeling is Women Beware Women. 
The thesis of the play, as the title indicates, 
is more arbitrary and less fundamental. The 
play itself, although less disfigured by ribaldry 
or clowning, is more tedious. Middleton sinks 
himself in conventional moralizing of the epoch, 
so that, if we are impatient, we decide that he 
gives merely a document of Elizabethan hum- 
bug—and then suddenly a personage will 
blaze out in genuine fire of vituperation. The 
wickedness of the personages in Women Beware 
Women is conventional wickedness of the stage 
of the time; yet slowly the exasperation of 
Bianca, the wife who married beneath her, be- 
neath the ambitions to which she was entitled, 
emerges from the negative; slowly the real hu- 
man passions emerge from the mesh of interest 
in which they begin. And here again Middle- 
ton, in writing what appears on the surface a 

Besa 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

conventional picture-palace Italian melodrama 
of the time, has caught permanent human 
feelings. And in this play Middleton shows his 
interest—more than any of his contemporaries 
—in innuendo and double meanings; and makes 
use of that game of chess, which he was to use 
more openly and directly for satire in that 
perfect piece of literary political art, A Game at 
Chesse. The irony could not be improved upon: 

Did I not say my duke would fetch you o’er, Wiaow? 

I think you spoke in earnest when you said it, 
madam. 

And my black king makes all the haste he can too. 

Well, madam, we may meet with him in time yet. 

I’ve given thee blind mate twice. 

There is hardly anything truer or more impres- 
sive in Elizabethan drama than Bianca’s grad- 
ual self-will and self-importance in consequence 
of her courtship by the Duke: 

Troth, you speak wondrous well for your old house 
here; 

*Twill shortly fall down at your feet to thank you, 

Or stoop, when you go to bed, like a good child, 

To ask you blessing. 

[ 118 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

In spite of all the long-winded speeches, in 
spite of all the conventional Italianate horrors, 
Bianca remains, like Beatrice in The Changeling, 
a real woman; as real, indeed, as any woman 
of Elizabethan tragedy. Bianca is a type of the 
woman who is purely moved by vanity. 

But if Middleton, this obscure and uninterest- 
ing person, understood the female better than 
any of the Elizabethans—better than the crea- 
tor of the Duchess of Malfy, better than Mar- 
lowe, better than Tourneur, or Shirley, or 
Fletcher, better than any of them except Shake- 
speare alone—he was also able, in his comedy, 
to present a finer woman than any of them. 
The Roaring Girl has no apparent relation to 
Middleton’s tragedies, yet it is agreed to be 
primarily the work of Middleton. It is typical 
of the comedies of Middleton, and it is the best. 
In his tragedies Middleton employs all the Ital- 
ianate horrors of his time, and obviously for 
the purpose of pleasing the taste of his time; 
yet underneath we feel always a quiet and un- 
disturbed vision of things as they are and not 
“another thing.”’ So in his comedies. The come- 

[ 119 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

dies are long-winded; the fathers are heavy 
fathers, and rant as heavy fathers should; the 
sons are wild and wanton sons, and perform all 
the pranks to be expected of them; the machin- 
ery is the usual Elizabethan machinery; Middle- 
ton is solicitous to please his audience with what 
they expect; but there is underneath the same 
steady impersonal passionless observation of 
human nature. The Roaring Girl is as artificial 
as any comedy of the time; its plot creaks loudly; 
yet the Girl herself is always real. She may rant, 
she may behave preposterously, but she re- 
mains a type of the sort of woman who has re- 
nounced all happiness for herself and who lives 
only for a principle. Nowhere more than in 
The Roaring Girl can the hand of Middleton be 
distinguished more clearly from the hand of 
Dekker. Dekker is all sentiment; and, indeed, 
in the so admired passages of A Fair Quarrel, 
exploited by Lamb, the mood if not the hand 
of Dekker seems to the unexpert critic to be 
more present than Middleton’s. A Fair Quarrel 
seems as much, if not more, Dekker’s than 
Middleton’s. Similarly with The Spanish Gypsy, 

[ 120 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

which can with difficulty be attributed to 
Middleton. But the feeling about Moll Cut- 
Purse of The Roaring Girl is Middleton’s rather 
than anybody’s. In Middleton’s tragedy there 
is a strain of realism underneath, which is one 
with the poetry; and in his comedy we find 
the same thing. 

In her recent book on The Social Mode of 
Restoration Comedy, Miss Kathleen Lynch calls 
attention to the gradual transition from Eliza- 
bethan-Jacobean to Restoration comedy. She 
observes, what is certainly true, that Middleton 
is the greatest “realist” in Jacobean comedy. 
Miss Lynch’s extremely suggestive thesis is 
that the transition from Elizabethan-Jacobean 
to later Caroline comedy is primarily economic: 
that the interest changes from the citizen aping 
gentry to the citizen become gentry and ac- 
cepting that code of manners. In the comedy 
of Middleton certainly there is as yet no code 
of manners; but the merchant of Cheapside is 
aiming at becoming a member of the county 
gentry. Miss Lynch remarks: “Middleton’s 
keen concentration on the spectacle of the inter- 

[ rer] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

play of different social classes marks an impor- 
tant development in realistic comedy.” She 
calls attention to this aspect of Middleton’s 
comedy, that it marks, better than the romantic 
comedy of Shakespeare, or the comedy of 
Jonson, occupied with what Jonson thought to 
be permanent and not transient aspects of 
human nature, the transition between the aris- 
tocratic world which preceded the Tudors and 
the plutocratic modern world which the Tudors 
initiated and encouraged. By the time of the 
return of Charles II, as Miss Lynch points out, 
society had been reorganized and formed, and 
social conventions had been created. In the 
Tudor times birth still counted (though nearly 
all the great families were extinct); by the time 
of Charles II only breeding counted. The com- 
edy of Middleton, and the comedy of Brome, 
and the comedy of Shirley, is intermediate, as 
Miss Lynch remarks. Middleton, she observes, 
marks the transitional stage in which the Lon- 
don tradesman was anxious to cease to be a 
tradesman and to become a country gentle- 
man. The words of his City Magnate in 

ea 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

Michaelmas Terme have not yet lost their 
point: 

A fine journey in the Whitsun holydays, i’faith, 
to ride with a number of citizens and their wives, 
some upon pillions, some upon side-saddles, I and 
little Thomasine i’ the middle, our son and heir, 
Sim Quomodo, in a peach-colour taffeta jacket, 
some horse length, or a long yard before us—there 
will be a fine show on’s I can tell you. 

But Middleton’s comedy is not, like the comedy 
of Congreve, the comedy of a set social beha- 
viour; it is still, like the later comedy of Dickens, 
the comedy of individuals, in spite of the con- 
tinual motions of city merchants toward county 
gentility. In the comedy of the Restoration a 
figure such as that of Moll Cut-Purse would 
have been impossible. As a social document 
the comedy of Middleton illustrates the tran- 
sition from government by a landed aristoc- 
racy to government by a city aristocracy 
gradually engrossing the land. As such. it is of 
the greatest interest. But as literature, as a 
dispassionate picture of human nature, Middle- 
ton’s comedy deserves to be remembered chiefly 
by its real—perpetually real—and human 

[ 123 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

figure of Moll the Roaring Girl. That Middle- 
ton’s comedy was “photographic,” that it in- 
troduces us to the low life of the time far better 
than anything in the comedy of Shakespeare 
or the comedy of Jonson, better than anything 
except the pamphlets of Dekker and Greene 
and Nashe, there is little doubt. But it pro- 
duced one great play— The Roaring Girl—a great 
play in spite of the tedious long speeches of 
some of the principal characters, in spite of the 
clumsy machinery of the plot: for the reason 
that Middleton was a great observer of human 
nature, without fear, without sentiment, with- 
out prejudice, without personality. 

And Middleton in the end—after criticism 
has subtracted all that Rowley, all that Dekker, 
all that others contributed—is a great example 
of great English drama. He has no message; 
he is merely a great recorder. Incidentally, in 
flashes and when the dramatic need comes, he 
is a great poet, a great master of versification: 

I that am of your blood was taken from you 
For your better health; look no more upon ’t, 
But cast it to the ground regardlessly, 

[ 124 ] 

THOMAS MIDDLETON 

Let the common sewer take it from distinction: 
Beneath the stars, upon yon meteor 

Ever hung my fate, ’mongst things corruptible; 
I ne’er could pluck it from him; my loathing 
Was prophet to the rest, but ne’er believed. 

The man who wrote these lines remains inscru- 
table, solitary, unadmired; purely an Eliza- 
bethan and not himself; welcoming collabora- 
tion, indifferent to fame; dying no one knows 
when and no one knows how; attracting, in 
three hundred years, no personal admiration. 
Yet he wrote one tragedy which more than any 
play except those of Shakespeare has a profound 
and permanent moral value and horror; and 
one comedy which more than any Elizabethan 
comedy realizes a free and noble womanhood. 

[ 125 J 

* 
ek tO i 
¥* % 
* * 

Vit. *x 

A NOTE ON RICHARD 
CRASHAW 

No HIGHER COMPLIMENT CAN BE PAID TO THIS 
book! than to say that in editing and in produc- 
tion it is worthy of the fine series of seventeenth- 
century poets of which it is a member. Mem- 
orable in this series are Saintsbury’s “Caroline 
Poets” (without which Benlowes, Cleveland, 
and King would be almost inaccessible), Grier- 
son’s “Donne,” Margoliouth’s ‘“‘Marvell,’’ and 
Professor Martin’s own “Vaughan.” This edi- 
tion of Crashaw was much needed. Heretofore 
the only scholarly edition was that of Waller, 
in 1904. It was a good edition for its time; but 
the text was neither well established nor com- 
plete; and for an ordinary reader it had the 
disadvantage that one sometimes had to hunt 
to find the poem one wanted. Mr. Martin has 
collated the texts and gives the variants, with- 
out disfiguring the pages of a very handsome 
and practical book. His notes deserve particular 
attention, for Crashaw is a poet who needs 
notes—not for reading for pleasure—but if we 
wish to study him in relation to his time. Poets 
of that age made use of each other pretty freely; 

1The Poems English Latin and Greek of Richard Crashaw. Edited 
by L. C. Martin. Oxford University Press. 

[ 129 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Crashaw for one was well read (thanks partly 
to his father’s library) in the Italian and Latin 
poetry of his time, which was Legion. Mr. 
Martin’s notes give many interesting parallels. 
If there is anything more to be discovered about 
Crashaw, it will be in the way of further deriva- 
tions. 

Having given due praise to the edition, I 
must confess to some disappointment with the 
introduction. It gives a very dense summary 
of the facts, and includes an extremely interest- 
ing letter written by Crashaw. But Mr. Martin 
seems over-anxious not to use too much space: 
on the other hand the one critical opinion on 
which he ventures does not seem to me happy. 
Perhaps I expected, in default of any critical 
biography of Crashaw, something that would 
take its place; something as good as Grierson’s 
capital study of Donne in his edition of that 
poet above mentioned. We are still left with no 
first-rate criticism of Crashaw in English. The 
best study of Crashaw that I know, and a very 
fine and suggestive essay, is that by Mario Praz 
in his Secentismo e Marinismo in Inghilterra. 

[ 130 ] 

A NOTE ON RICHARD CRASHAW 

“When we survey,” says Professor Martin, 
“the remarkable development of Crashaw’s 
genius close up to the end of his life, in circum- 
stances that must often have been trying and 
distracting in the extreme, his ‘unfulfilled re- 
nown’ becomes indeed comparable with that 
of those other two English poets whose work his 
own in some ways strangely foreshadows, and 
who, like him, found in Italy a retreat and a 
final resting place.” (I wish Mr. Martin had 
saved a line or two by saying Keats and Shelley 
straight out, instead of searching for a fine 
phrase.) Now this remark might lead to several 
false inferences. Crashaw lived to be about 
thirty-seven; so he had some good years more 
than Keats or Shelley in which to develop. 
A man can go far between twenty-seven and 
thirty-seven. Mr. Martin is therefore unfair 
to Keats and Shelley. But moreover Crashaw’s 
verse is, as one would expect, far more mature 
than that of either of these poets; and I do not 
find in the poem on which he bases this sugges- 
tion, the “Letter to the Countess of Denbigh,” 
the evidence of promise that Mr. Martin finds 

[ 131 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

in it. It is indeed a fine poem, but it is the work 
of a mature master, and promises nothing but 
more of the same kind. Crashaw is, I believe, 
a much greater poet than he is usually sup- 
posed to be; Keats and Shelley are, in their ac- 
tual accomplishment, not nearly such great 
poets as they are supposed to be. But nothing 
that Crashaw wrote has the promise that is 
patent in Hyperion or The Triumph of Life. We 
must try of course always to distinguish promise 
from performance; both must be taken into 
account in judging a poet, and they must be 
kept separate. We can only say that Keats and 
Shelley would probably have become greater 
poets, poets on a much greater scale, than Cra- 
shaw; judging them on their accomplishment 
only, Crashaw was a finished master, and Keats 
and Shelley were apprentices with immense 
possibilities before them. 

So much for one question. Next, in what way 
can Crashaw be said to “foreshadow” Keats 
and Shelley? As for Keats, I simply do not 
know what Mr. Martin means, I see so little 
resemblance. With Shelley, there are obvious 

[ 132 ] 

A NOTE ON RICHARD CRASHAW 

and striking resemblances, though I think very 
superficial ones. To suggest, as Mr. Martin’s 
words seem to me to suggest, that Crashaw 
was in any way a forerunner or “prophet” of 
Shelley, is quite off the rails. The obvious 
parallel is between “The Weeper” and “The 
Skylark,” rather than between their uses of 
the octosyllabic couplet, which are wholly 
different. 

The dew no more will weepe, 
The Primroses pale cheeke to decke, 
The deaw no more will sleepe, 
Nuzzel’d in the Lillies neck. 
Much rather would it tremble heere, 
And leave them both to bee thy Teare. 

Not the soft Gold which 
Steales from the Amber-weeping Tree, 
Makes sorrow halfe so Rich, 
As the drops distil’d from thee. 
Sorrowes best Iewels lye in these 
Caskets, of which Heaven keeps the Keyes. 

Not in the Evenings Eyes 
When they red with weeping are, 
For the Sun that dyes, 
Sits sorrow with a face so faire. 

[ 133 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Nowhere but heere did ever meet 
Sweetnesse so sad, sadnes so sweet. 

I doubt whether the sound of two poems can 
be very similar, when the sense is entirely differ- 
ent. At any rate, I have found that the more I 
studied the meaning of Crashaw’s verse, and 
his peculiar use of image and conceit, the less 
resemblance the music of it seemed to have to 
Shelley’s. Take one of Crashaw’s more extreme 
and grotesque figures, from “The Tear”: 

Faire Drop, why quak’st thou so? 
Cause thou streight must lay thy Head 
In the Dust? o no; 
The Dust shall never bee thy Bed: 
A pillow for thee will I bring, 
Stuft with Downe of Angels wing. 

This imagery is almost the quintessence of an 
immense mass of devotional verse of the seven- 
teenth century. But it has nothing to do with 
Shelley. Crashaw’s images, even when entirely 
preposterous—for there is no warrant for bring- 
ing a pillow (and what a pillow!) for the head 
of a tear—give a kind of intellectual pleasure— 

[ 134 ] 

A NOTE ON RICHARD CRASHAW 

it is a deliberate conscious perversity of lan- 
guage, a perversity like that of the amazing and 
amazingly impressive interior of St. Peter’s. 
There is brain work in it. But in “The Sky- 
lark” there is no brain work. For the first 
time perhaps in verse of such eminence, sound 
exists without sense. Crashaw would never 
have written so shabby a line as “That from 
heaven or near it” merely to provide an im- 
perfect rhyme for spirit. 

Keen as are the arrows 
Of that silver sphere 
Whose intense lamp narrows 
In the white dawn clear, 
Until we hardly see, we feel that it is there. 

I should be grateful for any explanation of this 
stanza; until now I am still ignorant to what 
Sphere Shelley refers, or why it should have 
silver arrows, or what the devil he means by 
an intense lamp narrowing in the white dawn; 
though I can understand that we could hardly 
see the lamp of a silver sphere narrowing in 
white dawn (why dawn? as he has just referred 

[ 135 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

to the pale purple even). There may be some 
clue for persons more learned than I; but Shel- 
ley should have provided notes. Crashaw does 
not ueed such notes. 

And when Shelley has some definite state- 
ment to make, he simply says it; keeps his 
images on one side and his meanings on the 
other: 

We look before and after, 
And pine for what is not: 
Our sincerest laughter 
With some pain is fraught; 
Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest 
thought. 

This is a sweeping assertion, and is rather com- 
monplace in expression; but it is intelligible. 
And it is not in the least like Crashaw. 

I call Crashaw a “‘devotional’’ poet, because 
the word “religious” is so abused. Shelley even 
has been called religious, but he could not be 
called devout; he is religious in the same sense 
as when we say that Dean Inge or the Bishop 
of Birmingham is religious. Devotional poetry 
is religious poetry which falls within an ex- 

[ 136 ] 

A NOTE ON RICHARD CRASHAW 

act faith and has precise objects for contem- 
plation. Crashaw is sometimes called erotic 
in his devotion. “Erotic” is an abused word, 
but in any case ought not to be an offensive 
word. In one aspect it may be applied to Cra- 
shaw. Dante, for instance, always seems per- 
fectly aware of every shade of both human and 
divine love; Beatrice is his means of transition 
between the two; and there is never any danger 
of his confounding the two loves. But just as 
Crashaw is deficient in humanity, and yet is 
neither quite in the world nor out of it, and so 
is neither a Dante nor an Adam of St. Victor, 
so we feel at times that his passion for heavenly 
objects is imperfect because it is partly a sub- 
stitute for human passion. It is not impure, but 
it is incomplete. 

Yet Crashaw is quite alone in his peculiar 
kind of greatness. He is alone among the meta- 
physical poets of England, who were mostly 
intensely English: Crashaw is primarily a Euro- 
pean. He was saturated still more in Italian 
and Latin poetry than in English. Indeed Mr. 
Mario Praz, who has probably read more 

[ 137 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

than anybody of the Latin poetry and the con- 
tinental poetry of the seventeenth century, puts 
Crashaw above Marino, Gongora, and every- 
body else, merely as the representative of the 
baroque spirit in literature. 

[ 138 ] 

* x 
Vey nae te 
# * 
* * 
* * 
* * 
* VIII. * 

THE HUMANISM OF 
IRVING BABBITT 

Petras > en >¢ 

Ve Lv dwt eee 

- - serie 
es rn ae — ocr 
Sempre se heindern-d 
. ah ee NIV AT 

IT Is PROVERBIALLY EASIER TO DESTROY THAN 
to construct; and as a corollary of this proverb, 
it is easier for readers to apprehend the destruc- 
tive than the constructive side of an author’s 
thought. More than this: when a writer is skilful 
at destructive criticism, the public is satisfied 
with that. If he has no constructive philosophy, 
it is not demanded; and if he has, it is over- 
looked. This is especially true when we are 
concerned with critics of society, from Arnold 
to the present day. All such critics are criticized 
from one common standard, and that the low- 
est: the standard of brilliant attack upon as- 
pects of contemporary society which we know 
and dislike. It is the easiest standard to take. 
For the criticism deals with concrete things in 
our world which we know, and the writer may 
be merely echoing, in neater phrasing, our own 
thoughts; whereas the construction deals with 
things hard and unfamiliar. Hence the popu- 
larity of Mr. Mencken. 

But there are more serious critics than Mr. 
Mencken, and of these we must ask in the end 
what they have to offer in place of what they 
denounce. M. Julien Benda, for instance, makes 

[ 141 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

it a part of his deliberate programme to offer 
nothing; he has a romantic view of critical de- 
tachment which limits his interest. Mr. Wynd- 
ham Lewis is obviously striving courageously 
toward a positive theory, but in his published 
work has not yet reached that point. But in 
Professor Babbitt’s latest book, Democracy and 
Leadership, the criticism is related to a positive 
theory and dependent upon it. This theory is 
not altogether expounded, but is partly as- 
sumed. What I wish to do in the present essay 
is to ask a few questions of Mr. Babbitt’s con- 
structive theory. 

The centre of Mr. Babbitt’s philosophy is the 
doctrine of humanism. In his earlier books we 
were able to accept this idea without analysis; 
but in Democracy and Leadership—which I take 
to be at this point the summary of his theory 
—we are tempted to question it. The problem 
of humanism is undoubtedly related to the 
problem of religion. Mr. Babbitt makes it very 
clear, here and there throughout the book, that 
he is unable to take the religious view—that 
is to say that he cannot accept any dogma or 

[ 142 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

revelation; and that humanism is the alternative 
to religion. And this brings up the question: is 
this alternative any more than a_ substitute, 
and if a substitute, does it not bear the same 
relation to religion that “humanitarianism” 
bears to humanism? Is it, in the end, a view 
of life that will work by itself, or is it a deriva- 
tive of religion which will work only for a short 
time in history, and only for a few highly cul- 
tivated persons like Mr. Babbitt—whose an- 
cestral traditions, furthermore, are Christian, 
and who is, like many people, at the distance of 
a generation or so from definite Christian be- 
lief? Is it, in other words, durable beyond one 
or two generations? 

Mr. Babbitt says, of the “representatives of 
the humanitarian movement,” that 

they wish to live on the naturalistic level, and at the 
same time to enjoy the benefits that the past had 
hoped to achieve as a result of some humanistic or 
religious discipline. 

The definition is admirable, but provokes us 
to ask whether, by altering a few words, we 

[ 143 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

cannot arrive at the following statement about 
humanists: 

they wish to live on the humanistic level, and at the 
same time to enjoy the benefits that the past had 
hoped to achieve as a result of some religious 
discipline. 

If this transposition is justified, it means that 
the difference is only of one step: the humanitar- 
ian has suppressed the properly human, and is 
left with the animal; the humanist has sup- 
pressed the divine, and is left with a human 
element which may quickly descend again to 
the animal from which he has sought to raise 
it. 

Mr. Babbitt is a stout upholder of tradition 
and continuity, and he knows, with all his im- 
mense and encyclopedic information, that the 
Christian religion is an essential part of the 
history of our race. Humanism and religion are 
thus, as historical facts, by no means parallel; 
humanism has been sporadic, but Christianity 
continuous. It is quite irrelevant to conjecture 
the possible development of the European 

[ 144 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

races without Christianity—to imagine, that 
is, a tradition of humanism equivalent to the 
actual tradition of Christianity. For all we can 
say is that we should have been very different 
creatures, whether better or worse. Our prob- 
lem being to form the future, we can only form 
it on the materials of the past; we must use 
our heredity, instead of denying it. The re- 
ligious habits of the race are still very strong, 
in all places, at all times, and for all people. 
There is no humanistic habit: humanism is, I 
think, merely the state of mind of a few persons 
in a few places at a few times. To exist at all, it 
is dependent upon some other attitude, for it 
is essentially critical—I would even say para- 
sitical. It has been, and can still be, of great 
value; but it will never provide showers of 
partridges or abundance of manna for the 
chosen peoples. 

It is a little difficult to define humanism in 
Mr. Babbitt’s terms, for he is very apt to line 
it up in battle order with religion against hu- 
manitarianism and naturalism; and what I 
am trying to do is to contrast it with religion. 

[145 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

Mr. Babbitt is very apt to use phrases like “‘tra- 
dition humanistic and religious” which suggest 
that you could say also “tradition humanistic 
or religious.”” So I must make shift to define 
humanism as I can from a few of the examples 
that Mr. Babbitt seems to hold up to us. 

I should say that he regarded Confucius, 
Buddha, Socrates, and Erasmus as humanists 
(I do not know whether he would include 
Montaigne). It may surprise some to see Con- 
fucius and Buddha, who are popularly regarded 
as founders of religions, in this list. But it is 
always the human reason, not the revelation 
of the supernatural, upon which Mr. Babbitt 
insists. Confucius and Buddha are not in the 
same boat, to begin with. Mr. Babbitt of 
course knows infinitely more about both of 
these men than I do; but even people who know 
even less about them than I do, know that Con- 
fucianism endured by fitting in with popular 
religion, and that Buddhism endured by be- 
coming as distinctly a religion as Christianity— 
recognizing a dependence of the human upon 
the divine. 

[ 146 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

And finally, the attitude of Socrates and that 
of Erasmus toward the religion of their place 
and time were very different from what I 
take to be the attitude of Professor Babbitt. 
How far Socrates believed, and whether his 
legendary request of the sacrifice of a cock was 
merely gentlemanly behaviour or even irony, 
we cannot tell; but the equivalent would be 
Professor Babbitt receiving extreme unction, 
and that I cannot at present conceive. But both 
Socrates and Erasmus were content to remain 
critics, and to leave the religious fabric un- 
touched. So that I find Mr. Babbitt’s humanism 
to be very different from that of any of the 
humanists above mentioned. 

This is no small point, but the question is a 
difficult one. It is not at all that Mr. Babbitt 
has misunderstood any of these persons, or that 
he is not fully acquainted with the civilizations 
out of which they sprang. On the contrary, 
he knows all about them. It is rather, I think, 
that in his interest in the messages of individuals 
—messages conveyed in books—he has tended 
merely to neglect the conditions. The great 

[ 147 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

men whom he holds up for our admiration and 
example are torn from their contexts of race, 
place, and time. And in consequence, Mr. 
Babbitt seems to me to tear himself from his 
own context. His humanism is really something 
quite different from that of his exemplars, but 
(to my mind) alarmingly like very liberal 
Protestant theology of the nineteenth century: 
it is, in fact, a product—a by-product—of 
Protestant theology in its last agonies. 

I admit that all humanists—as humanists 
—have been individualists. As humanists, they 
have had nothing to offer to the mob. But they 
have usually left a place, not only for the mob, 
but (what is more important) for the mob part 
of the mind in themselves. Mr. Babbitt is too 
rigorous and conscientious a Protestant to do 
that: hence there seems to be a gap between 
his own individualism (and indeed intellec- 
tualism, beyond a certain point, must be in- 
dividualistic) and his genuine desire to offer 
something which will be useful to the Ameri- 
can nation primarily and to civilization itself. 
But the historical humanist, as I understand 

[ 148 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

him, halts at a certain point and admits that 
the reason will go no farther, and that it can- 
not feed on honey and locusts. 

Humanism is either an alternative to reli- 
gion, or is ancillary to it. To my mind, it always 
flourishes most when religion has been strong; 
and if you find examples of humanism which 
are anti-religious, or at least in opposition to 
the religious faith of the place and time, then 
such humanism is purely destructive, for it 
has never found anything to replace what it 
destroyed. Any religion, of course, is for ever 
in danger of petrifaction into mere ritual and 
habit, though ritual and habit be essential to 
religion. It is only renewed and refreshed by 
an awakening of feeling and fresh devotion, 
or by the critical reason. The latter may be 
the part of the humanist. But if so, then the 
function of humanism, though necessary, is 
secondary. You cannot make humanism itself 
into a religion. 

What Mr. Babbitt, on one side, seems to me 
to be trying to do is to make humanism—his 
own form of humanism—work without religion. 

[ 149 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

For otherwise, I cannot see the significance of 
his doctrine of self-control. This doctrine runs 
throughout his work, and sometimes appears as 
the “inner check.” It appears as an alternative 
to both political and religious anarchy. In the 
political form it is more easily acceptable. As 
forms of government become more democratic, 
as the outer restraints of kingship, aristocracy, 
and class disappear, so it becomes more and 
more necessary that the individual no longer 
controlled by authority or habitual respect 
should control himself. So far, the doctrine is 
obviously true and impregnable. But Mr. 
Babbitt seems to think also that the ‘outer’ 
restraints of an orthodox religion, as they 
weaken, can be supplied by the inner restraint 
of the individual over himself. If I have inter- 
preted him correctly, he is thus trying to build 
a Catholic platform out of Protestant planks. By 
tradition an individualist, and jealous of the 
independence of individual thought, he is 
struggling to make something that will be valid 
for the nation, the race, the world. 

The sum of a population of individuals, all 

[ 150 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

ideally and efficiently checking and controlling 
themselves, will never make a whole. And if 
you distinguish so sharply between “outer” and 
‘inner’ checks as Mr. Babbitt does, then there 
is nothing left for the individual to check him- 
self by but his own private notions and his judg- 
ment, which is pretty precarious. As a matter 
of fact, when you leave the political field for 
the theological, the distinction between outer 
and inner becomes far from clear. Given the 
most highly organized and temporally powerful 
hierarchy, with all the powers of inquisition and 
punishment imaginable, still the idea of the 
religion is the immer control—the appeal not to 
a man’s behaviour but to his soul. If a religion 
cannot touch a man’s self, so that in the end he 
is controlling himself instead of being merely 
controlled by priests as he might be by police- 
men, then it has failed in its professed task. I sus- 
pect Mr. Babbitt at times of an instinctive 
dread of organized religion, a dread that it 
should cramp and deform the free operations 
of his own mind. If so, he is surely under a 
misapprehension. 

[ 151 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

And what, one asks, are all these millions, 
even these thousands or the remnant of a few 
intelligent hundreds, going to control them- 
selves for? Mr. Babbitt’s critical judgment is 
exceptionally sound, and there is hardly one 
of his several remarks that is not, by itself, ac- 
ceptable. It is the joints of his edifice, not the 
materials, that sometimes seem a bit weak. He 
says truly: 

It has been a constant experience of man in all 
ages that mere rationalism leaves him unsatisfied. 
Man craves in some sense or other of the word an 

enthusiasm that will lift him out of his merely 
rational self. 

But it is not clear that Mr. Babbitt has any 
other enthusiasm to offer except the enthusiasm 
for being lifted out of one’s merely rational self 
by some enthusiasm. Indeed, if he can infect 
people with enthusiasm for getting even up to 
the level of their rational selves, he will ac- 
complish a good deal. 

But this seems to me just the point at which 
“humanistic control” ends, if it gets that far. 
He speaks of the basis “of religion and human- 

[ 152 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

istic control” in Burke, but what we should like 
to know is the respective parts played by 
religion and humanism in this basis. And with 
all the references that Mr. Babbitt makes to the 
role of religion in the past, and all the con- 
nexions that he perceives between the decline 
of theology and the growth of the modern errors 
that he detests, he reveals himself as uncom- 
promisingly detached from any religious be- 
lief, even the most purely “personal”: 

To be modern has meant practically to be in- 
creasingly positive and critical, to refuse to receive 
anything on an authority “‘anterior, exterior, and 
superior” to the individual. With those who still 
cling to the principle of outer authority I have no 
quarrel. I am not primarily concerned with them. 
I am myself a thoroughgoing individualist, writing 
for those who are, like myself, irrevocably com- 
mitted to the modern experiment. In fact, so far 
as I object to the moderns at all, it is because they 
have not been sufficiently modern, or, what 
amounts tothesame thing, have not been sufficiently 
experimental. 

Those of us who lay no claim to being modern 
may not be involved in the objection, but, as 

[ 153 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

bystanders, we may be allowed to inquire 
where all this modernity and experimenting is 
going to lead. Is everybody to spend his time 
experimenting? And on what, and to what end? 
And if the experimenting merely leads to the 
conclusion that self-control is good, that seems 
a very frosty termination to our hunt for “‘en- 
thusiasm.” What is the higher will to will, if 
there is nothing either “anterior, exterior, or 
superior” to the individual? If this will is to 
have anything on which to operate, it must be 
in relation to external objects and to objective 
values. Mr. Babbitt says: 

To give the first place to the higher will is only 
another way of declaring that life is an act of faith. 
One may discover on positive grounds a deep 
meaning in the old Christian tenet that we do not 
know in order that we may believe, but we believe 
in order that we may know. 

This is quite true; but if life is an act of faith, 
in what is it an act of faith? The Life-Forcers, 
with Mr. Bernard Shaw at their head, would 
say I suppose “‘in Life itself’; but I should not 
accuse Mr. Babbitt of anything so silly as that. 

[ 154 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

However, a few pages further on he gives some- 
thing more definite to will: it is civilization. 

The next idea, accordingly, to be examined 
is that of civilization. It seems, on the face of it, 
to mean something definite; it is in fact, merely 
a frame to be filled with definite objects, not a 
definite object itself. I do not believe that I can 
sit down for three minutes to will civilization 
without my mind’s wandering to something 
else. I do not mean that civilization is a mere 
word; the word means something quite real. 
But the minds of the individuals who can be 
said to “have willed civilization” are minds 
filled with a great variety of objects of will, 
according to place, time, and individual con- 
stitution; what they have in common is rather a 
habit in the same direction than a will to civil- 
ization. And unless by civilization you mean 
material progress, cleanliness, etc.—which is 
not what Mr. Babbitt means; if you mean a 
spiritual and intellectual coordination on a 
high level, then it is doubtful whether civil- 
ization can endure without religion, and religion 
without a church. 

[ 155 ] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

I am not here concerned with the question 
whether such a “humanistic” civilization as 
that aimed at by Professor Babbitt is or is not 
desirable; only with the question whether it is 
feasible. From this point of view the danger of 
such theories is, I think, the danger of collapse. 
For those who had not followed Mr. Babbitt 
very far, or who had felt his influence more re- 
motely, the collapse would be back again into 
humanitarianism thinly disguised. For others 
who had followed him hungrily to the end and 
had found no hay in the stable, the collapse 
might well be into a Catholicism without the 
element of humanism and criticism, which 
would be a Catholicism of despair. There is a 
hint of this in Mr. Babbitt’s own words: 

The choice to which the modern man will finally 
be reduced, it has been said, is that of being a Bolshe- 
vist or a Jesuit. In that case (assuming that by 
Jesuit is meant the ultramontane Catholic) there 
does not seem to be much room for hesitation. 
Ultramontane Catholicism does not, like Bolshe- 
vism, strike at the very root of civilization. In 
fact, under certain conditions that are already 
partly in sight, the Catholic Church may per- 

[ 156 J 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

haps be the only institution left in the Occident 
that can be counted upon to uphold civilized 
standards. It may also be possible, however, to be 
a thorough-going modern and at the same time 
civilized... . 

The last sentence somehow seems to me to die 
away a little faintly. But the point is that Mr. 
Babbitt seems to be giving away to the Church 
in anticipation more than would many who are 
more concerned with it in the present than he. 
Mr. Babbitt is much more ultramontane than 
I am. One may feel a very deep respect and 
even love for the Catholic Church (by which I 
understand Mr. Babbitt means the hierarchy 
in communion with the Holy See); but if one 
studies its history and vicissitudes, its difficulties 
and problems past and present, one is struck 
with admiration and awe certainly, but is not 
the more tempted to place all the hopes of 
humanity on one institution. 

But my purpose has been, not to predict a 
bad end for Mr. Babbitt’s philosophy, but to 
point out the direction which I think it should 
follow if the obscurities of “humanism” were 

[ 157] 

FOR LANCELOT ANDREWES 

cleared up. It should lead, I think, to the con- 
clusion that the humanistic point of view is 
auxiliary to and dependent upon the religious 
point of view. For us, religion is of course 
Christianity; and Christianity implies, I think, 
the conception of the Church. It would be not 
only interesting but invaluable if Professor 
Babbitt, with his learning, his great ability, his 
influence, and his interest in the most important 
questions of the time, could reach this point. 
His influence might thus join with that of 
another philosopher of the same rank—Charles 
Maurras—and might, indeed, correct some of 
the extravagances of that writer. 

Such a consummation is impossible. Pro- 
fessor Babbitt knows too much; and by that 
I do not mean merely erudition or information 
or scholarship. I mean that he knows too many 
religions and philosophies, has assimilated their 
spirit too thoroughly (there is probably no one 
in England or America who understands early 
Buddhism better than he) to be able to give 
himself to any. The result is humanism. I be- 
lieve that it is better to recognize the weaknesses 

[ 158 ] 

HUMANISM OF IRVING BABBITT 

of humanism at once, and allow for them, so 
that the structure may not crash beneath an 
excessive weight; and so that we may arrive at 
an enduring recognition of its value for us, and 
of our obligation to its author. 

THE END 

[ 159] 

’ a 
oe . 
“gs * (Mia Reseed qari 
Su laa wl rete: a 
} x OR _ 

7 = ¢ 7 a. =n ah, 3) 
7 de sah ging IOP Te alma 
: : a ee) a eases) —— 
7 By Pe Sia. 6 ae Ar hp’ e _ 

~~) Ad 

ie 
‘ NM 

82389 

PN Eliot, T 
203 For Lancelot Andrewes 
Eh 

BP we = A LURE 
yeti Lev 
om LEY 

Beets 

oo 

BEL Sei 
penn 
Opal 

canis 
ay 
ie
