ae Le ugg TA lace ety etn ty te Age aes o2'd dh slal apiadome “otaialsiy ate ty


Reet EIR ee ee ee NE AD, Dag sn AUREL TO eC SEA Te eNO TT Tes. aed Te OO OMe e RD ENE HV REHT pee mune ONT vs


ig FR asm


Teh
12/8,
| G
> 8


—— na Ae
= 4


ABSTRACT


FROM


The Regulations of the Librarp.


PEF ALAA DA


4,—That all books shall be returned half-yearly,


in order that they may be inspected by the Hono-
rary Secretaries.


5.—That any member detaining a book beyond
the time prescribed by the rules, shall be fined 6d.
per day for each volume so detained. 4 ftir Phas
becnr afftuctorfi.~ hy La te. 0H & +

6.—That if any book be in any manner injured,
the same shall be taken at cost price by the member
in whose possession it was so damaged; or if any
book be lost, the member to whom it was last de-
livered shall forfeit its published price.


7.—That no member shall be allowed to lend a
book belonging to the society.


HUMAN


PHYSFOLOGY.


DG i), 071, (aller


HUMAN j
PHYSIOLOGY.


;


BY


JOHN ELLIOTSON, M.D.Caytap. F.R.S.


PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL AND CHIRURGICAL
AND OF THE PHRENOLOGICAL SOCIETIES 5
PROFESSOR OF THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICKR OF MEDICINE AND
OF CLINICAL MEDICINE, AND DEAN OF THE FACULTY, IN THE UNIVERSITY 5
SENIOR PHYSICIAN OF THE NORTH LONDON HOSPITAL 5
FELLOW Of THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS 5
FORMERLY PHYSICIAN TO ST. THOMAS’S HOSPITAL, AND
PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH;
ETC. ETC. ETC.


WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED,
MUCH OF THE ELEMENTARY PART OF THE


INSTITUTIONES PHYSIOLOGICA


OF


J. F.. BLUMENBACH, M.D. F.R.S.


PROFESSOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GOTTINGEN.


ILLUSTRATED WITH NUMEROUS WOGOD-CUTS.


Fifth Epition.


UNIVERSITY OF LONDON:


LONDON:


LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMAN,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.


1835.


.
a |
a .
©
+ es
: i ie


{| HISTORICAL |
MEDICAL —


TO
THE STUDENTS


OF THE


UNIVERSITY OF LONDON,


THIS WORK
Is


AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED.


PRI E-FA: CE.


~~


In 1815, 1 translated the third edition of Professor Blu-
menbach’s “ Institutiones Physiologicee,” anonymously, with
the addition of twenty pages of notes; the whole amounting to
two hundred and sixty pages.


In 1817, I published a second edition, with my name, and
the addition of a hundred and fifty pages of notes; the
whole amounting to four hundred and twenty-six pages.


In 1820, I published a third edition, with two hundred
pages of notes, in smaller type than the text; so that,
although the whole amounted to four hundred and sixty-five
pages, the matter of my notes very nearly equalled that of
the text.


In 1824, I published a fourth edition, from a new edition
which had appeared of the original work in 1821. The
notes, still in smaller type, filled three hundred and fifty pages,
and the whole amounted to five hundred and eighty-one ; so
that the matter of my notes greatly exceeded that of the text.


Finding that, in the present edition (which, through my
engagements, has been delayed long after the preceding was


out of print), my own matter would very much exceed that


vill PREFACE.


of Blumenbach, and that much of the original would require
emendation on account of recent discoveries or might be
better omitted, and that the disjointed nature of the work
would be a source of greater inconvenience to the reader
than ever, I resolved to remodel the whole, omitting many
parts of the original, and blending my notes with as much of
it as I could retain: and as the portions of the original
retained are of so much smaller amount than my own labours,
and of a very elementary character, and the proportions of
Blumenbach’s share and my own thus completely reversed, I
feel satisfied that, in now giving my own name to the work,

- Ishall be justified in the eyes of even the celebrated and
venerable Blumenbach, who, though eighty-three years of age,
still delivers his lectures at eight o’clock every morning. The
passages with inverted commas and no farther intimation are
from Blumenbach. I have illustrated many pages with wood-
cuts, from Dr. Jules Cloquet’s collection, for the sake of the
general reader; since works of this description are now read
as much out of the profession as by medical men.


The correction of any errors, and the communication of
any facts, either publicly or privately, will always be esteemed
by me a valuable favour. :


37. Conduit Street,
Feb. 14. 1835.


pe
oe, Sy os


“Sy.
=


CON TENA 5.


I. GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY.


Page


5


Cuapr. I. General View of the Objects of Nature, and of Man as one
distinguished from the Rest - - ae |
II. General View of the Constituents of the Human Body ~ is

III. General View of the Organs, Functions, and Powers of the
Human Body - = a = 19

II. SPECIAL PHYSIOLOGY.
Nutritive Functions.

Cuar. I. Hunger, Thirst, and Food - - - - 49
TI. Mastication and Deglutition - - - 68
III. Digestion - = = a a rT
IV. Pancreatic Juice - - - - §&8
V. Bile = - - - - 91
VI. Spleen - - - - - 104
VII. Omentum = - - . - 110
VIII. Intestines - - - - malic
IX. Absorbent Vessels ~ - - - 123
X. Blood - - - - - 143
XI. Motion of the Blood - ~ - - 162
XII. Respiration - - - - - 196
XIII. Animal Heat - - - - - 230
XIV. Nutrition = - . ~ - 248
XV. Secretion - - - - - 255
XVI. Perspiration = = “ = - 269
XVII. Urine = - a < - 289
AVIII. Fat - - - - - - 298


a


Cuar. XIX.
xX,


XXI.
».©.4 08
XXIII.
XXIV.
RY.
XAVI.
RAVI


CONTENTS.


Nervous Functions.


Nervous System
Voluntary Motion -
Voice and Speech” -
External Senses in general and Touch in particular
Taste - - - - -
Smell

Hearing
Sight - - Ss 4
Sleep - - = s


Formative Functions, Decay, and Varieties.


Cuar. XXVITI.
X XIX.

XXX.

KXXI.

XXXII.

XX XIII.
XXXIV.
XXXV.
ROS i


Digestion
Phrenology
Mesmerism


General Differences of the Sexes
Genital Function in Man - - -
Genital Function in Woman - = =
Menstruation
Conception and Pregnancy -
Labour and its Sequelz -
Milk
Differences in the System before and after Birth -
Origin, Growth, Decline, and Death of the Human

System


APPENDIX.


ae 4
ad | j s te
4
‘i '
be ‘ 7
im
a? : 3
Ay, e Byun ,
}
‘ ”
PI i ‘
’
°
“
.
*
o J
: .
i 1
é
—-
@ a
: ses
‘


CORRIGENDA.


Page 67. line 1. of note, and
71. line 14. from bottom
90. line 1. after “sheep,” add “ horse, and dog.”

lines 4, 5. for “is neutral, or has only a little alkaline carbonate, and no

sulpho-cyanic acid,” substitute “is acid, though it becomes
alkaline while being collected, and contains salts of soda,
potass, and lime, but no sulpho-cyanic acid.”

189. line 21. for “twin,” read “ foetus.”

line 22. for “foetus,” read “twin.”

191. line 13. from bottom, for “head,” read “ hand.”

290. last line, for “ chemical,” read “ chirurgical.”

234, line 7. from bottom, for “ 52°,” read ‘ 56°.”

$23. line 5. from bottom, for “ 11,” read “ 224. sq.”’

368.

369.

375. line 5. from bottom, for ‘ 50,” read “ 56.”

383, note |, first line, for “Mr. (now Lord) Jeffery,” read “ Dr. Jobn
Gordon.”

389. line 2. of note, for “ M. Retzius,” read “ Baron Retzer.”

419. line 10. of note, for “ X XI.” read “ XXUL”

424, line 1. of note *, for “ Phr.”’ read “ Phil.”

466. line 17. for “* 324,” read “ 304.”

497. line 8. from bottom, for “ Sir G. Blane,” read “* Whytt.”

509, last line, in a few copies, for “ ait,” read ‘‘ fait.”

667. line 10. for “ George the Third,” read “ George the First.”

719. line 16. for ‘‘iris,” read “ irio.”

737, line 15. of note, for “herisson,” read “ hedgehog.”

741, line 8. for “ veins,” read “ corpora cavernosa.”

813. line 4. for “ John,” read “ Joseph.”

839. line 12. from bottom, for “heart, which is the most permanent part,”
read “head, which is the most permanent part (the heart).”


for “ Rastail,” read “ Raspail.”


in note, passim, for “ Dr. Dyer,” read “ Dr, Dyce.”


HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY.


I. GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY.


CHAPTER I.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE OBJECTS OF NATURE, AND OF MAN AS
DISTINGUISHED FROM THE REST.


Nomerous authors have remarked that a gradation exists among
all the objects of the universe, from the Almighty Creator, through
archangels and angels, men, brutes, vegetables, and inanimate
matter, down to nothing.


‘¢ Vast chain of being which from God began,
Natures ethereal, human, angel, man,
Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see,
No glass can reach, from infinite to thee,
From thee to nothing.’ *


Yet this gradation, striking as it is, deserves not the epithet
regular or insensible. “ The highest being not infinite must be,
as has been often observed, at an infinite distance below infinity.”
« And in this distance between finite and infinite there will be
room for ever for an infinite series of indefinable existence. Be-
tween the lowest positive existence and nothing, wherever we
suppose existence to cease, is another chasm infinitely deep ;
where there is room again for endless orders of subordinate
beings, continued for ever and ever, and yet infinitely superior to


4 Pope, lssay on Man, Epistle 1.
B


2 GRADATION OF OBJECTS.


non-existence.” ‘ Nor is this all. In the sca herever it begins
or ends, are infinite vacuities. At whatever distance we suppose
the next order of beings to be above man, there is room for an
intermediate order of beings between them, and if for one order
then for infinite orders; since every thing that admits of more
or less, and, consequently, all the parts of that which admits
them, may be infinitely divided. So that, as far as we can judge,
there may be room in the vacuity between any two steps of the
scale, or between any cath cint of the cone, for infinite exertion
of infinite power.” >

In fact, at how vast a distance do we see the innate mental
properties of man standing above those of the most sagacious
brute! How immensely does the volition of the lowest animal
raise it above the whole vegetable kingdom! And how deep the
chasm between the vital organisation of the meanest vegetable
and a mass of inanimate matter! Gradation must be admitted,
but it is far from regular or insensible. Neither does it at all
regard perfection of system, nor very much the degree, but
chiefly the excellence, and, within the limits of the visible world,
the combination, of properties. Man, placed at the summit of
terrestrial objects by the excellence of his mind and the combi-
nation of the common properties of matter, of those of vege-
tables, and of those of brutes, with those peculiar to himself, is
surpassed by the dog in acuteness of smell and by the oak in
magnitude, nor can he boast of more perfection than the gnat or
the thistle in their kinds,


Substances consist of Particles endowed with certain properties
without which their existence cannot be conceived, viz. extension
and impenetrability ; with others which proceed, indeed, from
their existence, but are capable of being subdued by opposing
energies, viz. mobility, inertness; and with others apparently
neither necessary to their existence nor flowing from it, but
merely superadded: for example, various attractions and repul-
sions, and i powers of affecting animated systems.

INANIMATE SUBSTANCES may be gaseous, liquid, or solid. If
solid, the inanimate body has no properties which are not analogous
to these, or even dependent upon them. It is for the most part


> Dr. Johnson, Review of a Free Hageiry into the Nature and Origin of Evil.


INANIMATE SUBSTANCES, VEGETABLES, AND ANIMALS. i]


homogeneous in its composition, and disposed to be flat and
angular, increases by external accretion, has an indeterminate
volume, and contains within itself no causes of decay. ‘The rest
of the bodies in nature are animated, and are vegetables and
animals.

VEGETABLES, in addition to the properties of inanimate matter,
possess those of Lire, viz. sensibility (without consciousness or
perception )—I would say excitability, for sensibility without the
power of sensation is nonsense,—and contractility; or I would
rather express both by the term excitability.« Their structure is
beautifully organised, their volume is determinate, and their sur-
faces disposed to be curved; they grow by interstitial deposition,
changing substances to their own nature, and are destined in their
very nature for a limited existence, —a period of increase and
decay. They contain fluids, some of which they receive, others
they produce, and others they discharge.

ANIMALS, in addition to the properties and characteristics of
vegetables, enjoy Minp, the indispensable attributes of which are
the powers of consciousness and perception, and of volition: the
two former, — which are in truth but one, termed consciousness
when it takes cognisance of internal impressions, and perception
when of external, — without the latter, would be, like vegetable
or organic sensibility without contractility, were this possible,
useless ; and the latter could not exist without the former‘, any
more than vegetable or organic contraction could occur without
excitability: nor can the existence of mind be conceived without
the faculties of consciousness, perception, and volition, any more
than the existence of matter without extension and impenetra-
bility. The possession of mind by animals necessarily implies the
presence of a brain for its exertion, and of a nerve or nerves for
the purpose of conveying impressions to this brain, and at least
volitions from it to one or more voluntary muscles. A system


© By their possession of the former, stimuli act upon them, and by the latter,
they upon stimuli: by the sensibility and contractility of the vessels, substances
are taken in by the roots, circulated through the system, and converted into the
various parts of the vegetable. Yet this does not imply perception, consciousness,
or will. The excitability of the absorbents and secretories of our own system car-
ries on absorption and secretion without our consciousness or volition,

1 « Sense,’ says Hamlet to his mother, “ sure you have,

Else could you not have motion.”  Actiii. Se. 4.
BQ


4: BRUTES.


which. is not. thus gifted certainly deserves not the name of
animal.¢

Notwithstanding the vast interval which of necessity exists
between the animal and vegetable kingdoms, the lowest brutes
approach as nearly as possible in organisation, and consequently
in function, to vegetable simplicity. They possess merely con-
sciousness and perception, and volition, with the appetite for
food, or are even nourished by imbibition, and multiply by shoots,
fixed like vegetables to the spot which they inhabit. The five
senses, sexual appetite, instincts, memory, judgment, and loco-


* I cannot conceive an animal without consc:ousness, perception, and volition ;
nor can I conceive these in an animal without a brain, any more than the secre-
tion of bile without a liver, or something analogous. I contend not for the name,
but for the thing. Zoologists indeed affirm that many internal worms and all
the class of zoophytes have no nervous system. But comparative anatomy is yet
imperfect, the examination of minute parts is extremely difficult, and new organs
are daily discovered. Blumenbach, after remarking that, except those animals
which inhabit corals and the proper zoophytes, most genera of the other orders of
the Linnean class of vermes are found to possess a distinct nervous system, adds:
“ although former anatomists have expressly declared in several instances that no
such parts existed.” (Comparative Anatomy, ch. cxvi. F.) Besides, some beings
haye been denominated animals without any very satisfactory reason.

Where the nervous system of an animal cannot be readily detected, its presence
may be inferred from motions evidently voluntary, such as retraction upon the
approach of footsteps, — proving the existence of an organ of hearing, a brain,
and nerves: motion in a part directly stimulated, as the contraction of an hydatid
upon being punctured, is no proof of an animal nature, for this is common to
vegetables, for instance, the leaves of the dionea muscipula, which contract forc-
ibly on a slight irritation. It may likewise be inferred from the presence of a
stomach, because, where there is a stomach, the food is taken in, not by absorbing
vessels constantly plunged in it, but by a more or less complicated and generally
solitary opening regulated by volition. John Hunter contended that the stomach >
was the grand characteristic of the animal kingdom.

* I see daily instances of something deserving some such name as judgment
or reason in brutes. To the incredulous I offer the following anecdote in the
words of Dr. Darwin. A wasp on a gravel walk had caught a fly nearly as
large as itself, Kneeling on the ground, I observed him separate the tail and
the head from the body part to which the wings were attached. He then took the
body part in his paws and rose about two feet from the ground with it; but a
gentle breeze wafting the wings of the fly turned him round in the air and he
settled again with his prey upon the gravel. I then distinctly observed him cut
off with his mouth first one of the wings and then the other, after which he flew
away with it unmolested with the wind.” Zoonomia: Instinct. — The works of
the two Hubers, Sur les Abeilles and Sur les Meurs des Fourmis indigenes, furnish


MAN. 5


motive power, with the necessary organs, are variously super-
added, and endless varieties of organisation constructed, so that
air and water, the surface and the crust of the earth, are all re-
plenished with animals completely calculated for their respective
habitations.§

Man, besides the common properties of animals, has others
which raise him to an immense superiority. His mind is endowed
with powers of the highest order that brutes have not, and his
body being, like the bodies of all animals, constituted in harmony


an abundance of most interesting instances of reason in those insects. See also
Mr. Smellie’s paper in the Transact. of Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. i.
p. 39. sqq.

8 An error has been committed not only in representing the gradation regular,
but in supposing every species of animal to constitute a distinct step in the grad-
ation. ‘* The whole chasm in nature,” says Addison (Spectator, No. 519.),
‘“‘ from a plant to a man, is filled up with divers kinds of creatures, rising one
above another, by such a gentle and easy ascent, that the little transitions and
deviations from one species to another are almost insensible.’”’ ‘* All quite down
from us,” says Locke (Essay on the Human Understanding, b. iii. c. 6.), ‘ the
descent is by easy steps, and a continued series of things, that in each remove
differ very little one from the other. There are fishes that have wings, and are
not strangers to the airy region ; and there are some birds, that are inhabitants of
the water; whose blood is cold as fishes, and their flesh so like in taste that the
scrupulous are allowed them on fish days. ‘There are animals so near of kin
both to birds and beasts, that they are in the middle between both: amphibious
animals link the terrestrial and aquatic together, seals live at land and at sea, and
porpoises have the warm blood and entrails of a hog; not to mention what is

_ confidently reported of mermaids or sea men.” “ In respect of our intellectual
and moral principles,” remarks Mr. Dugald Stewart (Outlines of Moral Philoso-

_ ply, par. 109.), “ our nature does not admit of comparison with that of any other
inhabitant of this globe: the difference between our constitution and theirs being
a difference, not in degree, but in kind. Perhaps this is the single instance in
which that regular gradation, which we, every where else, observe in the universe,
fails entirely.”

Now the various kinds of animals do certainly run into each other ; — there
are no great peculiarities of construction in single organs between which and the
ordinary structure of the same organs in other animals an intermediate structure
connecting the two are not continually brought to light by naturalists. No two
are so different but that discoveries are continually made of a third intermediate.
But connection is not gradation. Many kinds, and the intermediate ones by

which they are united, are all on a level in point of excellence and combination
of properties, so that a single step in the gradation may comprehend a great
number of kinds ;: — the whole vegetable kingdom forms but one step.


B 3


6 MAN.


with the mind that the powers of the latter may have effect,
differs necessarily in many points of construction from the body
of every brute. Well might Shakspeare exclaim, “ What a piece
of work is man! How noble in reason! how infinite in faculties !
in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how
like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the
world! the paragon of animals !”*

The orang utans approach the nearest of all brutes to the
human subject. Possessing expression of countenance, elevation
of forehead, and less projection of the lower part of the face than
other brutes, anterior extremities that are really arms and hands,
and teeth of the same number and pretty much of the same figure
as Our OwN; curious, imitative, covetous, social; said by some to
place sentinels and dispose themselves in a train for the propaga-
tion of alarm ; toseem now and then to laugh and weep}, to walk a
little occasionally erect, to defend themselves with sticks and
stones, to copulate face to face, to carry their young either in
their arms or on their backs, and to be very lascivious in regard
to our species ;— the orang utans at first sight afford, if any of the
genus can afford, a little probability to the opinion of a close con-
nection between apes and the human race. Uncivilised men, too,
make a slight approach in many corporeal particulars, as we shall
hereafter find, to the structure of other animals, and since, also,
the circumstances of their existence call into action few of the
peculiar mental powers of our nature, they have been adduced in
corroboration of this opinion. But the least examination displays
differences of the greatest magnitude between the human and the
brute creation.* These we shall review under two divisions, the


h Hamlet, Act ii. Sc. 2.

* Le Cat (Traité de V Existence du Fluide des Nerfs, p. 35.) asserts that he had
seen the jocko or chimpanzee (simia troglodytes) both laugh and cry. The reader
will remember the lines in Milton’s Paradise Lost (B. ix.),—


“« Smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied.”’


The orang utans exhibited a few years ago at Exeter ’Change,—the one a
satyrus and the other a chimpanzee,— are said by their keepers to have sometimes
laughed when much pleased, but never to have wept. Steller states the fact of
weeping in regard to the phoca ursina; Pallas, in regard to the camel ; and Hum-
boldt, in regard to a small American monkey. Mr. Lawrence, Lectures, p. 236.

* In La Fontaine’s charming fable of Le Singe et le Dauphin, the former


MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN. ‘


first embracing the mental, and the second the corporeal, charac-
teristics of mankind.

‘In judging of the mental faculties of mankind!, not merely
those should be considered which an unfortunately situated indi-
vidual may display, but those which all the race would display
under favourable circumstances. A seed and a pebble may not
on a shelf appear very dissimilar, but, if both are placed in the
earth, the innate characteristic energies of the seed soon become
conspicuous. A savage may in the same manner seem little
superior to an orang utan, but, if instruction is afforded to both,
the former will gradually develope the powers of our nature in
their noble superiority, while the latter will still remain an orang
utan. The excellence of man’s mind demonstrates itself chiefly


during a shipwreck, near Athens, resolves to profit by his resemblance to man,
for whom the dolphin was anciently said to have a great regard. (See Pliny,
Hist. Nat. ix. 8,9.) In the hurry,


Un dauphin le prit pour un homme,
Et sur son dos le fit asseoir

Si gravement, qu’on eut cru voir
Le chanteur que tant on renomme.


Just before landing him, the dolphin asked whether he often saw the Pir@us, to
which he unfortunately replied,


Tous les jours: il est mon ami:
C’est une vieille connaissance,


One glance was sufficient to discover the difference between a man and a
_monkey.


Le dauphin rit, tourne la téte ;

Et, le magot considéré,

I] s’appercoit qu’il n’a tiré

Du fond des eaux rien qu’une béte ;
Il l’y replonge, et va trouver
Quelque homme 4 fin de le sauver.


“« The difference between the volume of the brain of the orang utan and man
is as 5 to 1: their convolutions differ considerably in number and structure ; the
anterior lobes especially are narrowed into a cone, flattened above, hollowed out
below, &c. and the difference is much more striking in other apes.”’ Gall, 1. c.
t. vi. p. 298.

' In the external senses of at least smelling, hearing, and seeing, man is sur-
passed by brutes. Whether they have any sense not possessed by us I cannot
pretend to say,


B 4


8 MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN.


by his voice and hands. Witness the infinite variety and the
depth of thought expressed by means of words: witness his great
reasoning powers, his ingenuity, his taste, his upright, religious,
and benevolent, feelings, in his manufactories, his galleries of the
fine arts, his halls of justice, his temples, and his charitable estab-
lishments. Besides the qualities common to all animals, each of
which he, like every animal, possesses in a degree peculiar to
himself, and some indeed in a degree very far surpassing that in
which any brute possesses them, for instance, benevolence, me-
chanical contrivance, the sense for music and language, and the
general power of observation and inference respecting present
circumstances, he appears exclusively gifted with at least feelings
of religion and justice, with taste, with wit, and with decided
reflecting faculties of comparing and reasoning into causes.

The corporeal characteristics of mankind are not less striking
and noble. Among the beings beheld by Satan in Milton’s
Paradise,


“ Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native honour clad,
In naked majesty seem’d lords of all.” ®


The erect posture is natural and peculiar to man.° All nations
walk erect, and, among those individuals who have been disco-


™ Consult Blumenbach, De Generis Humani Varietate Nativa. Sect.i. De
Hominis a ceteris Animalibus differentia.

Paradise Lost, book iv. 288.

© There is little necessity in the present day to attempt the refutation of the
ridiculous opinion that man is destined to walk on all-fours. But I do so for the
purpose of displaying many peculiarities of our structure,

It is almost incredible that a thinking man could have entertained it for a
moment, any more than the idea of our naturally having tails, Yet this is the
fact; and, in exquisite ridicule of such philosophers, Butler makes Hudibras,
after proving to his mistress by his beard that he is no gelding, fruitlessly urge
his erect posture in proof that he is not a horse.


«‘ Next it appears I am no horse,
That I can argue and discourse,
Have but two legs, and ne’er a tail. —
Quoth she, That nothing will avail ;
For some philosophers of late here
Write, men have four legs by nature,
And that ’tis custom makes them go,
Erroneously upon but two.


CORPOREAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN. ‘9


vered in a wild and solitary state, there is no well authenticated
instance of one whose progression was on all-fours. If we at-
tempt this mode of progression, we move either on the knees
or the points of the toes, throwing the legs obliquely back to a
considerable distance; we find ourselves insecure and uneasy;
our eyes, instead of looking forwards, are directed to the ground;
and the openings of the nostrils are no longer at the lower part
of the nose,—in a situation to receive ascending odorous particles,
but lie behind it. Our inferior extremities, being of much greater
length, in proportion to the others and to the trunk, than the
posterior of brutes with four extremities, even in children in
whom the proportion is less, are evidently not intended to coin-
cide with them in movement; they are much stronger than the
arms, obviously for the purpose of great support: the presence of
calves, which are found in man alone, shows that the legs are to
support and move the whole machine; the thigh bones are in
the same line with the trunk, in quadrupeds they form an angle,
frequently an acute one; the bones of the tarsus become hard
and perfect sooner than those of the carpus, because strength of
leg is required for standing and walking sooner than strength of
arm and hand for labour; the great toe is of the highest import-
ance to the erect posture, and bestowed exclusively on mankind ;
the os calcis is very large, particularly at its posterior projection,
for the insertion of the strong muscles of the calf, and lies at
right angles with the leg; we alone can rest fully upon it, and
in fact upon the whole of the tarsus, metatarsus, and toes. The
superior extremities do not lie under the trunk as they would if


destined for its support, but on its sides, capable of motion in


every direction towards objects ; the fore-arm extends itself out-
wards, not forwards, as in quadrupeds, where it is an organ of
progression ; the hand is fixed not at right angles with the arm,
as an instrument of support, but in the same line, and cannot
be extended to a right angle without painfully stretching the
flexor tendons; the superior extremity is calculated in the erect


As ’twas in Germany made good
B’ a boy that lost himself in a wood,
And growing to a man was wont
With wolves upon all-four to hunt.”
Hudibras, part ii. cauto i.


10 CORPOREAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN.


posture for seizing and handling objects, by the freedom of its
motions, by the great length of the fingers above that of the toes,
and by the existence of the thumb, which, standing at a distance
from the fingers and bending towards them, acts as an opponent,
while the great toe is, like the rest, too short for apprehension,
stands in the same line with them, and moves in the same direc-
tion: were our hands employed in the horizontal posture, they
would be lost to us as grand instruments in the exercise of our
mental superiority. Quadrupeds have a strong ligament at the
back of the neck to sustain the head; in us there is no such thing,
and our extensor muscles at the back of the neck are compa-
ratively very weak.P They have the thorax deep and narrow,
that the anterior extremities may lie near together and give more
support; the sternum too is longer, and the ribs extend con-
siderably towards the pelvis to maintain the incumbent viscera;
our thorax is broad from side to side, that the arms being thrown
to a distance may have greater extent of motion, and shallow
from the sternum to the spine; and the abdominal viscera, press-
ing towards the pelvis rather than towards the surface of the
abdomen in the erect attitude, do not here require an osseous
support. The pelvis is beautifully adapted in us for supporting
the bowels in the erect posture; it is extremely expanded, and
the sacrum and os coccygis bend forwards below: in brutes it
does not merit the name of pelvis; for, not having to support
the abdominal contents, it is narrow, and the sacrum inclines but
little to the pubes. The nates, besides extending the pelvis upon
the thigh bones in the erect state of standing or walking, allow
us to rest while awake in the sitting posture, in which, the head
and trunk being still erect, our organs of sense have their proper
direction equally as in walking or standing; were we compelled
to. lie down like quadrupeds, when resting during the waking
state, the different organs of the face must change their present
situation to retain their present utility, no less than if we were
compelled to adopt the horizontal progression ; and, conversely,


‘P As the head is connected with the trunk farther back in brutes than in us,
the small length of lever between the occipital foramen and the back of the head,
and the length of the head below the foramen, require all this power; but even
in us much more upholding power than we have at the back of the neck would
be required for all-four progression, as the head would no longer rest upon the


spine.


4


CORPOREAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN, 11


were their situation so changed, the provision for the sitting pos-
ture would be comparatively useless.

While some, perversely desirous of degrading their race, have
attempted to remove a splendid distinction by asserting that we
are constructed for all fours, others with equal perverseness and
ignorance have asserted that monkeys are destined for the upright
posture. The monkey tribe, it is true, maintain the erect posture
less awkwardly than other brutes with four extremities, but they
cannot maintain it long, and, while in it, they bend their knees
and body ; they are insecure and tottering, and glad to rest upon
a stick; their feet, too, instead of being spread for support, are
coiled up as if to grasp something. In fact their structure proves
them to be neither biped nor quadruped, but four-handed, ani-
mals. They live naturally in trees, and are furnished with four
hands for grasping the branches and gathering their food. Of
their four hands the posterior are even the more perfect, and are
in no instance destitute of a thumb, although, like the thumbs of
all the quadrumana, so insignificant as to have been termed by
Eustachius, “ omnino ridiculus;” whereas the anterior hands of
one variety (s¢mia paniscus) have not this organ. The whole
length of the orang utan, it may be mentioned, falls very much
short of ours.

It was anciently supposed that man, because gifted with the
highest mental endowments, possessed the largest of all brains.
But as elephants and whales surpass him in this respect, and the
sagacious monkey and dog have smaller brains than the com-
paratively stupid ass, ox, and hog, the opinion was relinquished
by the moderns, and man was said only to have the largest brain
in proportion to the size of his body. But as more extensive
observation proved canary and other birds, and some varieties of
the monkey tribe, to have Jarger brains than man in proportion
to the body, and several mammalia to equal him in this particular,
and as rats and mice too surpass the dog, the horse, and the
elephant, in the comparative bulk of their brains, this opinion
also gave way, in its turn, to that of Sommerring, —that man
possesses the largest brain in comparison with the nerves arising
from it. This has not yet been contradicted, although the com-
parative size of the brain to the nerves originating from it (grant-
ing that they originate from it) is not an accurate measure of the
faculties, because the seal has in proportion to its nerves a larger


a
x


12 CORPOREAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN.


brain than the house-dog, and the porpoise than the orang
utan.@

As the human brain is of such great comparative magnitude,
the cranium is necessarily very large and bears a greater pro-
portion to the face than in any other animal. In an European the
vertical section of the cranium is almost four times larger than
that of the face (not including the lower jaw); in the monkey it is
little more than double; in most ferz, nearly equal ; in the glires,
solipedes, pecora, and belluz, less. The faculties, however, do
not depend upon this proportion, because men of great genius, as
Leo, Montaigne, Leibnitz, Haller, and Mirabeau, had very large
faces, and the sloth and seal have faces larger than the stag,
horse, and ox, in proportion to the brain, and the proportion is
acknowledged by Cuvier to be not at all applicable to birds. We
are assisted in discovering the proportion between the cranium
and face by the facial angle of Camper. He draws two straight
lines, the one, horizontal, passing through the external meatus
auditorius and the bottom of the nostrils; the other, more per-
pendicular, running from the convexity of the forehead to the
most prominent part of the upper jaw. The angle which the
latter,— the proper facial line,— makes with the former, is greatest
in the human subject, from the comparative smallness of the brain
and the great developement of the mouth and nose in brutes. In
the human adult this angle is about from 65° to 85°; in the orang
utan about from 55° to 65°; in some quadrupeds 20°; and in the
lower classes of vertebral animals it entirely disappears.

Neither is it to be regarded as an exact measure of the under-
standing, for persons of great intellect may have a prominent
mouth; it shows merely the projection of the forehead, while the
cranium and brain may vary greatly in the size of other parts; three-
fourths of quadrupeds, whose crania differ extremely in other re-
spects, have the same facial angle; great amplitude of the frontal
sinuses, as In the owl and hog, without any increase of brain, may
increase it, and for this reason Cuvier draws the facial line from
the internal table of the frontal bone.

In proportion as the face is elongated, the occipital foramen
lies more posteriorly; in man consequently it is most forward,
While in man it is nearly in the centre of the base of the cra-
nium, and horizontal, and has even sometimes its anterior margin


9 See Gall, 1. c, t. ii, p. 281. sqq.


CORPOREAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAN, 1s


elevated ; in most quadrupeds it is situated at the extremity of
the cranium obliquely, with its posterior parts turned upwards,
and is in some completely vertical. On this difference of situation,
Daubenton founded his occipital angle. He drew one line from
the posterior edge of the foramen to the lower edge of the orbit,
and another, in the direction of the foramen, passing between the
condyles and intersecting the former. According to the angle
formed, he established the similarity and diversity of crania.
The information derived from it in this respect is very imperfect,
because it shows the differences of the occiput merely. Blumen-
bach remarks that its variations are included between 80° and 90°
in most quadrupeds which differ very essentially in other points.

The want of the ossa intermaxillaria has been thought peculiar
to mankind. Quadrupeds, and nearly all the ape tribe, have two
bones between the superior maxillary, containing the dentes in-
cisores when these are present, and termed ossa intermaxillaria,
incisoria, or labialia. But these do not exist universally in them.
Man only has a prominent chin: his lower jaw is the shortest,
compared with the cranium, and its condyles differ in form, direc-
tion, and articulation, from those of any brute: in no brute are
the teeth arranged in such a close and uniform series ; the lower
incisores, like the jaw in which they are fixed, are perpendicular,
— a distinct characteristic of man, for in brutes they slope back-
backwards with the jaw bone; the canine are not longer than the
rest, nor insulated as in monkeys; the molares differ from those
of the orang utan and of all the genus simia by their singularly
obtuse projections.

The slight hairiness of the human skin in general, although
certain parts, as the pubes and axilla, are more copiously fur-
nished with hair than in brutes; the omnivorous structure of the
alimentary canal; the curve of the vagina corresponding with the
curve of the sacrum formerly mentioned, preventing woman from
being, as brute females are, retromingent; the peculiar structure


* Mémoires de l’ Académie des Sciences de Paris. 1764.

* In achimpanzee that died at Exeter Change a few years ago, the statement
of Tyson and Daubenton was verified, — that this black ape has no intermaxillary
bone. The red-haired variety (Simia Satyrus) has it, and is said to be destitute of
nails on the hind thumbs and of ligamentum teres at the head of the os femoris,
both which structures this chimpanzee possessed. The Satyrus is therefore not so
near the human subject as the Troglodytes. In a simia satyrus, however, lately


dissected at the Zoological Gardens, the hind thumbs possessed nails. Proceed-
ings, &c. Nov. 23. 1830.


14 ; _ DEFINITION OF PHYSIOLOGY.


of the human uterus and placenta; the length of the umbilical
chord and the existence of the vesicula umbilicalis until the fourth
month ; together with the extreme delicacy of the cellular mem-
brane; are likewise structural peculiarities of the human race.
The situation of the heart lying not upon the sternum, as in quad-
rupeds, but upon the diaphragm, on account of our erect position,
—the basis turned not, as in them, to the spine, but to the head,
and the apex to the left nipple; the absence of the allantois, of
the panniculus carnosus, of the rete mirabile arteriosum, of the
suspensorius oculi; and the smallness of the foramen incisivum,
which is not only very large in brutes, but generally double,
though not peculiarities, are striking circumstances.

‘Man only can live in every climatet; he is the slowest in
arriving at maturity, and, in proportion to his size, he lives the
longest of all mammalia ; he only procreates at every season, and,
while in celibacy, experiences nocturnal emissions. None but the
human female menstruates.

Man, thus distinguished from all other terrestrial beings, evi-
‘dently constitutes a separate species. For “a species comprehends
all the individuals which descend from each other, as from a com-
‘mon parent, and those which resemble them as much as they do
each other# ;” and no brute bears such a resemblance to man.


The knowledge of all the objects and laws of nature might be
supposed to be signified by the term physiology, derived as it is
from gvcics, nature, and A¢yos, a discourse. But the term is restricted
to vegetables and animals, and indeed solely to their functions.
The knowledge of their structure is designated Anatomy; the
knowledge of their functions PuystoLoey.

Both anatomy and physiology are divided into vegetable and
animal; and the latter again into brute, or comparative, and
human. The subject of the present work is HumAN Puysto.ocy:
but the functions of brutes and vegetables will frequently be
mentioned. .


* Blumenbach accounts for this, and I think justly, by the two-fold operation,
of our intellect (1. c. § 18. p. 54.), and of the more accommodating nature of
our frame (1. ¢. § 17.).

" Cuvier, Discours Préliminaire aux Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles des
Quadrupedes.


15


CHAP. II.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE CONSTITUENTS OF THE HUMAN BODY.


Tue ultimate principLes of animal bodies, forming the distinct
compounds, whether gases, fluids, or solids, are : —
Hydrogen,
Carbon,
Oxygen,
Azote,
Chlorin, iodin, fluorin ?
Sulphur,
Phosphorus,
Potassium,
Sodium,
Calcium,
Magnesium, silicium ?
Manganese ?
Iron,
Copper ?
The proximate PRINCIPLES, or distinct chemical compounds
of animal bodies, are: ~—
Albumen,
Fibrin, |
Colouring matter of blood,
Curd,
Fatty matter, pe
stearin,
Gelatine, obtained from various tex- | Subject to great variety
tures by boiling, in different animals, &c.
Matters found in the bile,— cho-
lesterin, erythrogin, asparagin,
picromel ?
Mucus, and probably some other
products of glands at present but
little understood,


‘ gee ultimate principles of yegetables may be considered the same as those of
animals,


16 ULTIMATE AND PROXIMATE ANIMAL PRINCIPLES,


Urea,

Cystic oxide, xanthic oxide,
Uric acid,

Erythric acid ?

Purpuric acid,

Oxalic acid,


)
Acetic acid,
J


Not subject to variety ;
uniform in all in-


Lactic acid,
stances.


Butyric acid,

Formic acid,

Benzoic acid,
Sulpho-cyanic acid,
Sugar of milk,

Sugar of diabetic urine,”


> Vegetable proximate principles are very numerous: the following may be
considered the chief : —
Sugar, 7
Starch,
Lignin,
Gum, mucus, jelly,
Extractive, colouring matters, bitter prin- >
ciples,
Gluten
Oils, fixed and volatile,
Resins, J
The following are constant in their character, or are peculiar to certain


All subject to endless variety as
occurring in different plants.


vegetables.

Various acids — Oxalic, citric, tartaric, malic, moroxylic, gallic, laccic, kinic,
boletic, prussic, meconic, benzoic, &c.
Various alkaline bodies — Quinina, cinchonina, morphina, strychnina, brucina,

delphina, picrotoxina, atropia, veratrina, hyoscyamina, &c.

Indigo,

Tan,

Suber,

Caoutchouc,

Wax,

Asparagine, ulmine, inuline, fungine, polychroite, hematine, nicotine, pol-
lenine, emetine, sarcocol, olivile, medulline, lupuline, cathartine,
piperine, daphnine, salicine, populine, digitaline, santonine, cafeine,
hordeine, elatine, &c, &e.


ULTIMATE AND PROXIMATE SOLIDS. 17


The ultimate soins, which these principles are said to compose,
are, the cellular fibre, the muscular fibre, and the nervous fibre.¢

The proximate soups, said to be composed of these primary, or
rather ultimate, or elementary solids or tissues, and forming the
different organs, have been variously specified.‘

Dr. Carmichael Smyth, in an admirable paper upon inflammation,
considered that disease according to the structures which it affects,
—the skin, cellular membrane, serous membranes, mucous mem-
branes, and muscular fibres.¢. Dr. Pinel, some years afterwards,
adopted this arrangementf; and Bichat at length suggested that
all diseases might be considered in this manner, and he distributed
the proximate solids into twenty-one kinds :-—


1. Cellular, 12. Fibro-cartilaginous,

2. Nervous, of animal life, 13. Muscular, of animal life,
3. Nervous, of organic life, 14. Muscular, of organic life,
4. Arterial, 15. Mucous,

5. Venous, 16. Serous,

6. Exhalant, 17. Synovial,

7. Absorbent, with its glands, 18. Glandular,

8. Osseous, 19. Dermoid,

9. Medullary, 20. Epidermoid,

10. Cartilaginous, 21. Pilous.8


11. Fibrous (tendino-fibrous),


© See Appendix, by Dr. Copeland, to his translation of Richerand’s Nowveaux
Elémens de Physiologie, p. 553. sqq. Many writers have asserted the globular
composition of various parts of the animal and vegetable frame. Lately, the cel-
Jular, muscular, and nervous structures were described as consisting of globules,
and some novel views presented, by Dr. M. Edwards, (Archives Générales de
Médecine, t. 3. Paris, 1823.) But the whole results have been denied by
Dr. Hodgkin and Mr. Lister, who repeated the examination with a much superior
microscope. Philos. Magazine, August, 1827.

Another author professes to have made still more minute discoveries than
Dr. Edwards. Dutrochet, Recherches, Anatomiques et Physiologiques, sur la
Structure Interne des Animaux et Végétauz.

¢ « The ancients divided the body into similar or homogenous parts, — those
consisting of particles similar to one another, as the bones, cartilages, muscles,
tendons, &c.; and dissimilar, — those composed of the similar, as the head, trunk,
limbs,” &c.

° Medical Communications, by a Society for the Promotion of Medical Knowledge,
vol. ii. 1790. Read to the Society, Jan. 1788.

* Nosographie Philosophique, 1797. & Anatomie Générale, t.i. p. 1xxx.

Cc


18 ULTIMATE AND PROXIMATE FLUIDS.


This arrangement, Dr. Rudolphi remarks, is physiological rather
than anatomical, and he distributes them into eight classes only: —


Cellular, Tendinous,
Horny, Vascular,
Cartilaginous, Muscular, and
Osseous, Nervous."


The ultimate and proximate riuips of the body, generated by
its functions, whether for its own use, or for elimination from it,
may perhaps be viewed as,


Aqueous, Oleaginous,
Mucous, Bilious,
Albuminous, Urinous,
Fibrinous, Seminal.


The first fluid is that derived from external matter, — the
chyle; then that into which this is formed, and which is dis-
tributed through the system, — the blood ; then the various fluids
produced from this.

To show the preponderance of the fluid over the solid matter
of the body, Blumenbach states that he possesses the entire, but
perfectly dry, mummy of a Guanche, or aboriginal inhabitant of
Teneriffe, presented to him by Sir Joseph Bankes, which, with all
its muscles and viscera, weighs but seven pounds and a half.!


h Grundriss der Physiologie, 68.
i Instit. Physiol. sect. 1, edit, 4. Gottinge, 1821.


CHAP. IN.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE ORGANS, FUNCTIONS, AND POWERS OF
THE HUMAN BODY.


Tue proximate solids are made up into various organs ; and the
operation of an organ is termed its function.

While a part is performing its functions, and even while it only
remains in a condition fit for the performance of its functions,
changes of its constituent particles go on; indeed, many func-
tions are in a great measure but chemical changes. The separ-
ation of one portion of matter must occasion the addition of
another to be necessary. Hence organs are framed for receiving
matter from without, and for changing it variously, so as to fit it
to become a portion of the fluids of the body; for distributing it
through the body, and rendering it a part of the body; and for the
separation and elimination of those particles which in the course
of the chemical changes must quit the system. We thus observe
organs of reception, assimilation, circulation, nutrition, secretion,
and excretion. As individuals last but a limited time, the species
is preserved by the generation of new beings from individuals.
Organs of generation are therefore framed; but this function is
merely circulation, secretion, excretion, and nutrition.

We perceive external objects and circumstances; are conscious
of much within ourselves; we think, desire, and exert volition.
The organs of these functions are termed the nervous system. It
exists in mass, and is also ramified throughout the frame. Im-
pressions upon the extremities of its ramifications, as well as upon
these in their course, are conveyed along them to the mass, where
they are perceived; and the mandates of the will are conveyed
from the mass along the ramifications to fleshy organs of motion,
termed muscles; and the influence of emotion is also conveyed
from the mass along the ramifications to every part.

c 2


20 GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS.


The ancients arranged all these functions in four classes : —
The vital, or those constantly necessary to life, comprising respir-
ation and the action of the heart: the natural, or those by which
the body is nourished: the animal, or those which principally
distinguish animals from vegetables, viz. sense, consciousness,
desires, thought, volition: and the genital.

The functions are now generally arranged in two classes: the
animal, constituting one peculiar to animals; and the vital and
natural, united into another, common to vegetables and animals,
under the title of organic or vital. The generative, relating in
their object to the species rather than to the individual, and of
but temporary duration, are thrown into a separate and inferior
division, but in fact, except the animal passion, are part of the
organic.

We owe the revival of this classification, and our knowledge of
the characteristics of each class of functions, to Dr.Wilson Philip 4
and Xavier Bichat ©; although the latter, from having published a
work expressly on the subject, has received the whole honour,
both in Great Britain and on the Continent.


The animal functions prove us feeling, thinking, and willing
beings: they are the actions of the senses which receive impres-
sions; of the brain which perceives them, is conscious, desires,
reflects, and wills; of the voluntary muscles which execute the
will in regard to motion; and of the nerves which are the agents
of transmission: the brain is their central organ. The vital or
organic functions are independent of mind, and give us simply
the notion of life: they are digestion, circulation, respiration,
exhalation, absorption, secretion, nutrition, calorification : the
heart is their central organ.

The organs of the animal functions are double and correspon-
dent, there being on each side of the median line of the body
either two distinct organs, as the eyes, ears, extremities ; or two
correspondent halves, as is the case with the brain, spinal marrow,
nose, tongue, &c.


* Treatise on Febrile Diseases, ch. iii. sect. 3. First edition. 1799. Paper
read to the Royal Med. Society of Edinburgh, 1791 or 1792, and inserted in its
Records. Essay on Opium. 1795. Edinburgh Med. and Surgical Journal,
July, 1809. p. 301. sq.

> Recherches Physiologiques sur la Vie et la Mort, 1805.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS. ae |


The organs of the vital or organic functions are in very few
instances double, or situated with their centres in the median line
and possessed of symmetrical halves; witness the heart, stomach,
liver. There are, indeed, two kidneys, but they continually
differ in size, figure, and situation: the two lungs are very dis-
similar. ©

Hence Bichat infers, that in the animal functions a harmony of
action in each organ, or in each half of the organ, is indispensable
to perfection, when both organs or sides act together ; and that
if such harmony do not occur, it is better for one organ or one
half to act alone. This certainly appears true of the eye,
and ear, and even of the brain. [t certainly does not hold good
in the actions of the voluntary muscles, nor in the operations of
the brain or spinal marrow in willing those actions. From the
duplicity of the organs it also happens that one side may cease
to act without detriment to the function of the other; while, in
the vital or organic class, no harmony of action is possible, and
the derangement of any one part of an organ generally affects
the whole of it, an obstruction in the colon disturbs the func-
tions of all the alimentary canal.

The animal functions experience periodical intermissions —
sleep. The organic or vital continue incessantly, suffering merely
remissions :— the blood constantly circulates, the perspiratory
fluid is constantly secreted, the stomach has no sooner digested
one meal than we commit another to it, yet we shall hereafter


© As the nerves of one perpendicular half of the body are connected with one
half of the brain or spinal marrow, it is not surprising that we often see a loss
of motion or of sense, or the reverse, viz. spasms or convulsions, or even an ex-
cess of sensibility, in one perpendicular half of the body. But we have examples
of ague affecting only one perpendicular half of the body (Ephemer. Nat. Curios.
and Mémoires de Montpellier, 1827): of persons who sweated on one perpendicu-
lar half only, (Zphemer. Nat. Curios. Dr. Abercrombie on Diseases of the Brain,
and Nerves (the line on the face was distinctly marked), p. 284. Dr. Andral,
Clinique, vol. i. p. 477.): and of a child that became pale and emaciated in one
perpendicular half, while the other remained plump and healthy. (Dr. Falconer,
Memoirs of London Med. Soc. vol. ix.) Still, as we have paralysis and convulsions
also in a horizontal half, so instances are on record of ague affecting a horizontal
half (Journal de Médecine, t. xxiv. p. 60, January, 1766); and of one horizontal
half sweating (Andral, ib.): and as we have also examples of paralysis and
convulsions affecting a limb only, so ague is said sometimes to haye seized but a
single limb. (Dr. Macculloch, on Marsh Fever and Malaria.)


Ga


$9 GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS.


see that the actions of the heart, lungs, &c., have intervals of
remission.

The animal functions are much influenced by habit; the vital
or organic are considered by Bichat as removed from its influence.
The power of habit over our sensations and voluntary motions
is manifest, —the more frequently an object is applied to our
organs of sense, the less intense is the sensation produced by it;
and the more frequently we perform an act of volition, the more
readily isit performed. Yet I think the force of habit equally great
over the organic functions. The operation of food and of all de-
scriptions of ingesta is most remarkably modified by habit; through
it poisons become comparatively innocuous, and divers bear a
Jong suspension of respiration.

Bichat regards the passions as directly influencing the organic
functions only, and springing from the state of the organs of
that class. Here he is to me perfectly unintelligible. Vexation
indeed disturbs the stomach, and fear augments the quantity of
urine ; but does not vexation equally and as directly disturb the
mind, — confuse the understanding, and occasion heat and pain
of the forehead? Are not, in fact, the passions a part of the
mind ?—a part of the animal functions? They powerfully affect,
it is true, the organic or vital functions, but this shows the close
connection merely between the two classes of functions. ¢

This connection is conspicuous in respiration, the mechanical
part of which belongs to the animal functions, the other to the
organic ; and in the alimentary functions, in which the food is
swallowed and the faeces rejected by volition, and digestion, &c.
performed, independently of our influence, by the powers of
simple life. So close indeed is this connection, that every organ
of the animal class is the seat of organic functions ;—=%in the
voluntary muscles, the organs of sense, and even in the brain,
circulation, secretion, and absorption are constantly carried on.
This connection is likewise apparent in the property of sensibility.
In the language of Bichat, there are animal sensibility and eontrac-


* Bordeu, Buffon, Cabanis, and the anatomist Reil, placed the passions in the
thoracic and abdominal viscera, &c. ; the two first in the diaphragm particularly,
Gall has shown the absurdity of these authors in his Fonct. du Cerveau, t. ii,
p- 93. sqq. We might as well consider the cheeks the seat of the feeling of
shame, because in shame we blush. Hippocrates opposed such absurdities in his
day. ‘ The heart and precordia,” says he, “ feel acutely,“ but have not the
least intelligence; the brain is the cause of all these things.” De Morbo Sacro.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS. 23


tility, and organic sensibility and contractility, besides the common
extensibility of matter, which he terms extensibilité de tissu, and
common contractility upon the removal of distension, — contrac-
tilité par défaut d’extension, which, indeed, is greater during life
than afterwards.© Animal sensibility is accompanied by a perception


© The following is Bichat’s table of the properties of the living body : —


Classes. Genera. Species. Varieties.
1
1 Animal
Sensibility 2
1 Organic
¥ Vital 1
=} 2 Animal I
24 Contractility 2 Sensible Such as the motion of the
AS Organic heart and alimentary
1 2 canal.
2 Extensibility Insensible Such as the motion of the
Structural 2 capillaries.
L Contractility


Although these are the general properties of the living frame, and sensibility,
or more properly excitability, is at the bottom of all the other vital or organic
properties except the active power of contraction, yet each part has also some
peculiarity, altogether inexplicable,— not in the least, I think, to be accounted for
on Bichat’s supposition of each part possessing a certain degree of organic sen-
sibility in relation to its fluids. What causes the vessels of muscle to produce
muscle; of bone, bone; of membrane, membrane; what causes the secreting
vessels of the liver to form bile, and of the testes semen, we know not. The
causes of these circumstances are called by Blumenbach, after Bordeu, vite
proprie ; but it must be carefully remembered, that this expression simply denotes
an unknown cause of a fact, and affords no explanation.

Feeling (I use the word for want of another to embrace consciousness and
perception) is in the same manner at the bottom of all the mental properties
except the active power of willing, but it alone will not explain them, All
matter is probably the same ; but its modifications likewise are so various, that at
present we are compelled to speak of distinct kinds of matter.

The operation of agents on the system is analogous. As far as they all affect the
living solid, they may be all called stimuli; but they differ in something more
than degree of stimulus. Each affects particular parts more than others; each
affects in a peculiar way ; some directly depress life, and many occasion opposite
results in different parts ; some preduce specific diseases, in which the composi-
tion of the fluids may be altered; and here occasionally the specific disease pro-
duced is contagious.

When organic sensibility is heightened in one part, it sinks in another, and vice
versd ; unless the change of it should be such as to extend generally, and even
then it is still frequently found in the opposite state in some particular part. v. c.
we notice coldness and paleness of the feet, and heat and fulness of the head,


C +


24 GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS.


in the mind, as in seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling:
animal contractility is excited by the volition of the mind con-
veyed to the voluntary muscles by means of the nerves. Organic
sensibility is attended by no perception, and is followed by con-


together ; blisters relieve internal inflammation, and irritate the more difficultly
in proportion to the violence of the internal disease. The same phenomena are
observable in animal sensibility and in the mind at large; —


“Tut, man! one fire puts out another’s burning,
One pain is lessen’d by another’s anguish ;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning ;
One desperate grief cures with another’s languish ;
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.”
SHAKSPEARE. Romeo and Juliet, act i. sc. ii.


The effect of vicissitudes of temperature, and a large number of other patho-
logical phenomena, are principally explicable on the derangement of the balance
of excitability, and for the most part, consequently, of circulation.

Notwithstanding it is a general law that the effects of an agent diminish
the more frequently it is applied, and vice versd, as shown on the one hand, in
the large quantities of spirituous liquors which persons at length bear, and on
the other by the violent inflammation excited by the application of warmth to
parts exposed to intense cold ; yet, if a stimulus is applied so energetically as to
leave the sensibility heightened, especially if to the point of inflammation, its
subsequent power is greatly increased. Immense potations of spirituous liquors
may gradually be borne, but if the increase is too great, the sensibility of the
stomach may become such that a single glass will prove violently irritating.

The general law, to which the effects of agents, in proportion to their previous
application, is referable, appears to be this;— that an agent acts according
to the difference between its strength and the strength of the former application.
Thus, if the right hand be immersed in water of 30°, and the left in water of 50°,
and both are removed to water of 70°, the effect of the water at 70° upon the
right hand will be greater than upon the left, on account of the difference between
30° and 70° being greater than between 50° and 70°; and this explains the
glow of the cold bath, as, during immersion, there is less stimulus, and, on emerg-
ing, the temperature of the atmosphere, and the re-admitted blood into the super-
ficial vessels, though stimuli absolutely of the same strength as before immersion,
are, comparatively, more powerful than what the system experienced during
immersion, .

The specific action of one agent frequently prevents or destroys that of another :
y. c. small-pox and measles very rarely occur together; the former disease is
frequently prevented for ever by the cow-pock; bark cures the effect of marsh


GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS. 25


traction totally independent of the will: — the heart is said to feel
(physiology has no proper term for the idea, but excitability
would answer the purpose) the stimulus of the blood, and, without
our influence, forthwith contracts; the lacteals to feel the stimulus
of the chyle without our knowledge, and they then propel it


miasmata. It in some cases destroys its own power in future, as is exemplified
in those diseases which occur usually but once during life.

These observations on rare and frequent agency may relate to agency in general
or by particular agents. A very high or low excitement may influence the effects
of all subsequent stimuli; but the rare or frequent application of a particular
agent in less intensity may influence its own effects only, as is exemplified in
the acquired capability of smoking or taking snuff, while other vapours or powders
affect no less than usual.

While moderate excitement is necessary to maintain action and excitability,
and excitement by one stimulus, within due limits, augments the effects of an-
other, violent excitement wears out the power, and, very violent, may suddenly
destroy life altogether: according to the verses,


Nutritur ventis, ventis extinguitur ignis,
Lenis alit flammas, grandior aura necat,


Dr. John Brown, seizing the undeniable general facts respecting the effect of
rare or frequent application upon the power of stimuli, and naming all agents
stimuli, founded a system of pathology and practice at once absurd and destruc-
tive. (Elementa Medicine.) Exhaustion, from excess of stimulus, he termed
direct debility; torpor, from deficiency of stimulus, indirect debility ; and how-~
ever inflammatory a disease, if it arose from a stimulus, it was to be treated by
violent stimuli, to prevent the excitability from falling too low.

In the first place, he abused the word stimulus, by confounding it with the
word agent, forgetting what has been just advanced respecting the peculiar pro-
perties of every agent, — that some depress, and thus, though agents, are not
stimuli; and some affect different parts differently; and some have a specific
power upon certain parts and certain diseases, and against other agents.

In the second place, he forgot what has been just said respecting the necessity
of a certain degree of excitement to maintain excitability ; the effect of one sti-
mulus, within due limits, of increasing the effect of others; and the fact of a
stimulus producing so much excitement, that morbid sensibility occurs, far less
stimulus than was at first applied causing ten times the effect, and this being
reducible only by lessening all stimuli, — the temperature, the quantity of blood,
&c., and stimulating distant parts. He forgot, also, the effect of sympathy and
specific action.

His error was in keeping in view some general laws, which all know and
acknowledge, to the exclusion of others of at least equal importance.


26 GENERAL VIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS.


without our assistance.f But although we never acquire the least
direct voluntary power over the actions of organic contractility,—
over the peristaltic motion of the intestines or the contractions of
the heart, yet every organ of the organic functions may have its
organic sensibility heightened into animal sensibility, as inflamma-
tion, for instance, of the pleura and the joints, daily demonstrates;
indeed, in some organs of that class of functions, we invariably
have sensation; — the stomach is the seat of hunger; in the lungs
we experience an uneasy sensation nearly as soon as their air is
expelled.

The nerves of the animal functions run to the brain or spinal
marrow; those of the organic chiefly to ganglia; but, as might
be expected, the two nervous systems have abundant commu-
nications.

The animal functions have not only a shorter existence than
the organic, from their necessity of alternate repose®, but they
flourish for a shorter duration,—they do not commence till birth,
they decline, and, in the natural course of events, terminate,
earlier, v. c. the organs of sense and the mental faculties fail be-
fore the action of the heart and capillaries. But the decay of the
animal functions must, in truth, be only the consequence of the
decay of the organic, because there are fundamentally in every
part organic functions,— circulation, nutrition, &c.; and the per-
fect performance of these in the organs of the animal functions is
indispensable to the perfect performance of the animal functions.
Hence the impairment of these organic functions, even to a small
extent, must derange or diminish the animal functions, and the
decline of the latter is really owing to the decline of the former,
although these still remain vigorous enough to appear unimpaired.


f There is no proof of feeling. There can be no feeling. We see them act
in consequence of the stimulus, and say they feel. he expression is only
admissible figuratively, but as all figurative terms in physiology are continually
accepted literally, and establish the most absurd notions, especially among the
vulgar, it had much better be explained by a mere expression of the fact, by the
word excitement.

® It is said that the heart has the same repose as the brain, the auricles and
ventricles acting in succession, and a pause occurring before their action is
renewed, The function, however, of the heart as a whole organ, constantly
goes on; while that of the brain, at least if it is only an organ of the mind, entirely
intemits in sound sleep.


LIFE, 27


We thus find in every living system a class of functions, not in
themselves dependent upon mind, as perfect in the vegetable
as in the animal, and pervading every part of the system. In
animals there further exist certain parts which, when endowed
with the common life of other parts, —with the organic pro-
perties, — are able to perform peculiar functions which give us the
notion of mind: the organ of these functions is termed brain, and,
by means of nerves and medullary prolongations, it maintains a
correspondence with the whole machine, influenced by and in-
fluencing the most distant parts.

The ORGANIC FUNCTIONS depend on LIFE, in the proper accept-
ation of the word. The word life should be regarded, like the word
attraction or repulsion, as merely an expression of a fact. In this
point of view it may be as easily defined as any other expression.
By LrFE we generally mean the power of organised matter to pre-
serve its particles in such chemical relations as to prevent other
chemical relations from inducing disorganisation, or even to
increase or decrease by internal appropriation and separation";
to produce peculiar matters for its own purposes ; to preserve, in
some measure, a temperature distinct from that of the surrounding
medium; to move certain parts of itself sensibly (as muscles) or
insensibly (as the capillaries) independently of mere impulse,
attraction, or repulsion: or if not organised (as the fluid which
becomes the embryo, the blood,) the power of matter produced by
an organised body endowed with the properties above mentioned,
to resist the ordinary chemical influences, and even directly form
(as the embryotic fluid) an organised system so endowed, or
directly become, (as the fibrin, when it is secreted from the blood or
blood is effused, becoming vascular, and its new vessels inosculat-


» So striking is this, that Stahl and his followers referred their notion of life
to this antiseptic property, and while he said, “ Life is formally nothing more than
the preservation of the body in mixture, corruptible, indeed, but without the
occurrence of corruption,” Junker said, “ What we call life is the opposite of
putridity.”

Chemical affinities are not destroyed by life, but only so brought to play that
decomposition is not their result. Without the operation of chemical affinities
the composition of the body could not exist, nor many of its functions, as respir-
ation, secretion, &c., take place. The physical properties of matter are equally
indispensable. Cohesion, gravity, hardness, softness, and fluidity are essential, in
different parts ; elasticity performs an important part in many functions, as in
respiration and the rise of the epiglottis; the laws of light and sound are indis-
pensable to the functions of the eye and car.


28 LIFE:


ing with those of adjoining parts,) the organised substance of an
already formed system so endowed.

That fluids as well as solids are susceptible of life, I cannot
doubt. There is no reason why they should not be so, although
a person who has not thought upon the subject may be as unable
to conceive the circumstance as a West Indian to conceive that
water may by cold become solid. It is impossible to deny that the
male or female genital fluid, or both, either alone or when united,
are alive, because from their union, or from one when influenced
by the other, a living being is produced which partakes of the
vital qualities of each parent. Accordingly Blumenbach, in his
Commentatio de vi vitali sanguini deneganda, grants both male and
female genital fluids to be alive’, notwithstanding that he fancies
his victory over the defenders of the blood’s life so complete, that,
like that of the unfortunate Carthaginian Dido, he says, “ in
ventos vita recessit.” It is as easy to conceive the blood to be alive


as the genital fluids. *
Many facts adduced as arguments of its life are certainly expli-


i In universum sane post omnia que super hoc argumento sive meditando sive
experiundo hactenus elicere licuit, nulli humorum nostri corporis genuina vis
vitalis tribuenda videtur, si unice a genitali utriusque sexus latice discesseris,
utpote cui jam ante quam uterino cavo exceptus et intime mixtus in foetus forma-
tionem abit, vitales inhzrere vires formativas, preter alia paterni vultus in nepotes
propagata similitudo, aliaque id genus phenomena haud infitianda demonstrare
videntur.”” Comment. Soc. Reg. Societ. Gotting. vol. ix. p. 12.

‘ k The doctrine of the life of the blood was maintained by Critias and his sect
among the ancients (Aristotle, De anima, cap. 2.), Harvey (Exercit. L. De
Generationis ordine, &c.), Glisson (De ventriculo et intestinis), and Albinus. (Blu-
menbach’s Commentat.l.c.) Iam surprised that Moses should have been adduced
by Harvey as authority for this opinion. When he says (Leviticus, ch. xvii. 11. 14. ),
«¢ For the life of the flesh is in the blood,’ — “ For it is the life of all flesh,” —he
can only mean, that, when it is withdrawn, life ceases, — that it is necessary to the
life of animals. He also says, (v. 14.) ‘ the blood of it is ror the life thereof.”’
The construction which would make Moses assert that the blood is alive, involves
the absurd assertion that the blood only is alive. Indeed, before the time of
Moses, the expression was used to Noah. In Genesis (ix. 4.) we read, ‘* Flesh
with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not eat.”” The whole
of the matter appears to be, that the Jews, like other neighbouring nations, were
in the habit of tearing limbs and cutting flesh from living animals, and eating
these portions raw. Saul’s army after a battle did this. (1 Samwel, xiv. 32, 33.)
To prevent this horrid cruelty, they were forbidden to eat flesh before the animal
had been drained of its blood, and thus deprived of life; and what is, in our own
version of the Bible, rendered, * flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood


LIFE. 29


cable without such a supposition. Its freedom from putrefaction
while circulating may be owing to the constant renovation of its
particles; for the thinness of hybernating animals at the end of
their torpid season shows it has received accessions even in them,
and this from the absorption of fat. Its inability to coagulate after
death from arsenic, opium, and some other narcotics, and from
lightning and electricity (though Sir C. Scudamore found it: to
coagulate as usual in the latter case), from hard running, anger, or
a blow on the stomach, all three of which deprive the muscles of
their usual stiffaess, may depend upon chemical changes. The
admixture of opium with the blood has been said to prevent its
coagulation, and this by destroying its life. But Sir C. Scudamore
found that the admixture of prussic acid and belladonna, both
strong poisons, has no such effect, and that many mere salts, as
common salt, weaken or prevent its coagulation, and these are not
likely to kill it, but to act chemically. Its accelerated coagulation
by means of heat, when frozen by cold, and some other circum-
stances, and the reverse, were believed to depend upon an affection
of its vitality, but are, perhaps, referable to some chemical effect:
Its earlier putridity when drawn from young than from old per-
sons may arise from its inferior qualities. Parts die if deprived
of a supply of blood; yet, though necessary as a material and
agent to maintain the life of parts, it is not, therefore, necessarily
itself alive. But the circumstance of its freezing more readily,
like eggs, frogs, snails, &c., when once previously frozen (which
change may be supposed to have exhausted its powers!), is, if
really the case, an argument in favour of its life, as these are
certainly endowed with life. The organisation of extravasated
blood™, and the inosculation of new vessels with those of surround-
ing parts, shows” that the solidified lymph is now endowed with


thereof,” is said to be rendered by the best interpreters, “ flesh or members torri
from living animals having the blood in them.” See Bruce, Travels to discover
the Source of the Nile, vol. iii. p. 297.

' Corrie, on the Vitality of the Blood, p. 45.

m™ J. Hunter, Treatise on the Blood, &c. p. i. ch. 1.

" Dr, John Thomson believes, that, when blood has been effused between divided
surfaces, its coagulum is absorbed, and secreted lymph only coagulates and be-
comes vascular, Lectures on Inflammation, p. 214, Yet at page 216. he does
not deny the occurrence.


30 LIFE.


life; and one may more easily believe it to have been alive in
the mass of blood, than that it should have acquired vitality after
its effusion. Indeed Sir Everard Home declares that a coagulum
of blood becomes vascular out of the body, and may be injected °;
but if the vessels are formed by the mere extrication of carbonic
acid gas, as he contends, their mere formation is no proof of life.

John Hunter believes that the chyle is alive, and some that
vivification commences in the stomach; and Albinus grants life
even to the excrement. But the excretions must be regarded
as dead matter, useless and foreign to the system, and they all
run with the greatest rapidity into decomposition. In operating
for retention of urine, the surgeon finds this fluid abominably
foetid ; the faeces become so when not discharged in due time;
and the neglect of washing the surface is the source of filth and
disease.

The essential nature of life is an impenetrable mystery, and no
more a subject for philosophical enquiry than the essential nature
of attraction or of heat. To attempt explaining the phenomena
of life by a vital fluid is only increasing the intricacy of the
subject by an unfounded hypothesis, and always reminds me of
Mr. Dugald Stewart’s remark, —“ That there is even some reason
for doubting, from the crude speculations on medical and chemical
subjects which are daily offered to the public, whether it (the
proper mode of studying nature) be yet understood so completely
as is commonly imagined, and whether a fuller illustration of the
rules of philosophising, than Bacon or his followers have given,
might not be useful even to physical enquirers.”? We see matter
in a certain state possessed of a certain power which we term life,
and the object of physiology is merely to observe its effects, just
as it is the object of chemistry to observe the circumstances of
the affinity of different bodies and of physics to observe other
phenomena of matter, without vainly speculating on the essence
of affinity or the essence of matter, to comprehend which our
faculties are, in their nature, incompetent. By attributing life,
the power of attraction, &c. to subtle and mobile fluids, we not
only do not advance a single step, for we have still to explain
what these fluids are, and how they obtain their powers, just as we
had before in regard to common matter; but we make the addi-


° Phil. Trans. vol. eviii. p. 188. sq.
? Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, vol. i, p. 8.


LIFE. 31


tional mysteries of their being united with ordinary matter, and
so united that life appears a power possessed by z¢. The editors
of a medical review have in vain searched John Hunter's works
for such an hypothesis4, and Mr. Lawrence has had no better
success’, so that I apprehend his meaning has been misunderstood
by those who constitute him its patron.‘ Granting for a moment
that life depends upon a peculiar, fine fluid, we have still to ac-
count for mind, because life is not mind, — a cabbage is as much
gifted with life as the wisest man. Yet those whose faith makes
life a subtle fluid strangely imagine that the doctrine of a soul is
thereby advanced. The life of a brute requires a subtle fluid as
much as the life of a man, and of a cabbage as much as the life


of a brute.

We have reason to believe that life never originates, but began
at the creation, and is communicated to assimilated matter, and
propagated from parent to offspring. It is the property of or-
ganised systems, producing various effects by various kinds of
organisation, but is not quite peculiar to organised matter, because
capable of being possessed by matter in a fluid state.t


1 Annals of Medicine and Surgery, 1817, p. 378. In the Treatise on the
Blood, (p. 89. sq.) John Hunter says, ‘* Life is a property (not a subtle fluid)
we do not understand.” ‘This property he conceives to reside in a certain matter
similar to the materials of the brain; diffused through the body and even con-
tained in the blood. ‘ The brain,” he adds, “is a mass of this matter, not
diffused through any thing, for the purpose of that thing, but constituting an
organ in itself.” This materia vite is, therefore, not subtle, but pretty solid, and
no other than medullary matter; and Vauquelin says he has discovered a fatty
matter in the blood, and which M. Chevreuil thinks he proves to be the same
as the substance of the brain and nerves. But the subtle-fluidists would not tolerate
gross fatty matter, and J, Hunter calls life a property.

’ Lectures on the Physiology, Zoology, and Natural History of Man, p. 84.

* J. Abernethy, Lectures delivered before the Royal College of Surgeons. 1814.

* As the fluids which form the embryo must be endowed with life, organisation
cannot be the cause of life ; but in truth, organisation is the effect of life, although
when produced it becomes an instrument of life. The erroneousness of the
French doctrine, that “ life is the result of organisation,’’ was refuted in the
Annals of Medicine and Surgery. (1816, Sept. pp. 346. 386.) The error appears
to have arisen in some measure from the want of definition, —the word life being
used sometimes properly for the power, sometimes improperly for the result.
Even if the result of life, — the functions of a part, should be called its life, life
could not be said to be the result of organisation, but of a power to which organis-
ation is an instrument. The Greeks had distinct appellations for the cause and
the result ; the former they termed yyy; the latter, Sah.


$2 MIND.


The ANIMAL FUNCTIONS demonstrate mtnD. This is seated in
the brain, to which the spinal marrow, nerves, and voluntary
muscles are subservient. MIND is the functional power of the
living brain. As I cannot conceive life any more than the power
of attraction unless possessed by matter, so I cannot conceive
mind unless possessed by a brain, or by some nervous organ,
whatever name we may choose to give it, endowed with life. I
speak of terrestrial or animal mind; with angelic and divine na-
ture we have nothing to do, and of them we know, in the same
respects, nothing. ‘To call the human mind positively a ray of
the divinity, (Divine particula aure “*, Ex ipso Deo decerptus,
Ex universa mente delibatus*,) appears to me absolute nonsense.
Brutes are as really endowed with mind, — with a consciousness
of personality, with feelings, desires, and will, — as man.¥ Every
child is conscious that it thinks with its head, and common lan-
guage designates this part as the seat of mind. Observation
shows that superiority of mind in the animal creation is exactly
commensurate with superiority of brain®; that activity of mind


" Horace.

* Cicero, De Senectute et Quest. Tuscul.

Y See Gall, l. c. t. 1. p.. 56. sqq. Aristotle no sooner asserts that a share of
divinity is bestowed on man “ only of all animals,” than he is obliged to retract,
and say, ‘‘ or most of all animals,’ —} uddiota mavtwy. De parl. animal.1.ii. c. 10.

z A stupid person is honoured with the expressions numb-scull, thick-head,
addle-pated, shallow-pated, badly furnished in the upper story; a clever person
with strong-headed, long-headed, having plenty of brains; a madman is said to
be wrong in the head, touched in the noddle, &c. A person whose memory or
power of attention is impaired, says he has no head, &c. When a catarrh chiefly
affects the head, we complain of stupidity, because ‘* we have such a cold in the
head,” &c. A man is always said to have an idea in his head.

a « The same progression which exists in the gradual perfection of animal
organisation, as far as regards vegetable life only, is observed in the gradual
perfection of the nervous system, and of animal life which depends upon it.
Comparative anatomy has followed the gradual perfection of animals, from the
most simple absorbent vessels to the most complicated apparatus of mastication,
deglutition, and digestion, —to the most perfect circulation. With every fresh
viscus, every fresh apparatus for sensation, is discovered a fresh function, and
this function is more complicated in proportion as the organisation of the viscus
or apparatus of sensation is more perfect. The stomach, kidneys, lungs, heart,
eyes, ears, are the more complicated as their functions become so.

*«* The same gradation may be demonstrated in the structure of the brains of the
different species. I have demonstrated in the preceding chapter, that the exist-
ence of each moral quality and intellectual faculty, depends solely upon the


“MIND. 38


‘and of brain are coequal; and that, as long as the brain is en-
dowed with life, and remains uninjured, it, like all other organs,
can perform its functions, and mind continues; but, as in all


presence of certain determinate cerebral parts, and not upon the whole mass of
brain. It follows, that the number of the faculties is in direct proportion to
the integrant parts of the brain. In insects, fish, and amphibia, the nervous mass
contained in the cerebral reservoir, is still divided into several distinct masses.
The greater part of these are not integrant parts of the brain, properly so called ;
they are ganglia, from which arise the nerves of smell, hearing, sight, &c. The
two hemispheres, properly so called, are placed behind the two ganglia of
the olfactory nerves, and are the more complicated as the industrial instincts
are more numerous; the cerebellum in these animals generally forms a hollow
pouch, sometimes placed horizontally, sometimes folded together.

‘¢ In birds, the two hemispheres are already more considerable, although distinct
convolutions cannot be discerned. The cerebellum still consists merely of its
middle or fundamental part ; but already appears composed of many rings placed
side by side.

** In the small mammalia, the shrew-mouse, mouse, rat, squirrel, weasel, &c.
convolutions are not yet discoverable. But as they are already distinctly found
in other larger rodentia, the beaver, kangaroo, &c., we may suppose that they
equally exist in them.

**In the larger mammalia, the cat, polecat, marten, fox, dog, ape, the
conyolutions are more distinct and numerous, but their form varies according to
the species.

*‘ In the dolphin, elephant, and man, they are more numerous and deep than in
the beaver, kangaroo, cat, &c., and their form and direction vary completely ac-
cording to the species.

“ Jn all the mammalia, the cerebellum possesses, besides the middle or funda-
mental part, two lateral parts, which are more or less complicated, according to
the species; and as the soi-disant pons varolii, or the soi-disant cerebral ganglia,
i. e. the transyerse layers of nervous bands, are only the commissure or junction
of the lateral parts of the cerebellum, they are found in all the mammailia, and in
none of the ovipara.

“« The number of the integral parts, or of the convolutions of the brain, varies
equally in the different species of mammalia; in some, the anterior lobes of the
hemispheres are larger or more elevated ; in others, again, the inferior parts of the
anterior lobes are nearly wanting. The middle lobes, and the other conyolutions,
present similar varieties,

“ In this way, the integrant parts of the brain augment in number and develope-
ment, as we pass from a less perfec to a more perfect animal, till we arrive at
the brain of man, who, in the anterior-superior, and in the superior region of the
frontal bone, possesses several parts of which other animals are deprived, and by
means of which he is endowed with the most eminent qualities and faculties,
with reason, and the feeling of religion and the existence of God,” Gall,

D


34 MIND.


other organs, when its life ceases, its power to perform its function
ceases, and the mind ceases: when disease or mechanical injury
affects it, the mind is affected, —inflammation of the stomach causes
vomiting, of the brain delirium, a blow upon the loins suppres-
sion or alteration of the urine, a blow upon the head stuns; if ori-
ginally constituted defective, the mind is defective‘; if fully de-


l.c. t.ii. p. 364. sqq. ‘ Some pretend to discover a striking resemblance
between the brain of an orang-utan and that of man. But, in the first place, the
difference of their volume is as five to one; their convolutions differ considerably
in number and structure; the anterior lobes, especially, are contracted into a
cone, flattened above, hollow below, &c.; and the difference is still more
remarkable in other simix.” t. vi. p. 298.

© See Gall, l.c. t. i. p. 196. sqq., and t. ii. p. 322. sqq. ‘* Willis has described
the brain of a young man imbecile from birth; its volume is scarcely 4th
part of that of an ordinary human brain. M. Bonn, professor at Amsterdam,
has two little crania of idiots, and the brain of an imbecile who attained his
twenty-fifth year, and was so stupid, that he was shown for money as an
African savage,” &c. ‘I have observed heads equaliy small in many living
idiots from birth. All these crania and heads are 13 or 14 inches in cireum-
ference, and 11 or 12 inches from the root of the nose to the foramen occi-
pitale.’” — “* With from 14 to 17 inches in circumference; and about 10 or 12
from the root of the nose to the foramen occipitale, we have more or less stupidity,
a more or less complete incapacity to fix the attention upon one object; uncertain
and transitory feelings and passions ; confusion of ideas,” &c.—* Heads of 18 or
184 inches in circumference are still small, although they permit a regular exer-
cise of the faculties; they possess but a sad mediocrity of talent, a spirit of servile
imitation, &c.; an extreme deficiency of seizing the relation between cause and
effect ; a want of self-government, and often few desires. Still some qualities or
faculties may be considerable, because particular organs may be greatly developed,
forming a striking contrast with the mediocrity of the rest. But as we approach
larger brains, we see intellectual faculties of greater magnitude, till we arrive at
heads 21 or 22 inches in circumference, —the dimensions at which men obtain
the height of intelligence.’’ Gall means French inches, which are about {, longer
than the English.

«« The dimensions of the brain,’ says Dr. Magendie, “ are proportioned to
those of the head. In this respect there is a great difference in individuals.
The volume of the brain is generally in direct proportion to the capacity of the
mind.”’—* It is rarely found that a man distinguished by his mental faculties has
not a large head.””— Précis de Physiologie, t. i. p. 184.

Dr. Marshall, an anatomical lecturer in London from two-and-forty to six-
and-twenty years ago, taught that the brain was the organ of mind, its original
defective conformation a source of idiocy, its disease the cause of insanity; and
gave many dissections of maniacs, and an excellent sketch of the varieties of the
disease. Morbid Anatomy of the Brain, &c. collected from the papers of the late
Andrew Marshall, M.D., by S. Sawrey, London, 1815.


,


MIND. 35


veloped, and properly acted on, the mind is vigorous: accordingly,
as it varies with age, in quality and bulk, is the mind also varied, —
the mind of the child is weak and very excitable, of the adult
vigorous and firm, and of the old man weak and dull, exactly like
the body‘; and the character of the mind of an individual agrees


>


4 Tf of children it is said,


‘¢ Inter se quas pro levibus noxiis iras gerunt?
Quapropter? quia enim qui eos gubernat animus, infirmum gerunt.”’
Terence, Hecyra.


The old man, — “ Res omnes timide gelideque ministrat,
Dilator, spe longus, iners —” Horace, drs Poetica.


Or, in the plainer language of Shakspeare, “* Old men have grey beards, their
faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and they
have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams.”

Hamlet, act 2. sc. 2.


Mr. Dugald Stewart allows that “ In the case of old men, it is generally found
that a decline of the faculties keeps pace with the decay of bodily health and
vigour. The few exceptions that occur to the universality of this fact, only prove
that there are some diseases fatal to life, which do not injure those parts of the
body with which the intellectual operations are more immediately connected.’’—
Outlines of Moral Philosophy, p. 233.


‘«‘ Preterea gigni pariter cum corpore, et una
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere, mentem.”’ Lucretius, lib. i.


“‘ In new-born children, it is difficult to discern, without maceration in spirits
of wine, any traces of fibres in the great collections of grey, reddish substances,
or the great cerebral ganglia, which supply, reinforce, and perfect, or which, ac-
cording to the opinion of others, give activity to, the hemispheres. The nervous
fibres are more visible in the middle and posterior lobes than in the anterior.
The fibrous structure of the white substance of the cerebellum also becomes
apparent gradually, and in proportion to its developement, All the nervous
fibres are at this period still so involved in the more or less reddish and gelatinous
substance, and in blood-vessels, that all the brain looks like a nervous pulp or
jelly.

“‘ The only functions of the infant, at this age, are very imperfect, and are those
of the five senses, of voluntary motion, hunger, the sensation of being comfortable
or uncomfortable, and the want of sleep.

«¢ After some months, the parts of the brain situated near the anterior-superior
region of the forehead, grow more rapidly than the other parts. The forehead,
from being flat, becomes prominent, and the child begins to fix its attention upon.
external objects, to compare, and form abstract ideas, — to generalise.

“ The whole brain is developed in succession, until, at the age of from twenty
to forty, it has attained its full growth relatively to each individual, The cerebel-
lum, likewise, which is smaller than the cerebrum in proportion as the subject is

DZ


36 MIND.


with the character of his body, being equally excitable, languid,
or torpid, evidently because the brain is of the same character as
the rest of the body to which it belongs, — the female mind ex-
ceeds the male in excitability as much as her body®; the qualities
of the mind are also hereditary‘, which they could not be, unless
they were, like our other qualities, corporeal conditions ; and the
mind is often disordered upon the disappearance of a bodily com-
plaint, just as other organs, besides the brain, are affected under
similar circumstances, — the retrocession of an eruption may affect
the lungs, causing asthma; the bowels, causing enteritis; or the
brain, causing insanity, — phthisis and insanity sometimes alter-


younger, is developed and perfectly formed towards the age of from eighteen to
twenty. ‘The youth, the young man, and the young girl, take an interest in
each other ; and the talents and inclinations are exercised and perfected till they
obtain maturity. From thirty or forty years of age, the cerebrum and cerebellum
remain nearly stationary till the fiftieth or seventieth year, according to individual
constitution. The same is the case with the moral and intellectual powers.
Certain parts of the brain, however, especially those in the anterior-inferior region
of the forehead, have at this time already begun to diminish ; the memory is less
faithful, and the imagination less ardent, and hint to us the approach of old age,
and the decline of our faculties.

“ At length all the cerebral mass gradually loses its nervous turgescence ; it
diminishes, wastes, shrinks (‘the convolutions lie farther from each other ;’
t. i. p. 192.) ; the consistence of its two substances undergoes alteration. The
moral and intellectual powers sink in proportion; the inclinations, the talents
disappear, the affairs of the world assume a gloomy aspect, the past only is
considered good; and, at the age of decrepitude, there remains only imbecility,
the weakness of a second childhood.” Gall, l.c. t. ii, p. 156. sqq.; also
t. iii. p. 28. sqq. Dr. Magendie allows that “ the brain is almost liquid in the
foetus, firmer in infancy, and still more so in manhood” ( Précis de Physiologie) ;
that above the age of seventy, the weight of the brain is on the average ,*-th less
than in the prime of life; and that the convolutions are then often distant half an
inch from each other, and their surface very distant from the cranium, as Cotugno
had observed. Journ. de Physiol. t. vii. p. 5. 87.

¢ « Mulieres sunt, ferme ut pueri, levi sententia.”»— Terence, Hecyra.

f « Parentibus liberi similes sunt non vultum modo et corporis formam, sed
animi indolem, et virtutes, et vitia, — Claudia gens diu Rome floruit impigra,
ferox, superba: eadem illachrymabilem Tiberium, tristissimum tyrannum pro-
duxit: tandem in immanem Caligulam et Claudium, et Agrippinam, ipsumque
demum Neronem, post sexcentos annos desitura.” — Gregory, Conspectus Medi-
cine Theoretice. Sa truais the verse


‘« Et patrum in natos abeunt, cum semine, mores.”


MIND. 37


nate with each other, just like affections of other organs; the
laws of the mind are precisely those of the functions of all other
organs,—a certain degree of excitement strengthens it; too
much exhausts it; physical agents affect it, and some specifi-
cally, as is the case with other functions, for example, narcotics.
The argument of Bishop Butler, that the soul is immortal and
independent of matter, because in fatal diseases the mind often
remains vigorous to the last 8, is perfectly groundless; for any
function will remain vigorous to the last, if the organ which per-
forms it is not the seat of the disease, nor much connected by
sympathy, or in other modes, with the organ which is the seat of
the disease —the stomach often calls regularly for food, and
digests it vigorously, while the lungs are almost completely con-
sumed by ulceration. All the cases that are adduced to prove
the little dependence of the mind upon the brain, are adduced in
opposition to the myriads of others that daily occur in the usual
course of nature, and are evidently regarded as extraordinary by
those who bring them forward. An exact parallel to each may
be found in the affections of every other organ, and each admits
of so easy an explanation, that it may be always truly said, “ Ex-
ceptio probat regulam. 4 |


8 The Analogy of Religion, natural and revealed, to the Constitution and Course
of Nature. By Joseph Butler, LL.D. Lord Bishop of Durham, p. 33.

5 T will not insult the understanding of my readers by showing that we have
no authentic instance of the real absence of brain in the cranium of a being
possessed of a mind. The records of medicine no less teem with wonders than
those of theology. The miracles of the Fathers and of the Romish Church may
be matched by cases not only of mind without brain, or some similar organ, but
of human impregnation without males, or by males without testes, and of human
foctuses nourished without communication with the mother,

In most cases where the mind is said to have been vigorous when the state
of the body at large, or of the brain alone, rendered the perfect performance of the
cerebral functions improbable in the eyes of the relaters, I believe the mental
power has been greatly over-rated, — that, because the individual merely talked
collectedly, he was imagined sufficient for the exertions of his best health.

The part of the brain affected by disease may have been one whose function is
not intellectual, but merely relating to the feelings, or may have related to
intellectual faculties whose state was not noticed by the narrators. In truth, the
narrators give us no satisfactory account of the feelings and intellectual powers of
the patients, nor of the exact portions of the brain affected ; nor could they, being
unacquainted with phrenology ; and they also forget that the cerebral organs are
all double. (See Gall, 1. c. t. ii. 188. sqq., 246. sqq.; and a paper by Dr. Andrew

Daw


38 MIND.


I have placed the preceding arguments alone, but to them may
be subjoined another equally demonstrative as any, — that the
stength of the various intellectual powers and inclinations accords
with the size of the various parts of the brain; that exactly as
the various parts of the brain are successively developed is the
character developed, and as they shrink with age does the cha-
racter again change.


In contending that the mind is a power of the living brain, and
the exercise of it the functions of that organ, I contend for merely
a physical fact ; and no Christian who has just conceptions of the
Author of Nature will hesitate to look boldly at Nature as she is,
lest he should discover facts opposite to the pronunciations of
his revelation; for the word and the works of the Almighty cannot


Combe, on the effects of injuries of the brain upon the manifestation of the
mind, in the Transactions of the Phrenological Society, Edinb. 1824.)

If after insanity no trace of disease is sometimes discoverable in the brain, let
us remember that the same is sometimes the case after epilepsy and various un-
doubted diseases of the brain, and sometimes with respect to the stomach after
chronic dyspepsia. Diseases may be functional only. Nay, when our senses are
not nice enough to discover structural affection of the brain in insanity, &c. we
have generally strong presumptive evidence of its affection, in the thickening or
excessive secretions of its membranes,— points more easily ascertained than equal
changes in the delicate texture of the brain.

Those who thus attempt to prove the substantial distinctness of the mind and
brain, forget that their facts, or rather arguments, are equally strong against what
they all admit, — the necessary connection of the mind and brain in this life ; and
are therefore grounded on what, if true, were violations of the course of nature.

There is a passage in Hippocrates, de Morbo Sacro, well worth quoting ; —
“* Men ought to know, that from the drain only proceed pleasure and joy, and
laughter and sport, as well as griefs, anxieties, sorrows, and weeping. By it we
are wise especially, and understand, and see, and hear, and appreciate what is
base and honourable, good and bad, pleasant and unpleasant, distinguishing them
partly by habit, partly by their utility. By it we distinguish what is pleasurable,
and what disagreeable, according to circumstances ; and, by it, the same things do
not please us under all circumstances. By it we are insane and delirious ; expe-
rience terrors and fears, partly by night, partly by day; and sleeplessness, and ill-
timed errors, and groundless cares ; do not recognise those who are with us ; lose
our habits, and forget our experience, And all this we suffer from the brain if it
is not healthy, &c.: wherefore I say, that the brain is the messenger and inter-
preter of intelligence and wisdom. But the precordia have obtained the name
of ppéveg among the Greeks, by custom, not from fact and nature; and I know
not what property they have of knowing and understanding, except that in sudden
and great joy or sorrow they leap,” &c.


MIND. 39


contradict each other. Bacon accordingly, in a very memor-
able part of his writings, directs the physical enquirer to be unin-
fluenced by religious opinions', as the more independently truth
is pursued the sooner will it be gained, and the sooner will the
real meaning of a divine statement of natural things, and the
conformity of this to physical fact, be established.

The assertion, however, that the mind is a power of the living
brain, is not an assertion that is material ; for a power or property
of matter cannot be matter. '

Neither is it an assertion that this power cannot be a something
immortal, subtle, immaterial, diffused through and connected with
the brain. A physical enquirer has to do with only what he
observes. He finds this power, but attempts not to explain it.
He simply says the living brain has this power, medullary matter
thoughitbe. Seeing that the brain thinks, and feels, and wills, as
clearly as that the liver has the power of producing bile, and does
produce it, and a salt the power of assuming a certain form,
and does crystallise, he leaves others at liberty to fancy an
hypothesis of its power being a subtle, immaterial, immortal
substance, exactly as they fancy life to be a subtle fluid, or,
perhaps, though very extraordinarily, the same subtle fluid (if
subtlety is immateriality and immortality) *, elucidating the subject


' Si quis animum diligentius advertat, non minus periculi naturali philosophiz
ex istiusmodi fallaci in iniquo foedere, quam ex apertis inimicitiis imminere.
Tali enim foedere et societate accepta, in philosophia tantum comprehendi, aucta
autem, vel audita, vel in melius mutata, etiam severius et pertinacius excludi.
Denique versus incrementa et novas veluti oras et regiones philosophia, omnia
ex parte religionis, pravarum suspicionum et impotentis fastidii plena esse. Alios
siquidem simplicius subvereri, ne forte altior in naturam inquisitio ultra datum
et concessum sobrietatis terminum penetret, &c. &c. Quare satis constabat in
hujusmodi opinionibus multum infirmitatis, quin et invidie et fermenti non parum
subesse,” &c. — Cogitata et Visa, vol. ix. p. 167. 8vo edition. In the same para-
graph he remarks, with regret, that no writers are more popular than those who
pompously set forth the union of divinity and philosophy, i. e. faith and sense, as
if it were not illegitimate. ‘“ Haud alias opiniones et disputationes magis secundis
ventis ferri reperies, quam eorum, qui, theologiz et philosophiz conjugium, veluti
legitimum, multa pompa et solemnitate celebrant, et grata rerum varietate animos
hominum permulcentes, interim divina et humana inauspicato permiscent.”

* The hypothesis of a subtle mobile fluid is downright materialism —the doc-
trine of Lucretius.

“ Quoniam est animi natura reperta
Mobilis egregie, perquam constare necesse est
Corporibus parvis et levibus atque rotundis.”’ Lib. iii. 204.


D 4


40 MIND.


no more than in the case of life, and equally increasing the
number of its difficulties '; as though we were not created beings,


Bacon complained (I. c.) that the first attempts to explain thunder and tem-
pests were accused of impiety by religious persons, who thought that religion
demanded these pheenomena to be referred to the immediate operation of the Deity.
The lovers of subtle fluids and spirits, conversely and as strangely, think religion
served by interposing a subtle fluid between common matter and the Deity. Van
Helmont was remarkably fortunate, for, after severe meditation, he fell into an
intellectual vision, and saw his own soul: ‘¢ Magna mox quies me invasit, et incidi
in somnium intellectuale satisque memorabile.” It was very small, and had no
organs of generation: ‘ Vidi enim animam meam satis exiguam, specie humana,
sexfis tamen discrimine liberam.”—Ortus Medicine, Confessio auctoris, p. 13.
He gave the soul, however, a close and dirty dwelling, for he placed it, not in the
pineal gland, but in the stomach.

' Locke (Second Reply to the Bishop of Poof: p- 477. 8vo edition) in
disparaging philosophical reasons for the immortality of the soul, says,

“ Dr. Cudworth affirms that there was never any of the ancients before Chris-
tianity that held the soul’s future permanency after death (i. e. from its inherent
immortality), who did not likewise assert its pre-existence.” If we necessarily
shall exist ¢o all eternity, we then must have existed from all eternity ; yet we are
not aware of having been alive before our brains. Sterne’s fine ridicule of the
absurdities introduced by this hypothesis of a soul, and that independent of the
brain, into the Romish church, is well known. <A great French man-midwife
acquaints us that he baptised a little abortion of the magnitude of a skinned
mouse; and on another occasion, when a woman was miscarrying in her fourth
month, and the child’s posteriors presented, that he sprinkled water upon them
and baptized them, in ease the little thing should turn out alive. (De Ja Motte,
Traité complet des Accouchemens, p. 243. 246.) Dr. Fodéré in his noted Mé-
decine Légale, 1813, (vol. ii. p. 62.) gravely suggests that baptism may always be
administered by a squirt, after the membranes are pierced, — “* Quant au bap-
téme, il me semble qu’il sera toujours facile de l’administrer, aprés avoir percé
les membranes, par le moyen d’un seringue a injection.” A good idea of what
follows in its train may be collected from Dante’s tiresome account of the intro-
duction of the soul into the body, beginning, “« Sangue perfetto che mai non si
beve,”’ &c. — Purgatorio, canto xxv. It is one parent of necromancy, of the belief
in ghosts, and of all the popish “ trumpery” respecting purgatory and the worship
of dead people called saints, of the opinions held by many respecting our oc-
cupations between death and doomsday, as if a future state began before; and
old writers sicken one with their notions about the period at which the sou! enters
the body, when it first existed, how it was engaged before it united with the body,
and how it employs itself after its separation till the day of judgment, &c.
‘* Hierom, Austin, and other fathers of the church, hold that the soul is immortal,
created of nothing, and so infused into the child or embryo in his mother’s womb
six months after the conception ; some say at three days, some six weeks, others
otherwise.” —Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy, p. 1. s. 1. m, 2. subs. 9. Where


MIND. 41


or not altogether ignorant, what matter is, or of what it is
capable and incapable; as though matter exhibited nothing but
extension, impenetrability, attraction, and inertness; and as
though an Almighty could not, if it seemed good to him, have
endowed it, as he most evidently has, with the superaddition of
life, and even of feeling and will.™

Nor does this assertion imply that the resurrection from the
dead is impossible, or even improbable. The physical enquirer,
finding the mind a power of the brain, and abstaining from
hypothesis, must conclude that, in the present order of things,
when the brain ceases to live the power necessarily ceases, — that,
in the language of scripture, Dust we are, and unto dust we all
return,—that our being is utterly extinguished, and we go back
to the insensibility of the earth whence we were taken." Our


the depot of souls is; how they learn when a youth has impregnated an ovarian
vesicle, and how they fly to and get into it; how it happens that the qualities of
the soul correspond with the brain, and are as hereditary as those of the body ;
whether this depends upon souls varying, and, if so, how a soul finds a body just
corresponding to itself; or upon the soul being obliged to conform to the cha-
racter of the brain, and thus suffering by the brain’s defects, we are not satisfac-
torily informed.

m «« All the difficulties that are raised against the thinking of matter, from our
ignorance or narrow vonceptions, stand not at all in the way of the power of Gon,
if he pleases to ordain it so.” The faculties of brutes prove, ‘ either that God
can and doth give to some parcels of matter a power of perception and thinking,
or that all animals have immaterial and consequently immortal souls as well as
men ; and to say that fleas and mites, &c. have immortal souls as well as men,
will possibly be looked on as going a great way to serve an hypothesis,” — Locke,
Second Reply to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 466. 8vo edit.

<¢ Si quelqu’un démontreroit jamais que l’Ame est matérielle,” says the pious
and benevolent Bonnet, “ loin de s’en alarmer, il faudroit admirer la puissance
qui auroit donné a la matiére la capacité de penser.”

‘In the ordinary derivation of plants and animals,” says Paley, “from
one another, a particle, in many cases minuter than all assignable, all conceivable
dimensions ; an aura, an efHluvium, an infinitesimal; determines the organis-
ation of a future body: does no less than fix, whether that which is about to be
produced shall be a vegetable, a merely sentient, or a RATIONAL being ; an oak,
a frog, or a philosopher ; makes all these differences ; gives to‘the future body its
qualities, and nature, and species. And this particle, from which springs, and by
which is determined, a whole future nature, itself proceeds from, and owes its con-
stitution to, a prior body,” &c. — Natural Theology, conclusion, p. 591.

" Miscellaneous Tracts, &c. by Richard Watson, D,D. F.R.S. Lord Bishop of
Llandaff. Sermon iii. p. 399, sq.


42 MIND.


consciousness of personality can afford no reason for imagining
ourselves immortal and distinct from earth, more than brutes;
for this the fly possesses equally with the philosopher about
whose head it buzzes.* ‘The moral government of the world,
the sublime reach of our acuteness, the great improveableness
of our characters, —

« __. this pleasing hope, this fond desire,

This longing after immortality,

this secret dread and inward horror
Of falling into nought,” P


have been thought to completely harmonise with a life hereafter,
but certainly fall so short of proof as to have lett the wisest of
antiquity,—Solomon, Socrates, Cicero, &c.—in uncertainty 4,
when they saw how death reduces us to our pristine elements.
The hope of immortality inspired by such reflections, assisted by
the desire of explaining every thing in some way or other, first,
I apprehend, made men attempt to find, in the imagined ethereal
essence of the soul, a reason for our not totally perishing as our
senses would lead us to suppose. But, because we refuse to
listen to a mere hypothesis respecting spirit, we are not necessa-
rily to deny the resurrection. For if a divine revelation pronounce
that there shall be another order of things in which the mind shall
exist again, we ought firmly to believe it, because neither our
experience nor our reason can inform us what will be hereafter,
and we must be senseless to start objections on a point beyond
the penetration of our faculties.'—The scripture so pronounces,


° Heathens have, very consistently with this reason for immortality, given it to
the fancied souls of brutes: Ulysses is made by Homer to behold the shade of
Orion — ;

Ojjpas dus cidedyta, Kat’ dopoderdy Aciwava
Tovds ards karémepver év oiomdroow bpecot. Odyss. A. 571.

Dr. Thomas Brown believed, “ that the metaphysical ancumENtT which proves
the immortality of man, extends with equal force to the other orders of earthly
existence.’’ Memoir of Thomas Brown, M.D., by the Rev. David Welsh. 1828,
p- XXil.

And “ Bonnet promised brutes immortality.”

P Addison, Cato. See a full enumeration in Mr. Dugald Stewart’s Outlines,
&c. p. 235. sq.

4 Bishop Watson, 1]. c. Sermon vi. p. 504. sq.

* « Nor can we be obliged, where we have the clear and evident sentence of
reason, to quit it for the contrary opinion, under a pretence that it is a matter of
faith, which can have no authority against the plain dictates of reason. But


MIND. 43


—not that we are naturally immortal, but that “in Adam (by
nature) all dies, —have our being utterly extinguished', and in
another order of things,—when the fashion of this world shall
have passed away and time shall be no more, that in Christ (by
the free, additional, gift of God, granted through the obedience
of Christ, but, consequently, by a miracle, not by our nature ")—
we shall all again be made alive. St. Paul declares the resurrec-


there are many things wherein we have very imperfect notions, or none at all;
and other things, of whose past, present, or future existence, by the actual use
of our faculties, we can have no knowledge: these, as being beyond the discovery
of our natural faculties, and above reason, are, when revealed, the proper matter
of faith. Thus, that part of the angels rebelled against God, and thereby lost
their first happy state, and that the dead shall rise and live again: these and the
like, being beyond the discovery of reason, are purely matters of faith, with
which reason has nothing directly to do.””— Locke, Essay on Human Under-
standing, iv. ch. 18.

Reason’s province is only to examine the proofs of the authenticity of a reve-
lation, and faith should thus be founded on reason. But how few of the human
race ever think, or are even capable, of carefully examining them! And of those
who do examine them, how few do not commence the examination with their
minds unconsciously half made up! And yet the greater number look down with
a self-complacent and uncharitable feeling upon even good men, whose opinions
differ in any respect from their own; forgetting that good conduct is the only
test of goodness, — that grapes cannot come from thorns, nor figs from thistles.

The question of the authenticity of Scripture is altogether foreign to this work.

’ Bishop Watson, Apology for the Bible, Letter x. near the end.

* Idem, Miscellan. Tracts, 1. c. — Dr. Law, Bishop of Carlisle, in his Theory
of Religion, &c., which went through seven editions, asserts that the sentence of
death passed upon Adam and Eve meant nothing less than a total destruction of
evistence ; and that the idea of its implying a continuation of consciousness and
real existence in some other place than earth, is not sanctioned by Scripture, but
is the philosophy of after-ages. —p. 545. Headds, that Bishop Tillotson, though
a patron of this notion, confesses it is not found in the Bible: and, after a critical
and elaborate examination of the words used in Scripture to denote soul and
spirit, and their various applications, he sums up the enquiry thus:—‘ But
neither do these words, nor any other, so far as I can find, ever stand for a
purely immaterial principle in man, or a substance, whatever some imagine they
mean by that word, wholly separable from, and independent of, the body.”

Bishop Sherlock employs strong expressions : — ‘* Scholars may reason on the
nature of the soul, and the condition of it when separated from the body: but the
common hopes of nature receive no support from such enquiries, We die and moul-
der to dust ; and in that state, what we are, or where we are, nature cannot say.”
Discourse ii. p. 85. and vol. iv. p. 79.

“ Bishop Watson, Apology, 1. c.


44 MIND.


tion to be “ a mystery :” it must, in truth, be a miracle; and there-
fore the enquiry, “how can these things be,” altogether fruitless.
The miracle of Christ’s resurrection, to which the Scriptures refer
us as the foundation of the hope of a future state, would not have
been necessary to convince us of a necessary truth, discoverable
by sense and reason. That the promises of the New Testament
are the proper and only foundation of our hopes of immortality,
was the opinion of the late Regius Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridge, whose powerful intellect and sincere
love of truth render his opinions weightier than the decrees of
councils. “I have no hope of a future existence,” says he,
“ except that which is grounded on the truth of Christianity. ”*


~


x Anecdotes of the Life of Richard Watson, D.D, F.R.S. late Lord Bishop of
Llandaff. — Vol. i. p. 107. See also a very decisive passage, beginning — “ As
a Deist, I have little expectation ; as a Christian I have no doubt, of a future
state,” in his Apology for the Bible, Letter x. near the end.

Bishop Jeremy Taylor, in his Doctrine of Original Sin, p. 24., assures us that
the words — “* Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection from
the dead,”’ and, “‘ as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive,”
directly affirm that a resurrection, or being made alive again, is granted, assured,
and executed by and in Christ alone ; and evidently suppose that the dead are not
made alive till the resurrection, and that, had not a resurrection been provided,
we should never, after death, have been made alive.

Locke argues, “‘ that all the great ends of religion and morality are secured
barely by the immortality of the soul, without a necessary supposition that it is
immaterial.” — First Reply, p. 34.

Mr. Dugald Stewart concedes that “the proper use of the doctrine of the
immateriality of the soul is not to demonstrate that the soul is physically and
necessarily immortal.”’ 1. c. p. 227.

Dr. Rush, of America, remarks upon this subject, ‘* that the writers in favour
of the immortality of the soul have done that truth great injury by connecting it
necessarily with its immateriality. The immortality of the soul depends upon the
will of the Deity, and not upon the supposed properties of spirit. Matter is in
its own nature as immortal as spirit. It is resolvable by heat and moisture into
a variety of forms; but it requires the same almighty hand to annihilate it, that
it did to create it. I know of no arguments to prove the immortality of the soul
but such as we derive from the Christian revelation.” — Medical Inquiries and
Observations, vol. ii. p. 15.

‘* T rather think,” says Dr. Priestley, “ that the whole of man is of some uni-
form composition, and that the property of perception, as well as the other
powers that are termed mental, is the result (whether necessary or not) of such
an organised structure as the brain. Consequently, that the whole man becomes
extinct at death, and that we have no hope of surviving the grave, but what is
derived from the scheme of revelation,” —First Introductory Essay to his Edition
of Hartley, p. Xxili. sq.


MIND. 45


While those are wrong who think there can be any thing like an
argument against a future life in another order of things, if de-
clared by a revelation, it is strange that others should think it
necessary to attempt rendering the pronunciations of scripture
more probable, and that by an hypothesis which is at best but the
remains of unenlightened times’, and should require any as-


Y The more uninformed the age, the greater the disposition to explain every
thing. The savage personifies the winds and the heavenly bodies; the ancients
fancied all matter endowed with a spirit — spiritus intus alit. Philo and Origen
maintain that the stars are so many souls, incorruptible and immorta!. In the
older writings of the moderns, even in those of the father of experiment and
observation — Lord Bacon, the properties of matter are referred to spirits: —
«from them and their motions principally proceed rarefaction, colliquation, con-
coction, maturation, putrefaction, vivification, and most of the effects of nature ;”
‘¢ for tangible parts in bodies are stupid things, and the spirits do, in effect, all.”
(Natural History, cent. i. 98.) — In fact, some authors believe in three souls —
the vegetable, sensible, and natural— for vegetables, brutes, and man ; those which
have the second having also the first, and those who have the third having all
three. Paracelsus believed in four. These old writers, in providing a spirit for
every thing, were more consistent than the moderns, who require it for only life
and mind; because a subtle fluid or spirit is quite as necessary to explain the
arrangement of saline particles into the regular form of a beautiful crystal.
All these notions still exist among the vulgar; and the last remaining among the
better informed, though it too is rapidly dying away, relates to mind. Those who
upbraid others for refusing their assent to this hypothesis, may recollect: that
Anaxagoras and many more were accused of atheism and impiety, because they
denied that the heavenly bodies were animated and intelligent. Even in the last
reign but one, the Newtonian doctrines were thought irreligious by the Hutchin-
sonian sect, to which Bishop Horne, the amiable writer on the Psalms, and
Mr. Jones, the learned and ingenious writer in defence of the Trinity, belonged :
and the Jesuits, in their edition of Newton, 1742, carefully disclaim all belief
in his demonstration of the earth’s motion, as this is decreed false by the Pope.

Materialist is as good a word as any other for branding those from whom we
differ; but materialism in its true acceptation signifies the doctrine of no first
cause, or that all has been produced ex fortuita atomorum collisione. The whole
tenor of scripture implies that we are bodies endowed with certain properties; and
those passages from which our having a distinct immaterial substance is inferred,
may be easily explained by the figurative style of the Bible, by the necessary
adoption of the language of the times, and by the influence of the national
opinions and prejudices of the writers on their modes of expression. With-
out due allowance, we might deem it impious to deny that “the round world
cannot be movyed;”’ that the sun ‘ pursues its course’’ round the earth ;
(Galileo was imprisoned for doing so, and yet, said the sage to himself while
in prison, “the earth does move’? —e pur si muove:) that Naaman’s leprosy (a
condition of body) was a real substance, because we read that it left him and


46 MIND.


surance besides that of the gospel, which, they read, ‘“ has
ee ee


‘clave unto Gehazi;”? that Adam “surely’’ (more properly “ utterly,” ‘ to-
tally,” or ‘ entirely”) died on the very day he tasted the forbidden fruit; that
the winds possessed sense, because Christ said, “‘ Peace, be still ;’’ that the earth
is square, because we twice read of its four corners (Isa. xi. Rev. vii.) ; and that
Saul’s melancholy, and the cases of insanity and epilepsy related in the New
Testament, were possessions by demons, which are pronounced by St. Paul
to be “nothing in the world.” (See the Rev, Hugh Farmer’s original and
admirable works, especially his Essays on the Demoniacs of the New Testament, and
on Christ’s Temptation.) Without due allowance, what absurdities might not be
inferred from Christ’s use of the word heart? But the most enlightened divines
allow us at present to follow Bacon’s advice, and to read the Bible, not as a work
of philosophical instruction, but of the revelation of religious matters beyond our
knowledge, v. c. to learn from Genesis only how the world was created by God,
and to study geology without reference to Moses. “ The expressions of Moses are
evidently accommodated to the first and familiar notions derived from the sensible
appearances of the earth and heavens ; and the absurdity of supposing that the literal
interpretation of terms in Scripture ought to interfere with the advancement of
philosophical enquiry, would have been as generally forgotten as renounced, if
the oppressors of Galileo had not found a place in history.’’ 4 Treatise on the
Records of the Creation, &c., by J. B. Sumner, M. A., Prebendary of Durham, &c.
now Bishop of Chester, 3d edit. 1825, vol. i. p. 327. We may, therefore, learn
the miracle of the resurrection from the gospels, and enjoy our own opinions
respecting matter and spirit, body and soul, which, as relating to our nature, are
objects of physical enquiry, and therefore not of revelation, any more than astronomy
or geology. The writer of the celebrated Apology for the Bible says, “ when I
went to the University, I was of opinion, as most schoolboys are, that the soul was
a substance distinct from the body, and that when a man died, he, in classical
phrase, breathed out his soul, animam expiravit ; that it then went I knew not
whither, as it had come into the body, from I knew not where nor when, and had
dwelt in the body during life, but in what part of the body it had dwelt I knew
not.”—** This notion of the soul was, without doubt, the offspring of prejudice
and ignorance.” —“ Believing as I do in the truth of the Christian religion, which
teaches that men are accountable for their actions, I trouble not myself with dark
disquisitions concerning necessity and liberty, matter and spirit; hoping as I do
for eternal life through Jesus Christ, I am not disturbed at my inability clearly to
convince myself that the soul is or is not a substance distinct from the body.”
— Anecdotes of the Life of Bishop Watson, p. 14. sqq-

«‘ Well indeed is it for us,’’ says a liberal writer in the Quarterly Review,
on the subject of geology, “ that the cause of revelation does not depend upon
questions such as these ; for it is remarkable that in every instance the controversy
has ended in a gradual surrender of those very points which were at one time
represented as involving the vital interests of religion. Truth, it is certain, can-
not be opposed to truth. How inconsiderate a risk, then, do those advocates run,
who declare that the whole cause is at issue in a single dispute, and that the sub-


MIND. A]


brought life and immortality to light.* They should reflect that
the belief of an immaterial substance removes no imagined dif-
ficulty, as it is the peculiar doctrine of scripture, in distinction to
that of most heathen philosophers and people *, that the resurrec-
tion will be positively of Jody, — that in our flesh we shall see
God», and that therefore our minds, according to the scripture
doctrine, must appear as much a property of body hereafter as at
present.©

Only this — the Christian — account of a future state is reason-


stance of our faith hangs upon a thread — upon the literal interpretation of some
word or phrase, against which fresh arguments are springing up from day to day!”
1823, April, p. 163.

The Theory of Religion, by the learned, able, and enlightened Bishop Law,
already quoted, deserves to be read by every one, as proving that by the words
soul and spirit, no immaterial, immortal principle in man is meant, but merely
person, the superior and inferior mental faculties, living creature, &c. ; by death,
a total cessation of existence ; by the life hereafter, a second bodily existence. It is
to this admirable divine that Paley dedicates his Principles of Moral and Political
Philosophy, and says — “ Your Lordship’s researches have never lost sight of one
purpose, namely, to recover the simplicity of the Gospel from beneath that load of
unauthorised additions, which the ignorance of some, and the learning of others ;
the superstition of weak, and the craft of designing men, have (unhappily for its
interest) heaped upon it. And this purpose, I am convinced, was dictated by
the purest motive; by a firm, and, I think, a just opinion, “ that whatever ren-
ders religion more rational, renders it more credible: that he who, by a diligent
and faithful examination of the original records, dismisses from the system one
article which contradicts the apprehension, the experience, or the reasoning of
mankind, does more towards recommending the belief, and, with the belief, the
influence of Christianity, to the understandings and consciences of serious en-
quirers, and through them to universal reception and authority, than can be effect-
ed by a thousand contenders for creeds and ordinances of human establishment.”?

For an account of all the hypotheses that haye been taught upon life and mind,
see dn Enquiry into the Opinions, ancient and modern, concerning Life and Or-
ganisation. By John Barclay, M.D., Edinb, 1822.

z 2 Timothy, i. 10.

a « Errant exsangues sine corpore et ossibus umbra.””—Ovid. Metam. iv.

> Job,

© Itis the doctrine of the Church of England, that all men shall rise with their
bodies. Enoch and Elijah are represented to have been translated bodily. Nay,
our church has so little of this horror of matter, that it declares that Christ, “ the
very and eternal God” (Article ii.), ascended into heayen, and there sits, with
“his body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man’s
nature,” Article iy.


48 MIND.


able. The heathen doctrine was grounded on the supposed in-
herent immortality of a supposed substance distinct from the body.
The Christian doctrine teaches the resurrection of what we obvi-
ously are—odies, and that through a miracle of the Almighty. ¢


4 Respecting a difficulty which may present itself to the conceptions of some
Christians, but which the miraculousness of a future existence, I think, should re-
move, I may quote Paley’s sermon on the state after death. He concludes,

«© That it is a question by which we need not be at all disturbed, whether the
bodies with which we shall arise be new bodies, or the same bodies under a new
form:

“ For no alteration will hinder us from remaining the same, provided we are
sensible, and conscious that we are so; any more than the changes which our visible
person undergoes even in this life, and which from infancy to manhood are un-
doubtedly very great, hinder us from being the same, to ourselves and in ourselves,
and to all intents and purposes whatsvever.’? — Sermons on several Subjects, by the
late Rev. W. Paley, D.D. serm. 3. p. 96. These are a small system of divinity,
and, having been bequeathed by him to his parishioners, probably contain his
mature convictions.


II. SPECIAL PHYSIOLOGY.


CEE? f,


HUNGER, THIRST, AND FOOD.


Tue solid and fluid substances, taken into the mouth to repair
the losses of the system, are termed food and drink; or both are
comprised under the word food.

The desire for the former is called hunger or appetite, and for
the latter, thzrst.

«« Some ascribe hunger to an uneasiness arising in the stomach
from its being empty and unoccupied; others, to the mutual
friction of its ruge; others, not only to the stimulus of its fluids,
now secreted in abundance, — of the saliva and gastric juice, but
to an acrimony which they acquire when food is not taken in
proper time.”

If hunger arise from merely a sense of vacuity in the stomach,
why should it be increased by the application of cold to the sur-
face, and instantly by the deglutition of cold liquids, &c. ?

The explanation by friction of the ruge is equally unsatisfac-
tory ; because the friction of these, if it does really occur, cannot
be greater than the friction of the stomach against its contents
immediately after a meal, when the organ is in great action, but
at which time hunger does not exist.

Nor can the presence of the gastric juice explain the matter:
because, as every one knows, no sensation arises in any other
organ, which is not excrementory, from the peculiar-stimulus of
its natural fluid, and I presume that this is the stimulus intended,
for the mechanical stimulus, from the bulk of the gastric juice,
occurs equally from the presence of food, which does not excite
hunger ; because, if the hungry stomach is evacuated by vomiting,
as in sea-sickness, the appetite, when the sickness has ceased, is
even greater than before ; and because hunger often ceases after
a time, though the gastric juice still remains in the stomach, and
is probably more abundant than ever.

E


50 HUNGER.


The supposition of an acrimony generated in the gastric juice,
&c. being a cause of hunger, is absurd. The fluid would be unfit
for its purposes, and would be more likely to destroy than produce
appetite.

Hunger has been attributed by some to a sympathy of the sto-
mach with a general feeling of want in the system. But hunger
is removed immediately that a due quantity of food is swallowed,—
long before the general system can have derived benefit from the
meal: fowls are satisfied when their crops are filled, although
their food is not even ground, preparatorily to digestion, till it has
passed from the crop into the gizzard; and ruminating animals leave
off eating before they begin to chew the substances with which they
have distended their stomachs. Again, persons unable to obtain
food in sufficient quantity lessen their hunger by swallowing any
innutritious and indigestible matter. The circumstance giving
rise to this opinion is the continuance of hunger although food be
taken in abundance, in cases of scirrhous pylorus and enlarged me-
senteric glands. Here, it is urged, the hunger continues, because
the body receives no nourishment. But, in scirrbus of the pylorus,
vomiting generally soon follows the reception of food into the
stomach; and therefore this organ is reduced to the condition in
which it was previously, and the return of hunger is easily expli-
cable: but I do not know that a continued hunger commonly
occurs in cases of scirrhous pylorus. In diseases of the mesen-
teric glands there is, in fact, no obstruction to the course of the
chyle. They are found permeable, according to Dr. Boekker, a
German anatomist, and the continued hunger appears rather a
part of the diseased state of the chylopoietic viscera. Besides,
many cases of imperfect nutrition, from various causes, occur,
without any increase of appetite: and where there is an in-
crease of appetite, the process of digestion seems to proceed with
unusual rapidity, so that the stomach becomes empty sooner than
in health.— In continued abstinence, although the system is daily
more in want, hunger usually ceases after a few days, whether
from the stomach falling into a state of relaxation, becoming dis-
tended with wind, or from other circumstances.

If hunger arose from fatigue of the stomach, it should be
greatest immediately after the laborious act of digestion, and gra-
dually decrease; but it on the contrary increases.

Were irritation the cause, hunger should be greatest when the
stomach is filled with food.


HUNGER, 51


On the whole, hunger may perhaps be regarded as a sensation
connected with the contracted state of the stomach.

It occurs when the stomach, being empty, must be contracted,
and is increased instantaneously by a draught of cold liquid, which
cannot but contract the stomach, and corrugate its inner coat:
acids, bitters, and astringents have the same effect, and from their
nature they may be supposed to act in the same way. Cold air
applied to the surface increases it, and, in all probability, by a
similar operation ; for the impression of cold upon the skin excites
an attempt at evacuation in the urinary bladder, and, when all
other means fail to induce the intestines to expel their contents
or the uterus to contract after delivery, the affusion of cold water
so frequently succeeds, that the omission of the practice in obsti-
nate cases is highly censurable. It is diminished by heat and
every thing which relaxes. Again, it ceases immediately that
the stomach is filled and thus the organ dilated and all corru-
gation removed; and, the more the contents of the stomach are of
a nature to be absorbed or passed into the duodenum, the sooner
it recurs. Distension of the stomach is universally acknowledged
to be incompatible with hunger; whence the proverb, —“ a full
belly loathes the honey-comb.”

The Otomacs during the periodical inundation of the rivers of
South America, when the depth of the waters almost entirely pre-
vents fishing, appease their hunger for two or three months by
distending their stomach with prodigious quantities, a pound a day
and upwards, of a fine unctuous, strong-smelling, yellowish-grey
clay, slightly baked, and destitute of all organic substance, oily or
farinaceous.* The savages of New Caledonia, in the Pacific Ocean,
in times of scarcity, do the same by eating a friable lapis ollaris,
consisting of equal parts of magnesia and silex, with a little oxide
of copper. The wolves, rein-deer, and kids of Siberia, when
pressed by hunger in winter, also devour clay or friable steatites.
The Kamtschatkans sometimes appease their hunger by distending
their stomach with sawdust, for want of samiething better.

Being, in this view, a sensation connected with a local state of
the stomach, it will be affected not only by whatever affects this
state, but by whatever affects also the sensibility to this state, and


* Humboldt, Tableaux de la Nature, t.i. They become so fond of it, that
they take a little, even when well provided with sustenance, and are compelled to
tie their children’s hands to prevent them from geophagising.


Be


52 THIRST.


therefore be subject to the common laws of sensation. Hence
uncivilised tribes enable themselves to traverse large tracts with-
out food by swallowing pills containing tobacco or opium. The
pain of all excessive muscular contraction is lessened by pressure;
whence the uneasiness of hunger is lessened by a belt fixed tightly
over the stomach; and some Northern Asiatic tribes really place
a band there, and lace it behind with cords drawn more tightly,
according to the degree of the uneasiness. Thus, too, the state of
the stomach remaining the same, hunger may diminish from the
occurrence of other feelings which attract our attention more
forcibly, by passions of the mind, &c.: as is exactly the case with
all other sensations, even with those that are morbid. Under
strong attention of the mind to pursuits of either intellect or
passion, to delightful or painful sensation, all other feelings cease
to be felt, although really violent; and frequently, from being
unattended to, do not recur. Passions, however, and the narcotic
pills of savages, may affect hunger, not only by increasing or di-
minishing the sensibility to the state of the stomach, but by in-
creasing or diminishing this state—the cause of the sensation.

As hunger appears to depend upon the local condition of the
stomach, so does thirst more evidently upon that of the mouth
and fauces. Every consideration renders it probable that thirst is
the sensation of the deficiency of moisture in the parts in which it
is seated. Whatever produces this, either by causing the fluids of
the mouth and fauces to be secreted in small quantity or of
great viscidity, or by carrying off the fluid when secreted, pro-
duces thirst; and vice versa. Jo be dry means to be thirsty, be-
cause the state is removed by directly wetting the parts, or by
supplying the system with fluid, that they may be moistened by
their own secretions. Being a sensation, the same may be re-
peated in regard to it as was observed respecting hunger. Rage
or terror dry up the mouth and throat, and cause violent thirst.
Thirst is only momentarily assuaged by wetting the mouth and
throat, because they presently grow dry again. Fluids must be
swallowed to be effectual, that they may be absorbed and the
part thus preserved moist by constant secretion.


“ The necessity of obeying those stimuli is greater or less, ac-
cording to age, constitution, and especially according to habit,
and nothing can therefore be affirmed positively respecting its ur-
gency ; but a healthy adult, in whom all the calls of nature are


STARVATION. 53


felt in their usual force », cannot abstain from food a whole day
without great prostration of strength, nor scarcely beyond eight
days without danger to life.”

Hippocrates says that most of those who abstain from food for
seven days, die within that period; and, if they do not, and are
even prevailed upon to eat and drink, that still they perish.° Sir
William Hamilton, however, saw a girl, sixteen years of age, appa-
rently not in bad health, who was extricated from the ruins of a
house at Oppido, in which she had remained eleven days without
food: an infant in her arms, but a tew months old, had died on
the fourth day, as the young are never so able to endure absti-
nence.? A moderate supply of water lengthens life astonishingly.
Dr. Willan was called to a young gentleman who had voluntarily
abstained from every thing but a little water, just flavoured with
orange juice, for sixty days: death ensued a fortnight afterwards.

edi cruelly found that of a number of starved fowls deprived of
water, none lived beyond the ninth day, whereas one indulged
with water lived upwards of twenty.£ If the water is not swal-
lowed, but imbibed by the surface or lungs, it may also prolong
life. Fodéré mentions some workmen who were extricated alive
at the end of fourteen days from a cold damp cavern in which they
had been buried under a ruin. 8

In abstinence equally great imbecility of mind takes place as
of body : extreme emaciation and cedema of the legs present a
frightful spectacle; urine may still be secreted, but the alvine
discharge is greatly diminished, or suppressed altogether; the pain


> « Consult, among innumerable writers on long fasting, James Barthol. Bec-
carius, Commentar. Instituti Bononiens. t. ii. p. 1.; and Flor. J. Voltelen, Me-
morab. Apositie Septennis Hist. Lug. Bat. 1777, 8vo.”

© De Carnibus.

4 Phil. Trans. vol. Ixxiii. p. 191. sq.

© Medical Communications, vol. ii.

f Osservax. intorno agli anim. viventi.

® Fodéré, Médecine Légale, t. ii. p. 285. A hog, weighing about 160 lbs., was
buried in its sty, under thirty feet of the chalk of Dover Cliff, for 160 days. When
dug out it weighed but 40]bs., and was extremely emaciated, clean, and white.
There was neither food nor water in the sty when the chalk fell. It had nibbled
_ the wood of the sty, and eaten some louse chalk, which from the appearance of
the excrement had passed more than once through the body. (Linnean Transact.
vol. xi. See London Med. Journ. vol. xxxv. 1816.) Pigs will not only eat
coals, but keep in good condition upon them alone. Coals, however, are a vege-
table substance. — Cuningham’s Two Years in New South Wales, vol. i, p- 301.


B 3


54 STARVATION.


of hunger ceases in a few days", probably from relaxation of the
stomach through debility. But when hunger has ceased, though
no food has been taken, weakness and sinking at the pit of the


stomach are still felt.
Life may be supported for a certain time by nutriment intro-


duced into the intestines. I lately attended a lady who, through
obstruction of the cesophagus, attended by suppuration, did not
swallow a particle of solid or fluid for six weeks, at the end of
which she died. Three injections of milk, eggs, and wine, were
employed daily. She passed a feculent soft evacuation in every
twenty-four hours, and never felt the sensation of hunger.

A poor diet, even of vegetable matter, sometimes gives rise to
symptoms of scurvy:; and famine is soon attended by epidemic


fever.

The torment of thirst increases until drink is procured or mois-
ture applied to the surface or inhaled: inflammation of the mouth
and throat, and intense fever, at length ensue.*

If abstinence is not forced upon the system, but is absolutely a
part of disease, it may, like suspension of respiration in morbid
states of insensibility !, and like immense doses of powerful medi-


h Among many other accounts of starvation, some of these facts may be seen in
Captain Franklin’s Narrative of a Journey to the Polar Sea, p. 465. sq. 427.
London, 1823 ; where the dreadful force of hunger is too truly illustrated. Our
countrymen devoured their old shoes, and any scraps of leather they possessed.
(pp. 418. 429. 438. 479.). The putrid spinal marrow left in bones, picked clean
by wolves and birds of prey, was esteemed a prize, though its acrimony excoriated
the lips; the bones were also eaten up after being burnt (p. 426.); great part of
a putrid deer:was devoured on the spot (p. 421.) ; and to destroy, skin, and cut
up a cow, was the work of a few minutes, after which the contents of the stomach
and the raw intestines were at once devoured and thought excellent. (p. 407.)
In the siege of Jerusalem and other ancient cities, we read of women driven by
hunger to devour their offspring ; and Captain Franklin was assured, near the
Saskatchawan, that men and women were then living, who had destroyed and
fed upon the bodies of their own families, to prevent starvation in very severe
seasons. (p. 51.)

i See Sir George Baker’s account of two women, in the Transact. of the College
of Physicians, vol. ii.

k A horrid description of raging thirst will be found in the account of the
black-hole of Calcutta. See Annual Register, 1758.

! An example of the impunity with which a long exclusion of air may be borne,
when the system is in a morbid nervous state, may appear to advantage by the side
of similar illustrations of the deprivation of food. The story of Ann Green,”
says the Rey. Mr, Derham, “ executed at Oxford, Dec. 14. 1650, is still well


STARVATION. 55


cines in various diseased states, be borne with wonderful indiffer-
ence; and this occurs chiefly among females. But the most
extraordinary case that I recollect, stated upon unquestionable
authority, is that of a young Scotchwoman, who laboured under
an anomalous nervous affection, and, excepting that on two occa-
sions she aac. ae water, received no nourishment what-
ever for eight years. She passed urine enough twice a week to
wet a shilling, and for three years had no intestinal evacuation.™


remembered among the seniors there: she was hang’d by the Neck near half an
Hour, some of her Friends thumping her on the Breast, others hanging with all
their Weight upon her Legs, sometimes lifting her up and then pulling her down
again with a sudden Jirk, thereby the sooner to dispatch her out of her Pain, as
the printed Account of her informs us, After she was in her Coffin, being ob-
serv’d to breathe, a lusty Fellow stampt with all his Force on her Breast and
Stomach, to put her out of Pain. But, by the Assistance of Dr. Peity, Dr. Willis,
Dr. Bathurst, and Dr. Clark, she was again brought to Life. I myself saw her
many Years after, between which Time and the Date of her Execution she had,
as I am inform’d, borne several Children.” (Physico- Theology, p.156.) Her
neryous insensibility appears from another writer, who states, that “ she neither
remembered how the fetters were knocked off, how she went out of prison, when
she was turned off the ladder, whether any psalm was sung or not, nor was she
sensible of any pain that she could remember. What is most remarkable is, that
she came to herself as if she had awakened out of a sleep, not recovering the use
of her speech by slow degrees, but in a manner altogether, beginning to speak
just where she left off on the gallows.” (Plott’s History of Oxford. )

™ Phil. Trans. vol. Ixvii. In a remarkable instance of imperfect abstinence
during fifty years, the woman voided a little feculent matter like a piece of roll-
tobacco, or a globule of sheep’s dung, but once a year, and that always in March,
for sixteen years. (Edinb. Med. and Phys. Essays, vol. vi.) It would be inter-
esting to examine the changes induced in the air by the lungs and skin of such
patients.

Pouteau mentions the case of one of his patients, a young lady thirteen years
of age, who was affected with convulsions and insensibility at a certain period,
generally every day, sometimes not quite so often, and great irritability ot’ stomach,
lived eighteen months, and grew more than two inches and a half, on syrup of
capillaire and cold water. Here, the abstinence was not part of the disease, but
the extraordinary state of the system enabled it to bear the abstinence. Guvres
Posthumes, t. i. p. 27.

Still, many cases of abstinence have been impostures and exaggerations; and I
cannot illustrate this better than by quoting the case of Eue Fleigen, the Dutch
prototype of our own Anne Moore of Tutbury. She contrived to deceive the
world for fourteen years (from 1597 to 1611), pretending that she took no
nourishment all that time, She bad no neryous derangement to render food

BE A


56 VORACITY.


For every example of extraordinary abstinence among females
we have a counterpart in voraciousness among males. When the
appetite is so great, it is seldom nice; and not only all animals in
all states are devoured, but glass, flints, metals, sand, wood, &c.
A Frenchman, named Tarare, and described by Drs. Percy and
Laurent, in some measure from their own observation ", will form
a good contrast to the Scotch girl. When a lad, he once swal-
lowed a large basket of apples, after some person had agreed to
pay for them ; and at another time a quantity of flints, corks, and
similar substances. ‘The colic frequently compelled him to apply
at the Hétel Dieu: he was no sooner relieved, however, than he
began his tricks again, and once was but just prevented from
swallowing the surgeon’s watch, with its chain and seals. In
1789 he joined the mob, and obtained sufficient food without
devouring for money. He was then about seventeen, weighing a
hundred pounds, and would eat five-and-twenty pounds of beef
a day. When the war broke out he entered into the army, and
devoured his comrades’ rations, as long as better supplies from
other sources rendered them of little value. But when at length
his comrades stood in need of them themselves, he was nearly
famished, fell ill, and was admitted into the hépital ambulant at


unnecessary ; yet the minister and magistrates of Meurs made trial of her for
thirteen successive days without detecting her imposture, Over her picture in
the Dutch original are these lines : —


Muere hee quam cernis decies ter sexq; peregit
Annos, bis septem prorsus non vescitur annis
Nec potat, sic sola sedet, sic pallida vitam

Ducit, et exigui se oblectat floribus horti.


Thus rendered in the English translation —


This maide, of Meurs 36 yeares spent
14 of which she tooke no nourishment
Thus pale, and wan she sits sad and alone
A garden ’s all shee loves to looke upon.
An Apologie or Declaration of the Power and Providence of
God. By George Hakewill. 1630. fol.

Respecting Anne Moore, see Dr. Henderson’s Examination, &c.

» Dictionnaire des Sciences Médicales, art. Homophage; where the dissection
of another polyphagus is given, whose stomach was found to haye been made
neither more nor less than a collection of marine stores. See also Percy’s Mémoire
sur le Polyphage, i n the Journal de Médecine, Brumaire, An xii.


VORACITY. 57


Sultzer. He there ate not only a quadruple allowance, the
broken food of the other patients, and the waste of the kitchen,
but would swallow the poultices and any thing else that came in
his way. He devoured so many dogs and cats alive that they fled
at the sight of him. Large snakes he despatched with the greatest
facility ; and once ee up in a few moments all the dinner
that was provided for fifteen German labourers, viz. four bowls
of curd, and two enormous dishes of dough boiled in water with
salt and fat. At another time, he disposed of thirty pounds of
raw liver and lights in the presence of some general officers, who,
finding that he could swallow a large wooden lancet case, took
the partitions out, enclosed a letter in it, and made him swallow
it, and proceed to the enemy’s quarters for the purpose of dis-
charging it by stool, and delivering the letter to a French colonel
who had fallen into the hands of the Prussians. This he contrived
to do, enclosed the answer in it, swallowed it again, made his
escape, discharged the case again from his bowels, washed it, and
presented it to Beauharnois and the other officers. Having,
however, been well drubbed by the enemy, he refused any further
secret service, and was readmitted into the hospital to be cured
of his hunger. Being no longer a novelty, he excited less in-
terest, and felt it necessary to have recourse to sheepfolds,
poultry-yards, private kitchens, slaughter-houses, and by-places,
where he had to contend with dogs and wolves for their filthy
food. He was detected drinking blood that had been taken from
his fellow-patients, and eating bodies in the dead-house. The
disappearance of a young child excited strong suspicions against
him, and he was at length chased away and unheard of for four
years, at the end of which time he applied at the Hospice de Ver-
sailles, wasted, no longer voracious, and labouring under a puru-
lent diarrhoea; and he soon died, aged twenty-six. The body
immediately became a mass of putridity. During his life he was
always offensive, hot, and in a sweat, especially at intervals. His
breath rolled off like steam, and his dejections were constantly
very copious, and intolerably foetid. He was of the middle height,
thin, and weak.

All the abdominal viscera were found full of suppurations.

His stomach was of immense size, and this has usually been the
case in persons habitually gluttonous. A polyphagous idiot
opened by the same writers displayed an enormous stomach, more
resembling that of a horse than of a human being : the intestines


58 VORACITY.


also formed several large pouches in succession, which appeared
like additional stomachs. Cabrol dissected a glutton of Toulouse,
and found the cesophagus terminating in an excessively large
cavity, and the intestines running, without a single convolution,
but with merely a gentle sigmoid flexure, to the anus. A large
pylorus, or a very depending position of it, have been found in other
cases. We thus learn the common causes of constitutional vora-
ciousness, and obtain an additional reason for referring hunger to
the want of distention of the stomach : —a great quantity of food
is required to fill these stomachs. If hunger were independent
of the distention of this organ, and connected solely with the
want of the system, an ordinary meal would suffice where the
stomach is very large, as the extraordinary quantity of food can-
not be demanded for nourishment, — when food enough for support
is taken, hunger should cease. But hunger continues till the sto-
mach is filled, and the prodigious collection in the case of Tarare
was disposed of by abundant stools, sweating, and copious pul-
monary exhalation.

The large capacity of the stomach is generally ascribable to
original conformation, but some account for it occasionally by
repeated over-distention and the deglutition of indigestible sub-
stances, —an opinion rather improbable, when we reflect that cor-
poration gluttons, who give a very fair trial to the distensibility of
their idol, never acquire such appetites and capaciousness of sto-
mach as qualify them for a show. The power of deglutition may
be very much increased by practice. We have all seen the Indian
jugglers ; and I frequently conversed with a poor man who had
swallowed nineteen large clasp-knives at different times, having
found in a drunken fit that he could get one down his throat for a
wager°: yet in him the appetite and capacity of stomach were not
augmented. Knife and stone eaters are seen in all countries.

Some great eaters are prodigies of strength; as Milo, who killed


° Several pieces of the knives are preserved in the Museum of Guy’s Hospital,
and an account of the case may be found in the Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xii.

There is a collection of cases of extraordinary swallowing from Galen, Vesalius,
Paré, &c., in Shenkius, Observationes Medica, lib. iii. j

A polyphagus at the Jardin des Plantes, who once ate a lion which had died
there of some disease, and at last died himself of eating Slbs. of new bread, most
originally conceived, being ali for the belly, that animals might be classed accord-
ing to their excrement, and actually made a collection of such stores, upon which
he would descant most eloquently. Dict. des Sc. Méd., Cas, Rares, p, 199,


VORACITY. 59


an ox with a blow of his fist, and devoured it; and the fellow
mentioned in a thesis published at Wittemberg in 1757, who once,
in the presence of the senate, ate up a sheep, a sucking-pig, and
sixty pounds of plums, stones and all, and could carry four men
a whole league upon his shoulders.

Voracity is of course sometimes, like depraved appetite, as in
chlorosis and pregnancy, but temporary, and referable to merely
disordered function. Dr. Satterly details the case of a lad in
whom, while labouring under typhus with marked inflammation in
the head, the exacerbations of fever were accompanied by such
hunger, that he ate every day four regular meals, each sufficient
for the stoutest labourer’s dinner, and many pounds of dry bread,
biscuit, and fruit between them. He had no sooner finished a
meal than he denied having tasted any thing,


“ cibus omuis in illo,


Causa cibi est, semperque locus fit inanis edendo,”’


and would suck and bite the bed-clothes or his fingers? if refused
more, cared nothing about the quality of what he ate, would pass
six or seven large solid motions a day by means of physic, and
ultimately recovered.4 The stomach here executed its office with
excessive rapidity, and was too soon empty again.


To show how some animals differ from us in the demand for
food, I may mention that the ant-lion will exist without the
smallest supply of food, apparently uninjured, for six months ;
though, when he can get it, he will daily devour an insect of his
own size. A spider has lived without food under a sealed glass
for ten months, and at the end of that time appeared as vigorous
as ever. Reptiles have often lived upwards of a century enclosed
in trees or stones.

On the other hand, herbivorous larve, as caterpillars, (for in-
sects are carnivorous, herbivorous, and omnivorous, like their
superiors,) will eat twice their weight of food daily."


P QOvid’s account of Erisichthon is verified in many histories of voracity :—


‘* Tpse suos artus lacero divellere morsu
Ceepit ; et infelix minuendo corpus alebat.” Metam. lib. viii.


1 Transactions of the Royal College of Physicians, London, vol. v.
See also Phil. Trans. Papers read 1745; and Abridgment, vol. iii. eh WG
* Kirby and Spence, Entomology, p. 398. sq,


60 FOOD.


“ Although thirst is a violent desire, drink appears not very
necessary to life and health; for many warm-blooded animals —
mice, quails, parrots, &c. — do not drink at all; and some indivi-
duals of the human species have lived in perfect health and
strength without tasting liquids.”® ,

Sauvages mentions a member of the Acadgagmnt Toulouse who
never thirsted, and passed whole months of the hottest summer
without drinking ; and a woman who passed 40 days without
liquids or thirst. ¢


“It has been disputed whether our food, by which we satisfy
these stimuli, is derived more advantageously, and the more con-
sistently with nature, from the animal or from the vegetable


kingdom."

« Some contend that man is herbivorous, from the shape of his
teeth *, the length of his intestines ¥, the difference between the
structure of the small and large intestines, and from the cells of
the colon, &c. Rousseau ingeniously urges the circumstance
that woman is naturally uniparous and provided with two breasts.
To these arguments it may be added, that some men have rumi-
nated,—a power peculiar to herbivorous animals®, and that tame


s ¢«¢ See G. Baker, Med. Transact. published by the Coll. of Physicians in London,
vol. ii. p. 265. sq.”

t « Nosol. Méthod. ti. 0, 770,

See also Eph. Nat. Cur. c. v. and vi. p. 80.”

u « J, W. Neergaard, Vergleichende Anatomie und Physiologie der Verdauungs-
werkzeuge der Saiigethiere und Vogel. Berlin, 1806, p. 244.”

x « Gassendi, Letter to J. Bapt. v. Helmont. Opera. Florence, 1727, fol.
t. vi. p-17. Al. Monro, senr. Essay on Comparative Anatomy, p. 17.”

y «© J, Wallis, Phil. Trans. No. 269.”’

2 « Sur V Origine de’ Inégalité parmi les Hommes, p. 196. sq.”

« A striking instance of this occurred at Bristol. A man twenty years of age
had, as long as he could remember, chewed his food a second time, after swallow-
ing it. The process began in a quarter of an hour if he had taken liquid at his
meal —- later if he had not: and, after a full meal, lasted about an hour and a half.
What had passed down first, always came up first. Before the second chewing,
his food appeared to lie heavy in the lowest part of his throat: after it, “ the food
passed clean away.” If he ate a variety, ‘‘ that which passed down first came
up first.”” He found the taste of the food on its return to be chewed rather plea-
santer than at first. ‘If this faculty left him it signified sickness, and he was
never well till it returned.’’ His father had sometimes ruminated sigh. (Phil.
Trans. Abridgment, vol, iii. p. 110. sq.) of


RUMINATION. 61


vegetable feeders are easily accustomed to animal food; where-
as carnivorous animals, excepting the dog, can very seldom be
brought to feed on vegetables.

« The arguments of those who, with Helvetius », regard man as
carnivorous, are derived from the conformation of his stomach,
the shortness of his caecum, &c.

‘¢ More careful observation, however, proves that man is not
destined for either kind of food alone, but for both. His teeth,
particularly the molares¢, and the peculiar structure of his intes-
tines just alluded to, hold a middle rank between the same parts
in the fere and in herbivorous animals.” In carnivorous animals,
the incisors are very large; and the molares generally of an
irregular wedge form, those of the lower jaw closing in those of
the upper like scissors, and being adapted for lacerating. In the
herbivorous, the surface of the molares is horizontal or oblique,
adapted for grinding. As the food of herbivorous animals re-
quires more preparation before it becomes the substance of the
animal, their stomach is adapted to retain it for a length of time.
The cesophagus opens nearer the right extremity of the stomach,
and the pylorus nearer the left, so that a blind pouch is left
on either side. In the carnivorous, the reverse is the case, and
the stomach cylindrical, to favour the quick passage of the food.
For the same reason, the intestines in the latter, even among
insects, are generally shorter, and have fewer valvule conniventes,
and in some instances no cecum.


Blumenbach has seen four examples of this kind: in two the process: was
compulsory, in two it was optional. These subjects also were males, and had a
real gratification in ruminating. Comparative Anatomy, translated by Messrs,
Lawrence and Coulson, 2d edit. p. 88. A case of human rumination, in a MAN,
has lately been seen at the London Hospital. London Medical Gazette, June 23.
1832.

b « De ? Homme, t. ii. p. 17.”

© « The opinion of Broussonet is singular. He thinks the human molares
closely resemble the teeth of herbivorous animals, and at the same time regards
the incisores and canini as allied to those of the carnivorous tribes: and, after
comparing the nwmber of the molares with that of the other teeth, concludes that
the quantity of vegetable food intended for man is to the quantity of animal food
as 20 to 12.

** But on this calculation it follows, that infants, who have four molares only
in each jaw, are destined to consume a larger portion of animal food than adults,
since the proportion of the molares to the other teeth is in them as 8 to 12.”


E7—F


62 FOOD.


«“ The mode in which the condyles of the lower jaw are articu~
lated with the temporal bones, demonstrates his destination for
both kinds of food in the most striking manner.” In animals which
subsist on animal food, the condyles of the lower jaw are locked
in an elongated glenoid cavity, and all rotatory motion thus pre-
vented, as motion upwards and downwards is sufficient for the
laceration of the food. In vegetable feeders the joint is shallow,
so that a horizontal motion is allowed for grinding the food. Its
nature in man is explained at the beginning of the next chapter.


« Ag the human race exists in more parts of the globe than any
other kind of animal, we should have been but ill provided for
if we had been destined to subsist on either description of food
alone; whereas man now inhabits some countries which afford
either vegetable or animal food only.

“ Man is by far the most omnivorous of all animals, capable
not only of feasting on luxurious combinations derived from each
kingdom, but of subsisting with health and vigour on nearly one
kind of the most simple food.

“ Thus, to mention a very few instances, many at present live
on vegetables only, as the tubera of solanum (potatoes), chestnuts,
dates, &c. The first families of mankind most probably subsisted
for a long period merely on fruits, roots, corn, and pulsed,

«“ The nomadic Moors have scarcely any other food than gum
senega®:


a «& Consult Heyne, Opuscula Academ. vol. i. p. 366. sq.”

e « Adamson, Mém. de I Acad. des Sc. de Paris, 1778, p. 1G.

In 1750, a caravan of Abyssinians had consumed all their provisions, and
would have starved but that they discovered among their merchandise a stock of
gum-arabic, on which alone above a thousand persons subsisted for two months.
(Hasselquist, Voyages and Travels in the Levant, p. 298.) Yet Dr. Magendie
says he finds that dogs perish if fed only with gum or sugar, olive oil, butter, and
similar articles, regarded as nutritious, which contain no azote. (Annales de
Chimie et de Physique, vol. iii. p. 66. 1816.) But although such substances be
alone unable to nourish, yet when united with others they may afford some
support ; for persons accustomed to a mixed diet generally grow thinner if they
confine themselves to vegetable food, which is indubitably good nourishment : and
even if we grant that such substances are not nutritious to dogs, they may be
proper food for other species: and to render it probable even that these are not
nutritious to dogs, the animals should have been gradually brought to feed on
them only; for animals may be brought to live on food the most opposite to
what their nature inclines them, if the change is made insensibly ; — Spallanzani


FOOD. 63


* The inhabitants of Kamtschatka and many other shores
scarcely any other than fish.

“ The shepherds in the province of Caraccas in South America,
on the banks of the Orinoko f, and even the Morelachs $ in Eu-
rope, live almost entirely on flesh.

“‘ Some barbarous nations devour raw animals. This cannot be
denied to have formerly been the case with the Samojedes», the
Esquimaux', and some tribes of South America.

‘“¢ Other nations are no less remarkable in their drink.

“ The inhabitants of many intertropical islands, especially in the
Pacific Ocean, can procure no sweet water, and instead of it drink
the juice of cocoa-nuts. }

“ Others take only sea-water; and innumerable similar facts
clearly prove man to be omnivorous.”

It appears that matter, as in the case of water, which has never
belonged to an animated system, is calculated to afford nourish-


made a pigeon live on flesh, and an eagle on bread. (Kzpériences sur la Diges-
tion, c. lxxiy. c. xxv.) If fresh-water mollusca are put at once into sea water,
or sea-water mollusca into fresh water, they perish ; but if the change is gradually
made, they live very well. (Annales de Chimie et de Physique, vol. ii. p. 32. 1816.)
A spider has fed upon sulphate of zinc. (Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy,
vol. xii. p. 454.) We have seen that the Otomacs eat little else some months of
the year than large quantities of earth, and that some brutes devour earth. I may
here add that not only the Otomacs are so fond of it, as, when well supplied with
food, to take a little, but that many nations of the torrid zone have a propensity
to geophagism. The negroes of Guinea, the Javanese, the New Caledonians,
and many South American tribes, eat clay as a luxury; and the Guajeroes, on
the west of Rio da la Hache, carry a little box of lime as sailors do a tobacco-box.
German workmen at the mountain of Kiffhonser spread clay instead of butter on
their bread, and call it stein butter, and find it very satisfying and easy of diges-
tion. ‘The Otomacs do not suffer by the practice, but in some tribes the people
grow sick and thin by indulging too freely in this luxury. Africans who geo-
phagised with impunity at home on a yellow clay, severely suffer from it in the
West Indies. (See also Dr. John Hunter, Diseases of the Army in Jamaica,
p- 248. sqq.) The redclay eaten in Jaya destroys the appetite and wastes the
* body.
f « Fil. Salv. Gily, Saggio di Storia Americana, vol. iv. p. 120.”
® “ Gius. Ant. Pujati, Reflessioni sul Vita Pitagorico. Feltri, 1751, 4to.”’
» « De Klingstaedt, Mém. sur les Samojedes et les Lappons. 1762, 8vo.”
' « Curtis, Phil. Trans. vol. Ixiy. p. ii. p. 381. $83.”
.. ats - Winter, in Hakluyt’s Principal Navigations of the English Nation, vol. iii,


Bae


>


64 FOOD.


ment to animals in some degree, but subordinately to matter
which has belonged to vegetables or animals, and that it alone will
in some instances support life for a time. Vegetables live chiefly
on such, and will indisputably live for a time with facility on them
alone, and some even if merely suspended in the air! (carbonic
acid is, indeed, the great nourishment of all vegetables), but even-
tually will not thrive and perfect their seed, unless animal or
vegetable remains exist in the soil; whence the necessity of this
kind of manure, which must have likewise been so changed by
putrefaction that its carbon has formed a compound resembling
the extractive principle and thus capable of solution in water.”
It has me contended that some animals, as fish, and that some
vegetables, readily subsist, growing equally with others, and per-
fecting their seed or ova, on simple water; but the experiments
in support of this assertion are not at all decisive." None of
these statements are affected by the derivation of gaseous sub-
stances from the surrounding air or water, by animals or vege-
tables.

The articles of diet generally employed by every nation and
class of society are much determined by the facility with which
they are procured. Generally, too, animal food is preferred in
cold climates, and vegetable in warm: a mixture, however, of the
two is usually preferred to either exclusively, and appears better
suited to our necessities. Animal food is chiefly muscle and fat,
milk and eggs; vegetable food, chiefly seeds and roots, fruits and
leaves, with more or less of the stalks. These articles, which are
rendered more or less masticable or digestible by heat, are
previously subjected to high temperatures in various ways; and
as many saline and aromatic substances are taken, not so much for
their nutritive qualities and their undoubted assistance when the
stomach is weak or chiefly vegetables are eaten, as for their sapid
qualities, and since the admixture of these, and the combination


! Two fig plants (Ficus australis and Ficus elastica) have continued to send
out shoots and leaves, the former for eight, the latter for fourteen, years, sus-
pended in the hot houses of the Botanical Garden of Edinburgh. — Elements of
Chemistry, by Dr. Turner, Professor of Chemistry in the University of London,
1833. p. 862. sq.

™ Mould consists principally of carbon, combined with a little oxygen and
hydrogen, and, if it be animal, with also a little azote, together with the usual
saline ingredients of organised substances.

" Full information on this subject will be found in Dr. Thomson’s System of
Chemistry, book iy. ch. 3. sect. 2.


:
——————


FOOD. 65


of various nutritive substances together, often highly increase the
exquisiteness of taste and flavour, the culinary art is cultivated
not only for health, but also for luxury.

The chief proximate principles of animal food are fibrin,
albumen, gelatine, oil, and sugar; of vegetable, gluten, fecula,
mucilage, oil, and sugar. My not less excellent than distinguished
friend, Dr. Prout, in the paper which was honoured with the Cop-
ley medal of the Royal Society °, reduces all the articles of
nourishment among the higher animals to three classes: the sac-
charine, oily, and albuminous. ‘The first comprehends sugars,
starches, gums, acetic acid, and some other analogous principles;
the second, oils and fats, alcohol, &c.; the third, fibrin, gelatine,
albumen, and caseum or the curd of milk, with vegetable gluten,
so abundant in wheat. He has favoured me with the following
remarks, which are chiefly an abstract from a work on digestion,
commenced by him in 1823, but not yet published.

“ Observing that milk, the only article actually furnished and
intended by nature as food, was essentially composed of three
ingredients, viz. saccharine, oily, and curdy or albuminous
matter, I was by degrees led to the conclusion that all the
alimentary matters employed by man and the more perfect ani-
mals might, in fact, be reduced to the same three general heads ;
hence I determined to submit them to a rigorous examination in
the first place, and ascertain, if possible, their general relations
and analogies. An account of the first of these classes, viz.
the saccharine matters, has been published in the Philosophical
Transactions, and the others are in progress. The characteristic
property of saccharine bodies is, that they are composed simply of
carbon united to oxygen and hydrogen in the proportions in which
they form water; the proportions of carbon varying in different
instances from about 30 to 50 per cent. The other two families
consist of compound bases (of which carbon constitutes the chief
element) likewise mixed with and modified by water, and the pro-
portion of carbon in oily bodies, which stand at the extreme of the
scale in this respect, varies from about 60 to 80 per cent.; hence,
considering carbon as indicating the degree of nutrition, which,
in some respects, may be fairly done, the oils may be regarded
in general as the most nutritious class of bodies; and the general
conclusion from the whole is, that substances naturally containing


° Phil. Trans. 1827.
EF 3


66 FOOD.


less than 30 or more than 80 per cent. of carbon are not well, if
at all, adapted for aliment.

“It remains to be proved whether animals can live on one of
these families exclusively ; but at present experiments are de-
cidedly against this assumption, and the most probable view is, that
a mixture of two at least, if not of all three, of the classes of nutri-
ment, is necessary. Thus, as has been stated, mk is a compound
of this description, and almost all the gramineous and herbaceous
matters employed as food by animals contain at least two of the
three —the saccharine and glutinous or albuminous. The same
is true of animal aliments, which consist, at least, of the albumin-
ous and oleaginous: in short, it is, perhaps, impossible to name a
substance employed by the more perfect animals as food, which
does not essentially constitute a natural compound of, at least,
two, if not of all three, of the above three great classes of aliment-
ary matters.

“ But it is in the artificial food of man that we see this great
principle of mixture most strongly exemplified. He, dissatisfied
with the productions spontaneously furnished by nature, culls from
every source, and, by the power of his reason, or, rather, his in-
stinct, forms, in every possible manner, and under every disguise,
the same great alimentary compound. This, after all his cooking
and art, how much soever he may be inclined to disbelieve it, is the
sole object of his labour, and the more nearly his results approach
to this, the more nearly they approach perfection. Thus, from
the earliest times, instinct has taught him to add oil or butter
to farinaceous substances, such as bread, which are naturally
defective in this principle. The same instinct has taught him to
fatten animals, with the view of procuring the oleaginous in con-
junction with the albuminous principle, which compound he finally
consumes, for the most part in conjunction with saccharine prin-
ciples in the form of bread or vegetables. Even in the utmost
refinements of his luxury and in his choicest delicacies, the same
great principle is attended to, and his sugar and flour, his eggs and
butter, in all their various forms and combinations, are nothing
more nor less than disguised imitations of the great alimentary
prototype, milk, as presented to him by nature.”» It may be


P Consult also Dr. Prout’s admirable Bridgewater Treatise, just published,
in which will be found this and much other highly original and valuable
matter.


FOOD. ; 67


worth reflecting, that children are particularly fond of saccharine
substances, and dislike the oleaginous, at least fat.

More or less of common salt exists in the food of all animals. It
is equally desired by the greater number, and many traverse im-
mense tracts and encounter great difficulties to obtain it. Dr.
Prout, I may mention, considers it, or the muriatic acid or chlo-
rine which it affords, of the highest importance in the animal
economy. How far a certain supply of other substances, as
earths, metals, phosphorus, &c. from without is necessary, is not
accurately known. Water is indispensable to vegetables and
most animals.

Dr. Prout considers it as a general rule, subject, indeed, to
many exceptions, that the food of organised beings is substances
lower than themselves in the scale of organisation. Vegetables
live chiefly on water and gases; and the animal or vegetable
matters which also are their food, certainly must be in a state of
entire decomposition. Some animals eat organised matter partly
decomposed. The greater part live on animal or vegetable
matter unchanged; and the animal matter is usually obtained
from animals inferior in bulk or intelligence, — from animals with
inferior powers of resistance. Man eats both animal and vegetable
matter undecomposed, of infinite variety, all derived necessarily
from beings inferior to himself. 4


4 M. Rastail, in a work published last year, at once profound, bold, and
original, and containing the substance of various memoirs printed during the
previous six years, entertains views very similar to those of Dr. Prout, though
much more imperfect. He states, that proximate principles must be combined
to become nutritious — that neither sugar nor gluten alone affords support, but
that when combined they are alimentary, He offers the same objections to
Dr. Magendie’s conclusions respecting gum and other unazotised substances,
which I have offered for many years. — Nouveaw Systeme de Chimie Organique,
fondé sur des Méthodes Nouvelles d’ Observation. Par F. V. Rastail. Paris, 1833.


68


CELAP: Fi


MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.


Tue food taken into the mouth, if solid, is reduced to a pulp by
trituration and mixture with the fluids, and then passed into the
stomach. The first process is termed mastication or chewing ; the
second, deglutition or swallowing.

“ The lower jaw is the chief organ of mastication, and is sup-
plied, as well as the upper, with three orders of teeth. __

“‘ With incisores, generally® scalpriform, for the purpose of
biting off small pieces, and not placed in the lower jaw, as in
other mammalia, more or less horizontally, but erect, — one of
the distinctive characters of the human race.

“ With strong conical canine teeth, by which we divide hard
substances, and which in man neither project beyond the rest,
nor are placed alone, but lie closely and in regular order with the
others.

“With molares of various sizes, adapted for grinding, and dif-


* «T say generally: for, without alluding to particular examples of their
obtuseness, I may remark that I have found the crown of the incisors thick and
obtuse in the skulls of most mummies. And since the more remarkable for this
variety have resembled, in their general figure and appearance, the singular and
never-to-be-mistaken physiognomy of the ancient Egyptians, observable in the
idols, sarcophagi, and statues of ancient Egypt, it is probable that this peculiar
form of the teeth, whether owing to diet or whatever else, was peculiar to the
ancient Egyptians, and may be regarded as a national mark, or even as a cha-
racteristic by which true ancient mummies may be distinguished from those of
late formation.”

“TI have written at large on this subject in the Philos. Trans. 1794. P. IL. .
p- 184.”


MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION. 69


fering conspicuously from those of other mammalia, by possessing
gibbous apices excessively obtuse.


The four central teeth in both jaws are
the incisores: the outer one on each side
in both is the canine: the five outermost
on each side in doth are the molares.

a, belly of the digastric arising at the
root of the mastoid process of the tempo-
ral bone: 6, belly arising below the sym-
physis of the lower jaw: c, tendon in
which each ends: d, os hyoides, into
which the tendon is inserted. If the os
hyoides is fixed, the inner belly can lower
the jaw: if the jaw is fixed, the os hy-
oides can be raised. e, genio-hyoideus :
JF; mylo-hyoideus.


‘« The lower jaw is connected with the skull by a remarkable
articulation, which holds a middle rank between arthrodia and
ginglymus; and, being supplied with two cartilaginous menisci
of considerable strength, has easy motion in every direction.” In
other words, the condyles of the lower jaw are prevented from
descending very deeply into the glenoid cavity; and are con-
fined to vertical movements, by a cartilage which is hollow on
each surface, and moveable, and permits the condyle to move
from the glenoid cavity to a tubercle which stands before this,
and thus to acquire still greater mobility.


a, outer part of the lower
jaw: 6, its condyle, pulled
down from the glenoid cavity
—@ to show the joints: c, inter-
SAL articular fibro-cartilage form.
, ing two menisci: d, upper
synovial membrane: e, lower
synovial membrane: f, zygo-
ma: g, mastoid process: h, sty-
loid process. The three other
Sey _~S figures are a superior, an in-

ferior, and a lateral,view of the
interarticular cartilage.


Yip oi /


\


The digaster, assisted somewhat by the genio-hyoidei and


70 MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.


mylo-hyoidei muscles, draws the lower jaw down, when we open
the mouth.

«« The masseters and temporal chiefly raise it again when we
bite off any thing, and are most powerfully contracted when we
break hard substances.

“ Its lateral motions are accomplished by the internal and ex-
ternal pterygoid.

“ The latter can also draw it forwards.

‘“ Substances are retained, directed, and brought under the
action of the teeth, by the buccinator, and by the tongue, which
is very flexible and changeable in form,


a, temporal muscle, inserted by a tendon
i into the coronoid process of the lower jaw :
iii 6, masseter arising from the zygoma, and
l/ inserted into the angle of the lower jaw:
c, buccinator, or great muscle of the cheek,
the action of which is to lessen the cavity of
the mouth, and draw the angle of the lips
backwards. The mere inspection of the
other muscles shows their action. d, the
parotid gland: e, its duct: f, a portion of
the sub-maxillary gland uniting with the
parotid.


a, external pterygoid, arising from the
pterygoid process and zy gomato-temporal sur-
i, face of the sphenoid bone, and the tuberosity
Ww of the os palati, and inserted into the front of
the neck of the condyle of the lower jaw, and
interarticular cartilage. 6, internal pterygoid,
arising from the pterygoid fossa of the sphe-
noid bone, and from the pterygoid processes
of the palate bone, and inserted within the
angle of the lower jaw.


(J


W


AKAN


MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION. ya


“During mastication, there occurs a flow of saliva”, which is a
frothy fluid,” consisting, according to Berzelius, of


Water “ “ . 4 = - 992.9
A peculiar animal matter - - - 29
Mucus - é = s - - 1.4
Alkaline muriates - E - - 7,
Lactate of soda and animal matter - 0.9
Pure soda - - - = - - 0.2
1000.0°


What Berzelius calls mucus, Dr. Thomas Thomson and Dr. Bos-
tock regard as albumen. This mucus is insoluble in water, and,
when incinerated, but not before, yields a large portion of phos-
phate of lime.@

According to an examination by Tiedemann and Gmelin, saliva,
mixed with more or less mucus, consists of —

A peculiar matter termed salivary; osmazome; mucus; — all
essential to its composition:

Sometimes a little albumen:

A little fatty matter, united with phosphorus :

Potass, united with acetic, phosphoric, sulphuric, hydro-chloric,
and sulpho-cyanic acid ; — all soluble salts :

A large quantity of phosphate, and a smaller of carbonate, of
lime; a minute quantity of magnesia ; — all three insoluble.

The solid contents amount to about 3: percent. The alkaline
properties of saliva were before ascribed to a free alkali, and that
alkali was supposed to be soda. In the dog the alkali is soda,
very little potass being discoverable.°

M. Rastail remarks, that whatever other persons examine the
saliva will have still other results, as different substances are
mixed in it at different times, and names are given to the mixture
the elements of which are not determined. He discovers that the

b « J, Barth. Siebold, Historia Systematis Salivalis. Jen. 1797. 4to.”

© J. Berzelius, Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, vol. iil. p. 242.

« The tartar of the teeth arises from its gradual decomposition upon them, and
consists, according to Berzelius, of


Earthy phosphates - <. - 79.0
Undecomposed mucus - - = 12.5
Peculiar salivary matter = - - = 10
Animal matter soluble in muriatic acid = Tob

100.0


* Die Verdauung nach Versuchen, &c. By Fred. Tiedemann and Leopold
Gmelin, Professors in the University of Heidelberg.


72 MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.


mucous membranes are constantly shedding and renewing, like
the epidermis, from their cells successively shrivelling; and that
saliva taken before breakfast, and examined with the microscope,
presents such membranous particles, which are the animal matter
mentioned by chemists, and soluble only in hydrochloric (muriatic)
acid. He adds, that, besides muriate of soda, it contains muriate
of ammonia; and as to the lactates, he proves that lactic acid is
only a combination of albumen and acetic acid. The quantity of
ammonia, salts, and membranous particles varies, and is much
greater before breakfast. He considers the saliva to be an albu-
minous solution, mixed with membranous fragments and salts,
which affect its solubility in water.‘

“The saliva flows from three orders of conglomerate glands,
placed laterally and interiorly with respect to the lower jaw.

“ The parotidsé are the largest, and pour forth the saliva behind
the middle molares of the upper jaw, through the Stenonian ducts :"

“ The submaaillary:, through the Whartonian : *

“ The sublingual’, —the smallest, through the numerous Ri-
vinian. ™


a, parotid gland: , parotid duct:
c, submaxillary gland: d,submax-
illary duct: e, sublingual gland.


f lie, p. 454. sq.

& «« See De Courcelles, Icones Musculorum Capitis, tab. 1. HSI 4
h « Stenonis, Observationes Anatomica, p. 20.”

i « De Courcelles, 1. c. tab. um. t. &.”

x « Wharton, Adenographia, p. 120.”


”


' «* De Courcelles, tab. v. g. g. g.
™ « Rivinus, De Dyspepsia. Lips. 1678. 4to.
Aug. Fr. Walther, De Lingua Humana, ib. 1724. 4to.”


MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION. 73


“ The excretion of saliva, amounting, according to the arbi-
trary statement of Nuck», to a pound in twelve hours, is aug-
mented by stimuli and by mechanical pressure, or, if the term
may be allowed, emulsion.

«The latter cause, greatly favoured by the situation of the
parotids, at the articulation of the jaws, occurs when we chew
hard substances, which thus become softened.

«‘ The former occurs when acrid substances are taken into
the mouth, which are thus properly diluted; or arises from ima-
gination, as when the mouth waters during the desire for food.

“ The mucus of the labial and buccal glands°, and of the


Inner part of lips.
aa, labial glands: 6, buc-
cal glands: cc, parotid
ducts: dd, their orifices.


af
tongue, as well as the moisture which transudes from the soft
parts of the mouth, is mixed with the saliva.

« The mixture of these fluids with a substance which we are
chewing, renders it not only a pultaceous and easily swallowed
bolus, but likewise prepares it for further digestion and for assi-
milation.


“ The mechanism? of deglutition, although very compli-
cated, and performed by the united powers of many very
different parts, amounts to this:—the tongue being drawn
towards its root, swelling and growing rigid, receives the bolus of
food upon its dorsum, which is drawn into a hollow form. The
bolus is then rolled into the isthmus of the fauces, and caught
with a curious and rather violent effort by the infundibulum of
the pharynx, which is enlarged and in some measure drawn for-
ward to receive it. The three constrictores4 muscles of the
pharynx drive it into the cesophagus. These motions are all per-


" « Nuck, Stalographia, p. 29. sq.”
“ De Courcelles, 1. c. tab. Iv. ee. @.’
«“ Fr, Bern. Albinus, De Deglutitione. LB. 1740. 4to,

P. J. Sandifort, Deglutitionis Mechanismus. Lugd. Batay. 1805. 4to.”
‘¢ Eustachius, tab. xu. fig. 4. 6.

Santorini, Tab. Posthum. v1. fig. 1.

B. S, Albinus, Tab. Musculor, xu. fig. 23, 24.”


>


a]


74 MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.


formed in very rapid succession, and require but a short space of
time.

“ Nature has provided various contrivances for opening and
securing this passage."

«The important motion of the tongue is regulated by the os
hyoides.

«“ The smallest particle of food is prevented from entering the
nostrils or Eustachian tubes, by means of the soft palates, which,
as well as the uvula suspended from its arch, and whose use is
not clearly understood, is extended by muscles of its own, and
closes those openings. *

‘“‘ The tongue protects the glottis, for the larynx at the mo-
ment of deglutition is drawn upwards and forwards, and in a
manner concealed under the retracted root of the tongue, and
applied to the latter in such a way, that the glottis, being also
constricted, and protected by the epiglottis, is most securely
defended from the entrance of foreign substances.” The glottis,


POSTERIOR VIEW- LATERAL VIEW.


Posterior and lateral views of the throat. a, the tongue: 6, palato-staphyline
muscles, forming the uvula: c, epiglottis: d, larynx: e, pharynx : J, beginning
of cesophagus: g, constrictor superior of pharynx turned back: h, constrictor
medius: i, constrictor inferior: j, posterior opening of nostrils: 4, opening of
Eustachian tube: J, genio-glossus muscle: m, buccinator: mn, orbicularis labi-
orum: 0, cavity of the nostrils.


r « J, C. Rosenmiiller, Zcones Chirurgico-Anatomice. Fasc. 1. Vinar. 1805.
fol.”
s « Littre, Mém. del’ Acad. des Sc. de Paris, 1718. tab. xv.”’
t « Santorini, Tab. Posthum. 1v—vu. fig. 2. — and vu.
B.S. Albinus, Tab. Musculor. xu. fig. 11. 27, 28.”


MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION. 75


however, when sound, may be sufficiently closed by the transverse
and oblique arytenoid muscles, independently of the epiglottis.
Dr. Magendie says that he saw two persons perfectly destitute of
epiglottis, who always swallowed without difficulty." Targioni
also met with one, and in that case neither deglutition nor speech
was impaired. *

“ Deglutition is facilitated by the abundance of mucus which
lubricates these parts, and which is afforded not only by the
tongue, but by the numerous sinusesy of the tonsils and muci-
parous crypte of the pharynx.

“ The esophagus, through which the food must pass pres
viously to entering the stomach, is a fleshy canal, narrow and
very strong, mobile, dilatable, very sensible, and consisting of
coats resembling, except in thickness, the coats of the other parts
of the alimentary canal.”

“ The external coat is muscular, and possesses Jongitudinal
and transverse fibres.

“ The middle is tendinous, lax, and more and more cellular
towards each of its surfaces, by which means it is connected with
the two other coats.

“‘ The interior is lined, like all the alimentary tube, with an
epithelium analogous to cuticle, and is lubricated by a very
smooth mucus.

“ This canal receives the approaching draught or bolus of
food, contracts upon it, propels it downwards, and, in the case of
the bolus, stuffs it down, as it were, till it passes the diaphragm
and enters the stomach.”

Professor Hallé observed in a woman, the interior of whose
stomach was exposed by disease, that the arrival of a bolus of
food in the stomach was followed by an eversion of the mucous
membrane of the cesophagus into it, as we notice in the case
of the rectum when a horse has finished discharging its faeces.@


“ Magendie, Précis Elément.

* Morgagni, xxviii, 13.

y « B, §. Albinus, Anotat. Acad. |. 11. tab. m1. fig. 1. n.”

* « See Math. Van. Geuns, Verhandelingen van de Maatschappye te Haarlem,
t. Xi. p. 9. Sq.

“ Jan. Bleuland, Observ. de Structura Gisophagit LB. 1785. 4to.”

* Magendie, Précis Elémentaire.


76 MASTICATION AND DEGLUTITION.


a, soft palate: 0,
anterior pillars of
soft palate: c, poste-
rior pillars of soft
palate. The space
between them is call-
ed the fauces. d,
uvula: e, upper part
of trachea: f, ceso-
phagus, the upper
part having been cut
away to shorten the
drawing: g, cardia:
h, pylorus, the space
between g and h be-
ing the cavity of the
stomach: zi, duode-
num: k, hepatic duct:
l, gall bladder: m,
cystic duct: m, ductus
communis choledo-
chus, formed of the
two: o, the opening
of the choledochus
into the duodenum :
3} p, pancreatic duct;
q, its opening into
theduodenum, which
here is distinct from
that of the choledo-
chus: r, jejunum :
s,ilium: ¢, termin-
ation of ilium in cz-


ditto : w, cecum : 2,
vermiform process :
y y, colon: x, rec-
tum : 1, part of leva-
tores ani: 2, anus.


S A cum: w, superior
Ze La fold of valve of co-
eS ag lon; v, inferior of


coef
I


CHAP. <i,


DIGESTION.


Tur stomach is the organ of digestion. It exists, what cannot
be affirmed of any other viscus, in, perhaps, all animals without
exception; and, if the importance of parts may be estimated in
this way, evidently holds the first rank among our organs.

“ The human stomach? resembles a very large leathern bottle,
is capable, in the adult, of containing three pints and upwards of
water, and has two openings.

“The superior, called cardia, at which the cesophagus, folded
and opening obliquely, expands into the stomach, is placed to-
wards the left side of its fundus.

“‘ The inferior, at which the right and narrow part of the sto-
mach terminates, is called pylorus, and descends somewhat into
the cavity of the duodenum.

«« The situation of the stomach varies accordingly as it is in a
state of repletion or depletion. When empty, it is flaccid, and
hangs into the cavity of the abdomen, its greater curvature in-
clining downwards, while the pylorus, being directed upwards,
forms, by doubling, an angle with the duodenum.»

«¢ When full, the larger curvature is rolled forwards¢, so that
the pylorus lies more in a line with the duodenum, while the
cardia, on the contrary, is folded, as it were, into an angle and
closed.

“The stomach is composed of four principal coats, separated
by the intervention of three others, which are merely cellular.

“ The external is common to nearly all the alimentary canal, and
continuous with the omentum, as we shall presently mention.

‘¢ Within this, and united to it by cellular membrane, lies the
muscular coat, which is particularly worthy of notice from being


a s¢ Wustachius, tab. x. fig. 1, 2, 3.
Ruysch, Thes. Anat. ii. tab. v. fig. 1.
Santorini, Tab. Posth. xi.”
b « Vesalius, Dec. h. Fabrica. LL. v. fig. 14, 15.71
ores Tides Gyles ent
G


78 DIGESTION.


. the seat of the extraordinary irritability of the stomach. It con-
sists of strata of muscular fibres¢, commonly divided into three
orders, one longitudinal and two circular (straight and oblique),
but running in so many directions that no exact account can be
given of their course.

“ The third is the chief membrane. It is usually termed nerv-
ous, but improperly, as it consists of condensed cellular membrane,
more lax on its surfaces, which are united, on the one hand, with
the muscular, and, on the other, with the internal villous coat.
It is firm and strong, and may be regarded as the basis of the
stomach.

“ The interior (besides the epithelium investing the whole ali-
mentary canal), improperly called villous, is extremely soft, and
in a manner spongy, porous, and folded into innumerable ruge®,
so that its surface is more extensive than that of the other coats;
it exhibits very small cells‘, somewhat similar to those larger cells
which are so beautiful in the reticulum of ruminants.

“ [ts internal surface is covered with mucus, probably secreted
in the muciparous crypts which are very distinct about the pylorus.

“‘ The stomach is amply furnished with nerves’ from each
nervous system, whence its great sensibility, owing to which it is
so readily affected by all kinds of stimuli, — whether external, as
cold,—or internal, as food and its own fluids, — or mental; whence
also the great and surprising sympathy between it and most
functions of the system; to which sympathy are referable the
influence of all passions upon the stomach, and of the healthy
condition of the stomach upon the tranquillity of the mind.

“The abundance and utility of the blood-vessels of the sto-
mach are no less striking. Its arteries, ramifying infinitely upon
the cellular membrane and glands, secrete the gastric juice, which
would appear to stream continually from the inner surface of the
stomach. i ;

“‘ In its general composition this fluid is analogous to the saliva


4 « Besides Haller, consult Bertin, Mém. de /’ Acad. des Sc. de Paris, 1761.”

© «¢ Ruysch, Thes. Anat. ii. tab. v. fig. 2, 3, 4*,”?

f « See G. Fordyce, On the Digestion of Food, p. 12. 59. 191.”

& « Walter, Tab. Nervor. Thorac. et Abdom. tab. iv.”

h « J, H. Rahn, Mirwm inter Caput et Viscera Abdominis Commercium. Got-

ting. 1771. 4to. ;

Dit. Vegens, De Sympathia inter Ventriculum et Caput. LB. 1784. 4to.
Wrisberg, Commentat. Societ. Scientiar. Gotting. t. xvi.”

i « Ever. Home, Phil. Trans. 1817. p. 347, tab. xviii. xix.”


DIGESTION. 79


equally antiseptic, very resolvent *, and capable of again dis-
solving the milk which it has coagulated.! .

“ Digestion is performed principally by it. The food, when
properly chewed and subacted by the saliva, is dissolved” by the
gastric fluid, and converted into the pultaceous chyme ; so that
most kinds of ingesta lose their specific qualities, are defended
from the usual chemical changes to which they are liable, such
as putridity, rancidity, &c., and acquire fresh properties prepara-
tory to chylification."

“‘ This important function is probably assisted by various ac-
cessory circumstances. Among them, some particularly mention
the peristaltic motion, which, being constant and undulatory, agi-
tates and subdues the pultaceous mass of food.° ‘The existence


k « Ed. Stevens, De Alimentorum Concoctione. Edinb. 1777. 8vo.

Laz. Spallanzani, Dissertazioni di Fisica Animale e Vegetabile. Modena.
1780. 8vo. vol. i.”

1 «& Consult Veratti, Comment. Instituti Bononiens. tom. vi.”

Seven grains of the inner coat of a calf’s stomach were found by Dr. Young
of Edinburgh to enable water poured upon it to coagulate 6857 times its weight
of milk. Thomson’s System of Chemistry, vol. iv. p. 596. ed. 6.,and Fordyce On
Digestion, p. 58.

m «¢-Fiven the stomach itself, when deprived of vitality, has been found acted
upon, and, as it were, digested, by it. See John Hunter, On the Digestion of the
Stomach after Death. Phil. Trans. vol. xii.” This occurs particularly in the
splenic portion, and a complete opening is sometimes made, with pulpy ragged
edges, and the neighbouring organs with which the gastric juice comes in con-
tact may be also corroded. It happens chiefly to persons and brutes who
have been cut off in good health soon after taking food, and is observed also in
vegetable feeders and fish. Some have ignorantly doubted this, and confounded
it with softening from disease. Dr. Camerer of Stuttgard, in 1818, proved
the accuracy of J. Hunter’s opinion, by observing this softening to occur with-
out putrefaction in brutes killed in good health, and putrefaction of the body
to occur without softening of the stomach; and by ascertaining that the fluid,
taken from a stomach which it had softened, produced the same change
in another dead stomach to which it was transferred, but none upon another
during life, though it immediately softened this stomach when the anima] was
killed, or both pneumogastric and trisplanchnic nerves were divided. This divi-
sion alone produced no such effect. See Andral, Précis d’ Anatomie Pathologique,
t. li. p. 86. sqq. A good paper, by Dr. Carswell, Professor of Morbid Anatomy
in the London University, will be found in the Jowrnal Hebdomadaire, Nos. 87.
and 91., and the Edin. Med. and Surg. Journ., 1830.

» « Consult Ign. Doellinger, Grundriss der Naturlehre des menschlichen Orga-
nismus, p. 88.”

° “ Consult Wepfer, Cicuta Aquatice Historia et Nove, in innumerable
places,”*

q@ 2


80 DIGESTION.


of a true peristaltic motion in the stomach during health, is,
however, not quite certain; indeed, the undulatory agitation of
the stomach that occurs, appears intended for the purpose of
driving the thoroughly dissolved portions downwards, while those
portions which are not completely subacted are repelled from the
pylorus by an antiperistaltic motion.

‘«« The other aids commonly enumerated, are the pressure on
the stomach from the alternate motion of the abdomen, and the
high temperature maintained in the stomach by the quantity of
blood in the neighbouring viscera and blood-vessels, which tem-
perature was at one time supposed to be of such importance, that
the word coction was synonymous with digestion.”

It was once imagined that fermentation, and once that tritur-
ation, was the cause of digestion, but, as neither can produce the
same effects on food out of the body that occur in the stomach,
these opinions fell to the ground. Besides, no signs of ferment-
ation appear when digestion is perfect ; and food, either defended
from trituration by being swallowed in metallic spheres perforated
to admit the gastric juiceP, or immersed in gastric juice out of
the body 4, is readily digested.


? The Abbe Spallanzani and Dr. Stevens made such experiments upon brutes :
but the latter experimented upon a man also, who was in the habit of swallowing
stones and rejecting them, and who of course found no difficulty in doing the
same with metallic balls.

4 Experiments of this kind were made by Spallanzani, who procured the
gastric juice by causing hungry animals to vomit, or by introducing a sponge
into the stomach. But sti]l more marked results were lately obtained in the case
of alad who hada fistulous opening from the stomach, in consequence of a wound
through which, by means of a hollow bougie and elastic bottle, gastric juice was
procured at pleasure. A portion of beef was introduced into the stomach on a
thread and withdrawn for comparison, at the same time that a similar portion was
plunged into a phial of gastric juice, the temperature of which was kept steadily
in a sand-bath at 100°, — the degree of the stomach’s temperature, ascertained by
the introduction of a thermometer. The portion in the phial became completely
dissolved, though more slowly than that in the stomach ; probably from the latter
being supplied with a succession of fresh gastric juice, and freely exposed to it by
motion ; for the action of the fluid is only on the surface, and a portion of chicken
placed in a phial of gastric juice, for a similar experiment, was more quickly acted
upon if agitated. The gastric juice, when first obtained, was almost as clear as
water, and its antiseptic power was shown by the solutions of beef and chicken
remaining a whole autumnal month without feetor or sour taste. American Me-
dical Recorder, January, 1826. Spallanzani and others found, that if gastric juice
is applied to putrescent matter, it removes the fector and suspends putrefaction,


DIGESTION. 8}


“ To determine the time requisite for digestion is evidently im-
possible, if we consider how it must vary according to the qua-
lity and quantity of the ingesta, the strength of the digestive
powers, and the more or less complete previous mastication.

“ During health, the stomach does not transmit the digestible
parts of the food before they are converted into a pulp. The
difference of food must therefore evidently cause a difference in
the period necessary for digestion." It may, however, be stated
generally, that the chyme gradually passes the pylorus in be-
tween three and six hours after our meals.”

“ The pylorus * is an annular fold, consisting, not like the other
ruge of the stomach, of merely the villous, but also of fibres
derived from the nervous and muscular, coats. All these, united,
form a conoidal opening at the termination of the stomach, pro-
jecting into the duodenum, as the uterus does into the vagina,
and, in a manner, embraced by it.”

The digestive process does not go on equally through the
whole mass of food, but takes place chiefly where this is in con-
tact with the stomach, and proceeds gradually from the surface to
the centre of the mass ; so that the food at the centre is entirely
different in appearance from that at the surface, and, as soon as a
portion is reduced to a homogeneous consistence, it passes into
the duodenum without waiting till the same change has pervaded
the whole.

Dr. Prout considers the solution of the food to be a common che-
mical process, and to depend principally upon the combination of
water with the alimentary substance by means of the gastric juice.
He has shown that this part of the functions of the stomach is quite
distinct, and may exist or be absent independently of the assimi-
lating process. Thus, in some forms of dyspepsia, the solvent powers
of the stomach are almost entirely suspended, so that the patient,
though he may be able to assimilate pulpy matters, is quite unable
to digest any thing solid; while in diabetes, the solvent power of


* “ Consult J. Walacus, De motu Chyli, p. 534. LB. 1651. 8vo.”

* ** A. Palm. Leveling, Dissert. sistens Pylorum, &c. Argent. 1764. 4to.
Reprinted in Sandifort’s Thes. vol. iii.”’

* Dr. Prout, in The Annals of Medicine and Surgery, Lond. 1817., also in
Thomson's Annals of Philosophy, 1819.

Dr. Wilson Philip, 4n Experimental Inquiry into the Laws of the Vital Func-
tions, &c. 1826. p. 121. sqq. Sdedit. Dr. Philip published subsequently to
Dr. Prout’s first paper.


G $


82 DIGESTION,


the stomach is often inordinately increased, and every article
dissolved as soon as swallowed."

Dr. Prout points out that hydrogen and oxygen essentially
exist in many animal and vegetable proximate principles in the
proportions which form water; in fact, that water essentially con-
stitutes a part of them. This essential water is distinct from
that which is accidental and makes the substance moist or fluid.
If a large portion of water enters into their composition, the
compound is weaker and more easily decomposed. Thus cane
sugar consists of fifty-four parts of carbon with seventy-two of
water: the weak sugar of honey consists of fifty-four parts of
carbon with one hundred and eight of water. We cannot at
pleasure lessen or augment the quantity of this essential water,
and so alter the strength of the compound. The same holds
in regard to the influence of water in all organised bodies. Thus
strong, fixed, and solid oils have a very small constituent portion
of water, and a large proportion of olefiant gas; while alcohol,
the weakest form of the oily principle, perfectly soluble in water,
contains more weight of water than half the weight of the olefiant
gas.

Dr. Prout contends that the first stage of digestion is the solu-
tion and reduction of the proximate principles of various sub-
stances, by means of water and the muriatic acid of the stomach,
to their weakest condition, —to that condition in which they
are the most easily decomposed and brought into new combin-
ations. The effect of good cookery is to facilitate this reduc-
tion of the proximate principles in the stomach to the weaker
form ;* for although we cannot by art make a weak compound
strong (except, indeed, by lessening the water, incidentally moist-
ening or dissolving it,) we are able in some measure to make a


“ Bridgewater Treatise, by Dr. Prout.

* Continental cookery is superior to ours for weak stomachs, as far as it
reduces substances to a pulp; but in the use of so much pure oil and pure
sugar it is injurious, Dr. Prout remarks, to weak stomachs. For nature does
not furnish sugar, starch, &c. or oil pure, but in combination. The purer we
employ them, and especially those which are crystallizable, the more refractory
is our food, Pure sugar, pure alcohol, and pure oil, are much less easy to be
digested by the healthy stomach than substances purely amylaceous, or than that
peculiar condition or mixture of alcohol existing in natural wines; or than
butter. In these forms, the assimilation of the saccharine and the oleaginous
principles is comparatively easy. Prout, 1. c. p. 507. sq.


DIGESTION. 83


strong compound weak. The substance of young animals con-
sists generally of weaker compounds than that of old, and is
therefore tenderer and easier of digestion. Besides this reduction
to a weaker state, the articles of food in general are more or less
dissolved in the stomach.

After the solution of the food and the reduction of its proxi-
mate principles to the weaker forms, the stomach possesses the
power of conversion, or of changing the proximate principles of
the food into others, so that a fluid, called chyle, of pretty uniform
composition, is obtained from it. Thus, it would appear, that the
various substances belonging to the classes of saccharine, albu-
minous, and oleaginous, are all convertible into each other, some
out of the body, some only within it. The albuminous and olea-
ginous require little change; and although the saccharine must
require more, we ought to remember that sugar spontaneously
becomes alcohol out of the body, and that alcohol is merely an
oleaginous substance of a weak kind, and therefore probably un-
dergoes in the stomach a similar series of changes to those which,
out of the body, convert it to alcohol. ¥

The cardiac portion of the stomach is the chief seat of di-
gestion, and when a part of the food is tolerably digested it passes
along the large curvature to the pyloric portion, where the pro-
cess is completed. As the cardiac half is the great digesting
portion, it is this half that is found sometimes to have been dis-
solved by the gastric juice after death; its contents are much
more fluid than those of the pyloric half; and Dr. Philip, who by
the dissection of about a hundred and thirty rabbits has been
enabled to furnish the completest account of what goes on in the
stomach, relates the case of a woman who had eaten and properly
digested to the last, but whose stomach was ulcerated every
where except at the cardiac end. Sir Everard Home says he
found that fluids which had been drunk were chiefly contained in
the cardiac portion, and, like many others, for upwards of a cen-
tury and a half, that, if the body was examined early after death,
the two portions of the stomach were frequently in fact divided
by a muscular contraction.* Dr. Haighton observed the same


y Dr. Prout, l. c. p. 498. sqq-
2 See Dr. Monro (Tertius), Outlines of the Anatomy of the Human Body in its
sound and diseased Stale, vol. iil. p. 111. 1813,
* Phil. Trans. 1808.
G 4


84 DIGESTION.


hour-glass contraction in a living dog, and remarked the peristaltic
motion to be much more vigorous in the pyloric half.»

Van Helmont asserted that the food becomes sour by digestion,
but this was afterwards denied, and acidity said never to happen
except in cases of disorder. Sir Gilbert Blane, many years ago,
however, declared that he had ‘ satisfied himself that there is
such an acid (the gastric) by applying the usual tests to the
inner surface of the stomach of animals. This property in rumin-
ating animals,” he added, “ is confined to the digesting stomach.”’¢
Dr. Prout has discovered that the acid generated is the muriatic,
both free and in combination with alkalies.¢ Tiedemann and
Gmelin soon afterwards found the same thing, though without
knowing, they assure us, Dr. Prout’s discovery. They assert the
clear ropy fluid of tl:e stomach, or gastric juice, without food, to
be nearly, or entirely, destitute of acidity, while the presence of
food, or of the most simple stimulus to the mucous membrane,
occasions it to become acid, and more so, according to the greater
indigestibility of the food. The acid is very copious. They also
assert the presence of acetic acid; but Dr. Prout believes this to
be either the result of irritation or of disease, or occasionally to
be derived from the aliment, and consequently to be neither
necessary nor ordinary. The general change of the aliment in the
stomach appears a greater or less approach to the nature of albu-
men, but Dr. Prout has been unable to detect true and perfect
albumen there when none has been taken.

Brutes have been the subjects of these experiments; chiefly
the rabbit, horse, dog, and cat.

Besides the labours of Dr. Prout, and of the professors of
Heidelberg, a work has been published on all the subjects of
chymification and chylification by MM. Leuret and Lassaigne,
contradictory in many respects to the results of the others; but,
knowing as I do the extreme accuracy of Dr. Prout in experi-
menting and deducing, and seeing that Tiedemann and Gmelin
have bestowed infinite labour in repeating, varying, and extend-


> Transactions of the Medical Society of London, vol. ii. 1788. In the lion,
bear, &c., the stomach is usually found divided by a slight contraction at its
middle, and in some animals of the mouse kind by a slight elevation of its inner
coat.

© Transactions of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Surgical Know-~
ledge, Vol. ii. p. 138, sq.

4 Phil, Trans, 1824.


DIGESTION. 85


ing their experiments, and have detailed all their proceedings,
while the French writers merely give results, and appear to have
bestowed far less pains, I must be excused for merely mentioning
their work. ¢

The inspection of living animals shows, that, during chymifi-
cation the mucous membrane of the stomach, and during chy-
lification that of the small intestine, becomes strikingly red ; and
if an animal is killed during either process, this redness is seen
in the corresponding portion of -the coat. f


© Recherches Physiologiques et Chimiques pour servir a l’ Histoire de la Digestion.
Paris, 1825.

An immense number of curious facts respecting different articles of food, and
many points on the subject of digestion, will be found in the German work, and
a good history of opinions in the French,

f Andral, Précis d’ Anatomie Pathologique, t. ii. P. i. p. 6.


In granivorous birds the food passes into the crop, and from this into a second
cavity, from which it enters the gizzard, —-a strong muscular receptacle, lined by
a thick membrane, in which, instead of having been masticated, it is ground by
means of pebbles and other hard bodies swallowed instinctively by the animal ;
hence true salivary glands do not exist about the mouth of birds, but abound in
the abdomen, opening into the lower part of the cesophagus and into the crop and
gizzard. In carnivorous birds, the gizzard is soft and smooth. The fluids of
both crop and gizzard contain a free acid, according to Tiedemann and Gmelin,
which is the muriatic or acetic.

Some graminivorous quadrupeds with divided hoofs have four stomachs, into
the first of which the food passes when swallowed, and from this into the second.
It is subsequently returned by portions into the mouth, chewed, and again swal-
lowed, when, by a contraction of the openings of the two first stomachs, it passes
over them into the third, and from this goes into the fourth. The process can be
delayed at pleasure when the paunch is quite full, Some birds and insects also
ruminate. The same chemists found the fluids of the two first stomachs alka-
line, and of the third and fourth, acid. The stomachs of some insects and crus-
tacea contain teeth. Some zoophytes are little more than a stomach, the food
taken into it being chiefly dissolved and absorbed, and the refuse expelled at
the orifice by which it had entered: others have several openings on the surface
leading by canals that unite and run to the stomach, —a structure called by
Cuvier, mouth-root. In regard to vegetables, it is not the whole root which ab-
sorbs, but the minute fibrous prolongations, which are called spongioles. Some roots
are also reservoirs of nourishment. Between the most distinct kinds of stomach
we see numerous intermediate varieties. The cardiac half of the interior of the
stomach of the horse, for example, is covered by cuticle, and appears merely
recipient, while the pyloric half is villous and digestive ; and the state of the con-
tents in each half is, therefore, very different: a link thus existing between such
stomachs as the human and the ruminating.


86 VOMITING.


Vomiting cannot occur unless the stomach have the resistance of the diaphragm
and abdominal muscles, or of something in their stead. Above a century and
a half ago, enquirers began to make the horrid experiment of giving an emetic
to an animal, and, after the abdominal muscles were cut away, observing how
fruitless were all the efforts of the stomach to reject its contents till they ap-
plied their hands in place of these muscles, when, the stomach being forced by
the diaphragm against the resistance, vomiting was instantly accomplished. From
these experiments, Bayle, Chirac, Schwartz, Wepfer, &c. inferred that vomiting
could not occur without the assistance of the diaphragm and abdominal
muscles. Haller, Element. Physiol. lib. xix. § xiv. Afterwards J. Hunter said,
«‘ We know that thé action of vomiting is performed entirely by the diaphragm
and abdominal muscles.” On certain Parts, &c. p. 199. Again, on the other hand,
Dr. Magendie finds that if the stomach is removed, and a pig’s bladder sub-
stituted and connected with the cesophagus the retching induced by injecting
tartarized antimony into the veins, causes the diaphragm and abdominal muscles
to compress it sufficiently to expel its contents into the mouth. Mémoire sur
le Vomissement, and Précis Elémentaire. The division of the par vagum, which sup-
plies the stomach, was found by him, accordingly, not to prevent vomiting ;
whereas the division of the phrenic nerves, which supply the diaphragm, greatly
impedes it,

But Dr. Haighton, one of those who have experimented on the sub-
ject, declares that the division of the par vagum did prevent vomiting in two
experiments which he made.  (Memwirs of the Lond. Med. Society, vol. ii.)
Dr. Haighton observed the peristaltic action of the stomach to grow gradually
fainter as sickness continued, and at length to be inyerted, although alone in-
sufficient to effect yomiting ; and he concluded that vomiting resulted from the
operation of the stomach on the one hand and of the abdominal muscles and
diaphragm on the other, He remarked that a quantity of air was swallowed
previously to the discharge, and the stomach is thus distended and brought more
under the influence of the diaphragm and abdominal muscles.

«« In vomiting, the muscles of the cavity of the abdomen act, in which is to be
included the diaphragm ; so that the capacity of the abdomen is lessened, and the
action of the diaphragm rather raises the ribs, and there is also an attempt to raise
them by their proper muscles, to make a kind of vacuum in the thorax, that the
esophagus may be rather opened than shut, while the glottis is shut so as to let no
air into the lungs. The muscles of the throat and fauces act to dilate the fauces,
which is easily felt by the hand, making there a vacuum, or what is commonly
called a suction.”” J. Hunter, Observations on certain Parts of the Animal
Economy-

It is generally accompanied by more or less of a peculiar sensation in the sto-
mach, called nausea. This frequently exists alone, and sometimes in a high degree;
but where it increases to a certain amount, it usually ends in vomiting. During
nausea the pulse is small, the temperature low, the face pale, and the head giddy,
and a large quantity of fluid is secreted in the mouth and fauces. It is excited by dis-
gust, certain articles, pain, sympathy of the stomach with other organs not in health,
by general derangement or disease of the stomach, by turning round, swinging,
or the motion of a ship, and from the latter cause takes its name,—vais (a


ship).


VOMITING. 87


The stomach has been called the grand centre of sympathy. Its sympathies
are great, but there is no reason for considering it the centre of sympathy. Blows
upon the head or testicle, and diseases of the kidney and uterus, nay, the mere
pregnant state of the latter, severe pain in any part, or a disgusting sight, will
often cause vomiting. Any depressing passion deranges the stomach, but anxiety
is a common source of stomach complaints, although the stomach generally bears
the whole blame, and is in vain drugged and dieted, or want of exercise or great
mental occupation is regarded as the cause, while the anxiety is overlooked.
Pleasurable mental exertion, ‘ constant occupation without care,” must be very
excessive to injure the stomach.

The stomach itself, except as far as its inner surface is very extensive and sen-
sible and therefore highly adapted for the influence of ingesta, appears, on the
whole, to affect other organs, by mere sympathy, far less than it is influenced by
them. The immediate debility and breathlessness occasioned by a blow on the
stomach is, however, well known. I saw a person gradually sink, and die at the
end of a few days from this cause, and nothing was detected after death.

The removal of a piece of the par vagum, or the destruction of that part of the
brain with which it is connected, or of a considerable part of the spinal marrow,
puts a stop, not to the muscular action of the stomach, or to its circulation, but
to the secretion of gastric juice and to digestion, according to Le Gallois, Sur le
Principe de la Vie, and many former writers ; and Dr. Philip, who is confirmed
by several others, declares that the removal of a portion of the nerve impairs
digestion much more than mere division, and that the application of galvanism
to the stomach restores digestion ; and MM. Leuret and Lassaigne declare, that
after the division of the par vagum, and even the removal of six inches of each
nerve, digestion proceeds as before, the only effect being the paralysis of the
sphincter of the cardia. I should remark, that Mr. Brodie and Dr. Magendie
found even digestion uninfluenced, if the division was made, not in the neck, but
close to the stomach. Phil. Trans. 1814. Précis Elémentaire, t. iis p. 103.


88


CHAP. IV.


OF THE PANCREATIC JUICE:


* Tue chyme, after passing the pylorus, undergoes new and con-
siderable changes in the duodenum, a short but very remark-
able portion of the intestine, before the nutrient chyle is separated.
To this end, there are poured upon it various secreted fluids, the
most important of which are the bile and pancreatic juice.

“ Of these we shall treat separately, beginning with the pan-
creatic fluid, because it is closely allied both in nature and func-
tion to the saliva and gastric juice already mentioned.

“ Although it is with ‘difficulty procured pure from living and
healthy animals, all observations made in regard to it establish its
close resemblance to the saliva. At the present day, it would
scarcely be worth while to mention the erroneous hypotheses of
Franc. Sylvius® and his followers — Regn. De Graaf‘, Flor.
Schuyl 4, and others, respecting its supposed acrimony, long since
ably refuted by the celebrated Pechlin®, Swammerdam f, and
Brunner’, unless they afforded a salutary admonition, how fatal
the practice of medicine may become, if not founded on sound
physiology.

“ The source of this fluid is similar to that of the saliva. It is
the pancreas, —by much the largest conglomerate gland in the
system, excepting the breasts,” being about three times heavier than
all the salivary glands together i, “ and extremely analogous to the


* “ Laur. Claussen, De Intestini Duodeni situ et neru. Lips. 1757. 4to. Re-
printed in Sandifort’s Thes. vol. iii.

And his Tabule Intestini Duodeni. LB. 1780. 4to.”

> “ De Chyli a faecibus alvinis secretione. LB. 1659. 4to.”

“ “ De succt Pancreatici Natura et Usu. ib. 1664. 12mo.”

4 « Pro Veteri Medicina. ib. 1670. 12mo.”

© “€ De Purgantium Medicamentorum Facultatibus. ib. 1672. 8vo.”’
“ Observationum Anatomic. Collegii privati Amstelodamens. P. ii. in quibus
precipue de pisciwm pancreate ejusque succo agitur. Amst. 1673. 12mo,”

& “ Experimenta nova circa pancreas. Amst. 1683. 8yo.”

n “¢ Santorini, Tab. Post. xiii. ie as”

' Marherr, Prelectiones in Her. Boerhaave, Instit. Med. t. i. § ci.


f


THE PANCREATIC JUICE. 89


salivary glands in every part of its structure, even in the circum-
stance of its excretory ducts arising by very minute radicles
and uniting into one common duct, which is denominated, from its
discoverer Wirsungian.

“ This duct penetrates the tunics of the duodenum, and sup-
plies the cavity of this intestine with a constant stillicidium of
pancreatic juice.” *


wort at Ah My, i


Pancreas. a, pan-
creatic duct: 6, cho-
ledochus: c, junc-
tion of the two and
their termination in
f the duodenum: d,
pers fh a portion of the du-

ayy * odenum divided.


sli ! i}
WNW


The quantity of the pancreatic juice cannot be accurately as-
certained. It is, no doubt, produced copiously during chylifi-
cation, and cannot be expected to flow readily at other times, or
naturally under the torments of an experiment.

“The excretion of this fluid is augmented by the same causes
which affect that of the saliva, — pressure and stimulus.

“ By the former it is emulged, whenever the stomach lies in a
state of repletion upon the pancreas.

‘“¢ The stimuli are the fresh and crude chyme entering the duo-
denum, and the bile flowing through the opening common to it
and the pancreatic fluid.” ;

The use of the pancreatic juice is unknown, but Tiedemann
and Gmelin conceive that it animalises the unazotised principles
of vegetable food. The organ is certainly much larger propor-
tionately in herbivorous than in carnivorous animals. They
assign the same purpose to the saliva.


k Mr. Kiernan states, that in some subjects the internal surface of the duct is
studded with mucous follicles ; whereas none are ever found in the ducts of the
parotid or submaxillary glands. Phil. Trans. 1833. p. 728.


90 THE PANCREATIC JUICE.


The pancreatic juice, at least in the sheep, according to them,
has twice as much solid contents as the saliva, and conversely a
large quantity of albumen and fatty matter with a small quantity
of salivary matter and mucus; is neutral, or has only a little
alkaline carbonate, and no sulpho-cyanic acid.


The pancreas exists in all the mammalia, birds, reptiles, and fishes.

Brunner, about 150 years ago, removed almost the whole pancreas from
dogs, and tied and cut away portions of the duct ; and they lived apparently as
well as before. From one he was not contented with removing the spleen at one
time and the pancreas at another, after which the poor animal pancratice valebat ;
but, to render it celebrated for experiments, he on a third occasion laid bare the
intestines and wounded them for an inch and a half, sewed up the wound, made
a suture in the abdominal parictes so badly that the intestines were found hanging
out on the ground one morning, purple and cold, and then allowed the animal to
lick the wound into healing. He also performed the operation for aneurysm in
the artery of its hind leg, and paracentesis of its chest, injecting a quantity of
milk into the pleura and pumping it out again. This even was not enough for
the gentle Brunner; he gave the dog such a dose of opium, when it had re-
covered from the operation on the spleen, that it was seized with tetanus. But
this also it got the better of, and lived upwards of three pleasant months with its
master, ‘‘ gratus mihi fuit hospes,”’ after all these indulgences, and was at last
lost in a crowd; stolen, no doubt, because “ celebris ab experimentorum multi-
tudinem,—vivum philosophie experimentalis exemplum, et splene mutilus,
variis cicatricibus notabilis.” Brunner offered any money for it again, but to no
purpose. (p. 6. 13.)


91


CHAP.., V.


THE BILE.


“ Trp bile is secreted by the divers:—the most ponderous and
the largest of all the viscera, especially in the foetus», in which its
size is inversely as the age. The high importance of this organ is
manifested, both by its immense supply of blood-vessels and their
extraordinary distribution, as well as by its general existence, for
it is not less common to all red-blooded animals than the heart
itself.c It exists also in invertebral animals with colourless blood,
wherever a heart and blood-vessels are present.

‘© The substance of the liver is peculiar, easily distinguished at
first sight from that of other viscera, of well-known colour and
delicate texture‘, supplied with numerous nerves*, lymphatics
(most remarkable on the surface)‘, biliferous ducts, and, what


a ¢¢ Bustachius, tab. xi. fig. 3, 4.
Ruysch, Thes. Anat. ix. tab. iv.
Santorini, Tab. Posth. xi.”

b « J, Bleuland, Icon hepatis fectus octimestris. Traj. ad Rhen. 1789. 4to.
F. L. D. Ebeling, De Pulmonum cum hepate antagonismo. Gott. 1806.


»”


8vo.

© 6 See Nic. Mulder’s Diss. de functione hepatis, in Disquisitione xootomica ilius
visceris nixa. Lugd. Bat. 1818. 8vo.”

d « Jn which, however, Autenreith discovers two substances, the one medul-
lary and the other cortical. Archiv. fiir die Physiol. t. vii. p. 299.

Consult also J. M. Mappe’s Dissertation, De penitiort hepatis humani structura,
Tub. 1817. 8vo.”

e « Walter, tab. iv.”

f <¢ Maur. v. Reverhorst, De motu bilis circulari ejusque morbis, tab. i. fig. 1,2.

Ruysch, Ep. Problemat. v. tab. vi.

Werner and Feller, Descriptio vasor. lacteor. atque lymphaticor. Fascic. i.
tab. iii. et iv.; although Fr. Aug. Walter finds fault with these plates, Annot.
Academic. p. 191. sq.

Mascagni, tab. xvii. xviil.””


92 THE BILE.


these ducts arise from, blood-vessels#, which are both very nu-
merous and in some instances very large, but of different de-
scriptions, as we shall state particularly.

“ The first blood-vessel to be noticed is the vena portarum
(or porte), dissimilar from other veins, both in its nature and
course. Its trunk is formed from the combination of most of
the visceral veins belonging to the abdomen, is supported by
a cellular sheath called the capsule of Glisson®, and, on enter-
ing the liver, is divided into branches which are subdivided more
and more as they penetrate into the substance of the organ,
till they become extremely minute, and spread over every part.
Hence Galen compared this system to a tree whose roots were
dispersed in the abdomen, and its branches fixed in the liver.i

“ The other kind of blood-vessels belonging to the liver, are
branches of the hepatic artery, which arises from the ceeliac, is
much inferior to the vena porte in size, and in the number of its
divisions, but spreads by very minute ramifications throughout the
substance of the organ.

‘¢ The extreme divisions of these two vessels terminate in true
veins, which unite into large venous trunks running to the vena
cava inferior.

«‘ These extreme divisions are inconceivably minute and col-
lected into very small glomerules*, which deceived Malpighi into
the belief that they were glandular acini, hexagonal, hollow, and
secretory.!

‘“‘ From these glomerules arise the pord biliarzi— very delicate
ducts, secreting the bile from the blood, and discharging it from
the liver through the common hepatic duct, which is formed from
their union.”


Such is the account of the anatomy of the liver, given by
most writers as well as Blumenbach. But Dr. Miller, Professor
at Bonn,™ declares that he has discovered all glands, and the


8 « See Haller, Icones Anat. Fascic. ii. tab. ii.”

" « Glisson, Anatomia Hepatis, p. 305. sq- 1659.”

'“ De Venarum Arteriarumque dissectione, p. 109. Opera. Basil. 1562.
Gai

* “ Nest. Maximeow. Ambodick, De Hepate. Argent. 1775. 4to.”

' “ De viscerum structura, p. 11. Lond. 1669.”

™ De Glandularum secernentium Structura peniliori, earumque prima Form-
atione in Homine atgue in Animalibus. Lipsia. 1830,


THE BILE. 93


liver among the rest, to be mere ducts, beginning from blind
extremities, and having blood-vessels ramifying on their parietes.
The dtliferous ducts, therefore, are not continuous, as Blumenbach
says, with blood-vessels; and Haller remarks, that no one ever
discovered such a continuation: but their fluids must be poured
into them from their inner surface, as fluids are secreted into canals
lined by mucous membrane.

Mr. Kiernan has recently published a most elaborate and ori-
ginal paper upon the structure of the liver, and states, — That the
extreme subdivisions of the hepatic artery all terminate in, or
become, veins that run into the branches of the vena porte; so
that this vein originates not only from the veins of the other
abdominal viscera, but also in the liver itself, as Ferrein pointed
out a century ago, and the artery has no termination in either
biliferous ducts or hepatic veins, and is destined for nutrition,
not for the secretion of bile. — That the subdivisions of the
vena porte (except, I presume, those which become secreting
vessels in the coats of the minutest biliferous ducts, and pour
forth fluid from their extremities upon the inner surface of
those ducts, unless indeed the fluid pass through pores in their
sides,) all terminate in, or become, the hepatic veins: — That
the minutest biliferous ducts, the subdivisions of the vena porte,
and the hepatic veins, are conglomerated into minute masses or
lobules, which Wepfer first discovered in the pig, surrounded, ex-
cept at their base, with a capsule of cellular membrane, that is a
prolongation of Glisson’s capsule and the proper capsule of the
liver, and supplied with minute arteries, and probably nerves and
absorbents ; when there is much cellular membrane in the capsule,
the lobules not being close together, but touching each other by
two or three points only, and being more or less circular or oval;
when the reverse is the case, being closely
compacted, and therefore angular : —
That the branches of the vena porte, after
running between the lobules, and cover-
ing them (except at their bases) and freely
anastomosing around them, so as to form
a continued plexus throughout the liver,
enter the lobulesmost minutely subdivided,
and become hepatic veins, which unite into
one large vessel in each process of every
lobule, and then these large vessels run into one which passes

H


94 THE BILE,


down the centre of the lobule, and goes out at the base, so as
to look like a stalk to the lobule. The veins formed from
these run between the bases of the
lobules and anastomose, and are
called sublobular, to distinguish them
from the hepatic veins within, which
are called intralobular and do not
anastomose, and from the portal
branches without, which run between
the other parts of the surface of the
lobules, or rather in the capsules of
the lobules, and are called interlo-
bular and anastomose so freely.

The lobules are very sparingly supplied with arteries, while the
biliferous ducts possess outside the lobules an abundance of them.

The minutest biliferous tubes form a reticulated plexus in
each lobule, and unite into branches which leave it. These
lobular biliary plexuses have much the appearance of cells,
and deceived some into the belief of cells which give origin
to ducts; and these Malpighi and others erroneously termed
acini.

As the liver so abounds in venous blood, it is very liable to
congestion; and any impediment to the exit of the blood from
the hepatic veins, as in diseases of the chest, will cause it to
accumulate in the large branches, then in the sublobular, the
central hepatic vein of each lobule, the twigs which run to it,
and at length in the central part of the lobular portal plexuses.
If the congestion is not greater, the central portion of the
lobules becomes red, and the
outer portion retains its usual yel-
lowish colour. This appearance
made Ferrein, and after him
many others, believe that two
substances exist in the liver, a
red and a white; and it is the
usual state after death. If the
congestion is greater, it extends
beyond the central portion of
the plexuses of the portal veins
in the lobules, even to the portal branches in the fissures, and
the redness reaches the edge of the lobules for the greater


THE BILE. 95


part — except where the lobules are not quite in contact with
each other; and the liver in this state is called a nutmeg liver.


Congestion beginning in the vena
porte is very rare, and the outer
portion of the lobules is then red,
while the central, in which the he-
patic veins lie, remains pale."


“It has been disputed whether the bile is produced from arterial
or venous blood.

“ The former opinion ® is countenanced by the analogy of the
other secretions which depend upon arterial blood ; nevertheless
more accurate investigation proves that the greater part, if not
the whole, of the biliary secretion is venous.

“* With respect to arguments derived from analogy, the vena
porte, resembling arteries in its distribution, may likewise bear a
resemblance to them in function. Besides, the liver is analogous


" Phil. Trans. 1833.
° « This has found an advocate in Rich. Powel, On the Bile and its Diseases.
Lond. 1801. 8yo.”
H 2


96 THE BILE.


to the lungs, in which the great pulmonary vessels are intended
for their function, and the bronchial arteries for their nourish-
ment ; and, if we are not greatly mistaken, the use of the hepatic
artery is similar.”

M. Simon informs us, that, after tying the hepatic artery in
pigeons, the bile was secreted as usual; but after tying the vena
porta, none was produced.P A. Kaau found water injected into
either the vena porte or hepatic artery exude on the surface of
the liver?; but this might be mere imbibition.

From the great abundance of twigs of the vena porte which
are distributed in the lobules, among the original biliferous or
secreting ducts, and the extremely small number of arteries
which enter the lobules, though they run plentifully upon the
larger or excreting biliferous ducts, Mr. Kiernan infers that the
bile is secreted from the blood of the vena porte alone.

Two instances have occurred in London, of the vena porte
running, not to the liver, but immediately to the vena cava inferior.
One is described by Mr. Abernethy", and the other is mentioned
by Mr. Lawrence.s Mr. Kiernan has examined the preparation
made from Mr. Abernethy’s case, and found that the branches
of the umbilical vein were open, and communicated with the
hepatic artery, the blood of which, having become venous in the
capillaries, must have found its way for secretion to the lobules
by means of the ramifications of the umbilical vein, which was
in truth, as it always is, the vena porte, but arose in this case
from the extremities of the hepatic artery alone, and not, as in
ordinary cases, from them and the extremities of the arteries of
the other abdominal viscera, by means of their veins, which unite
to form what is termed properly the vena porte.

In the moiluscea, there is certainly no vena porte, and the liver
receives its blood from the aorta.

“ The bile flows slowly, but constantly, along the hepatic duct.
The greater portion runs constantly through the ductus communis
choledochus into the duodenum, but some passes from the hepatic
into the cystic duct, and is received by the gall-bladder, where it


» Edinburgh Journal of Medical Science, No. i. p. 229. This effect of tying
the vena portze was long ago observed. See Sommerring, De C. H. Fabrica,
{uVis ps 182.

1 Perspiratio dicta Hippocrat.

" Phil. Trans vol. xxxiii.

* Medico-Chirurgic. Trans. vol. v. p.» 174


563.


THE BILE. 97


remains for a short period, and acquires the name of cystic
bile.*


a


Gi


“ys ——
<i TT


nr


A


The liver, gall-bladder, and stomach, raised.


aaa, liver; b, gall-bladder; c, pancreas; d, spleen; ¢, stomach; J; duo-
denum. See also the cut at the end of Chap. II.


“« The gall-bladder is an oblong sac, nearly pyriform, adheres to
the concave surface of the liver, and consists of three coats ; —

“ An exterior, not completely covering it, derived from the
peritonzum.

“ A middle, called nervous, and, as in the stomach, intestines,
and urinary bladder, the source of its firmness and tone.

“ An intertor“, which may be, in some measure, compared to


‘ « Tn the ox and other brutes there are peculiar hepato-cystic ducts, which
convey the bile directly from the liver to the gall-bladder.

See Observat. Anatom. Collegii privati Amstelodamens. P.i. Ams. 1667. 12mo.
p: 16: figs 7;

Also Perrault, Essais de Physique, t. i. p. 339. tab. ii.

Some have inconsiderately allowed them also in the human subject: v. c. De
Haen Ratio medendi contin. P. ii. p. 46. sq. tab. x. fig. 1.

Also Pitschel, Anat. und chirurg. Anmerk. Dresd. 1784. 8yo. tab. i.

Consult more at large, R. Forsten, Questiones selecte physiologice. Lugd.
Batav. 1774. 4to. p. 22.”

"  Ruysch, Epist. problem, quinta. Tab. y. fig. 3.”

Heo


98 THE BILE.


the inner coat of the stomach, as it contains a network of in-
numerable blood-vessels, abounds in mucous glands*, and is
marked by ruge ¥, which occasionally have a beautifully cancel-
lated and reticulated appearance.

“ Its cervix is conical, terminates in the cystic duct, is tortuous,
and contains a few falciform valves. ”

“‘ The bile which has passed into the gall-bladder is retained
until, from the reclined or supine posture of the body, it flows
down from it spontaneously, or is squeezed* out by the pressure
of the neighbouring jejunum, or ileum, or of the colon when
distended by feces.

“ The presence of stimuli in the duodenum may derive the bile
in that direction.

“‘ The great contractility of the gall-bladder, proved by expe-
riments on living animals, and by pathological phenomena, pro-
bably assists the discharge of bile, especially when this fluid has,
by retention, become very stimulating.

“ For the cystic bile, though very analogous to the hepatic,
becomes more concentrated, viscid, and bitter, by stagnation in
the gall-bladder; the cause of which is, in all probability, the ab-
sorption of its more watery parts by the lymphatic vessels.” >

Many animals have no gall-bladder; v. c. the horse, goat, &c.
All the carnivorous among the mammalia possess it, and all
reptiles, most of which also are carnivorous; while those of the
class mammalia that are destitute of it, are, with the exception of
the porpoise and dolphin, vegetable feeders. Hence, Cuvier
thinks that it is intended as a reservoir of bile where the animal
is subject to long fasting from the uncertain supply of food. The
gall-bladder is sometimes absent in the human subject. I have
read of six instances of this.°


x « Vicq-d’ Azyr, Guvres, t. v. p. 343.”
“ Casp. Fr. Wolff, Act. Acad. Scient. Petropol. 1779. P. ii.”
*  Caldesi, Osservaz. intorno alle Tartarughe. Tab. ii. fig. 10.
But especially Wolff, lately commended, I. c, P. i. tab. vi.
Also Fr. Aug. Walter, 1. c. tab. i.”
“ Caldani, Institut. Physiolog. p. 364. sq. Patav. 1778. 8yo.”
» « See Reverhorst, |. ¢. tab. ii. fig. 3.
Ruysch, l. ¢. tab. v. fig. 4.
Werner and Feller, 1. ¢. tab. ii. fig. 5.
Mascagni, tab. xviii.”
© Phil. Trans. 1749. The subject was a woman sixty years of age. Also
}. c. 1813. Transact. of the Coll. of Phys. vol. vie Mr. Cook’s edition of
Morgagni, Gaxelte de France, 1826; and Journal Hebdomadaire, referred to in
the London Medical Gazette, 1829.


“


»


THE BILE. 99


«“ Our attention must now be turned to the bile itself—a very
important fluid, respecting the nature and use of which there
has been more controversy for these forty years than about any
other fluid.

« The cystic bile, being more perfect and better calculated for
examination, will supply our observations.

“ Bile taken from a fresh adult subject is rather viscid, of a
brownish green colour, inodorous, and, if compared with that of
brutes, scarcely bitter.”

Berzelius® stated, that bile contains alkali and salts in the
same proportion as the blood, and that no resin exists in it, but
‘a peculiar matter, of a bitter and afterwards somewhat sweet
taste, which possesses characters in common with the fibrin, the
colouring matter, and the albumen of the blood.” This forms,
with an excess of acid, a perfectly resinous precipitate. What
was considered albumen in the bile, Berzelius regarded as the
mucus of the gall-bladder.

Bile contained, according to hin, of


Water - - - - - - 907°4
Biliary matter - - - - 80:0
Mucus of the gall-bladder dissolved in the bile - 3:0
Alkalies and salts common to all secreted fluids - 9°6
1000:0£


Of the weight of alkalies and salts, more than one half was
pure soda.

Tiedemann and Gmelin make the bile of the ox to consist of
91°51 water, with 7°30 proximate principles, and 1-19 salts. The
biliary matter, or picromel, they find a compound of resin and
a sweet crystallisable substance, which, together with another,
termed by them biliary asparagin, renders the resin soluble in
water. They discover also ozmazomeé, and a new acid — the
cholic, also cholesterin, gliadine, casein, the oleic, acetic, phos-
phoric, sulphuric, and muriatic acids, and colouring matter. The


4 « Qn the variety of colour in the bile, consult Bordenave, Analyse de la
Bile, in the Mém. Présentés, &c. t. vii. p. 611. GL

© Animal Chemistry, p. 65.

f Med. Chirurg. Trans. vol. iii. p. 241.

® A substance produced, like gelatin, by boiling, and obtained from muscle,
serum, or eyen mushrooms; and, according to M. Raspail, it is a mere impure
combination of albumen and acetic acid.


H 4


100 THE BILE.


soda, they say, is not pure, but a bicarbonate, and mixed with a
little potass.

M. Raspail remarks, that we may defy a chemist to either verify
the analysis of Berzelius or Tiedemann and Gmelin, or not to
increase the number of indeterminate substances which figure
in them, and this the more minute he attempts to be. He
considers, with M. Cadet, that bile is essentially a soap, withsoda
for its base, and mixed with sugar of milk; and that the other
substances are all accessary. Thus, the bile of the pig is a soap
with scarcely any albumen or picromel ; that of birds contains a
large quantity of albumen, and its picromel has no sugar; that of
fish has no resin, and its picromel is very sweet, and slightly acrid ;
human bile has no picromel, and has the less resin the more fatty
the liver. As to picromel, he regards it as a substance to be made
at pleasure by mixing resin, sugar, and an alkali or acid.”

Fourcroy first explained the chemical operation of the bile
in chylification.i According to Dr. Prout, during the precipita-
tion of the chyle and the decomposition of the bile, a gaseous
product is usually evolved, the mass becomes neutral, and traces
of an albuminous principle commence, strongest at a certain dis-
tance from the pylorus,—below the point at which the bile
enters the intestine, and gradually fainter in each direction. On
mixing bile with chyme out of the body, a distinct precipitation
takes place, and the mixture becomes neutral; but the formation
of an albuminous principle is doubtful, probably from the want of
the pancreatic fluid.

The bitter and bilious yellow matters pass off with the faces,
while the alkali (soda) of the bile probably combines with the
acid, and contributes to the formation of the chyle. The sugar
disappears. ‘The loss of the alkali, which preserved the biliary
yellow, bitter, resinous matters in solution, causes the separ-
ation of the latter; and Dr. Prout found their distinctive qualities
the more evident, the further from the intestine they were ex-
amined,

It is no longer wonderful that in jaundice, so intense that no bile
is seen in the faeces, and, according to Dr, Fordyce, even in arti-
ficial obstruction of the choledochus by ligature, nutrition con-
tinues, though, no doubt, less perfectly than in health. For


* 1. ec. p. 451. sqq.
' Syst@me des Connoissances Chimiques, t. X. p. 49.
* Dr. Prout, Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy, 1819. p. 273.


THE BILE. 101


Tiedemann and Gmelin, after tying the biliary duct, which proved
on dissection to have continued impervious !, found the thoracic
duct still containing an abundance of matter, yellowish, indeed,
from the jaundice, but coagulating, and its coagulum becoming
red, precisely like chyle; the small intestines had the soft flakes
usually considered chyle, but thought mucus by them, and both
large and small intestines contained nearly all the principles, ex-
cept those of the bile, seen in sound animals; but the contents
of the large intestines were exceedingly offensive. In the less
satisfactory experiments of MM. Leuret and Lassaigne, the tho-
racic duct was still full of chyle.

Although the bile is seen, by experimenting upon the contents
of the duodenum, to cause a precipitation (Tiedemann and Gme-
lin deny it, but Dr. Prout has almost constantly seen it), the chyle


In the year 1817, Dr. James Blundell tied the choledochus several times
in the dog and rabbit, and has ever since mentioned the results in his physiologi-
cal lectures. Generally the animal died of peritoneal inflammation, the bile
forcing its way into the cavity among the viscera, when the ligature had produced
ulceration; but when the animal did not die, the jaundice disappeared after a
time, and the animal was nourished as before: the bile had found some outlet.
On opening the animals, about a fortnight after the experiment, he discovered
that fibrin had been effused round the tied portion of the duct, so as to
re-establish the canal, and the ligatures had disappeared. Dr. Blundell’s
well-known accuracy renders all confirmation unnecessary, but I may mention,
that Mr. Brodie and others have since made the same experiment with the same
results. P

Dr. Blundell has on record the cases of two infants, four or five months old
in whom the hepatic ducts terminated blindly ; so that no bile entered the intes-
tines, and the stools were white, like spermaceti, and the skin jaundiced. But
the infants grew rapidly, and throve tolerably notwithstanding. He therefore
saw that nourishment could be accomplished without the mixture of bile and
chyme. Of these cases, one was examined by Mr. Luke, of the London Hos-
pital, the other by Mr. Gaunt, of Falcon Square.

Dr. Blundell has for many years been in the habit of displaying the precipitating
agency of the bile upon the chyme, by varying the mode of admixture: 1. By
working chyme and bile together, when the white chyle appears in the mass, like
veins in marble; 2, By enclosing chyme in black silk, and wetting a part of the
external surface of this printer’s ball, as it may be called, with bile; when, on
rendering it tense, the liquid portion of the chyme oozes through the texture, and
renders it generally blacker, but whitens it conspicuously in those spots where it
meets with bile: 3. By filtering the chyme repeatedly, and then dipping into
the thin strained fluid a rod with a drop of bile at its extremity, white chyle
appears at the point of contact.

He found the same results in the curious hybrid experiment, of employing
the bile of a dog, and the chyme of a rabbit.


102 THE BILE.


may thus be separated without it; but probably, Dr. Prout con-
ceives, in less quantity and perfection.

The neutralising effect of the bile, he informs me, is evident on
laying a piece of litmus paper through the pylorus, when the
portion in the stomach becomes red, and that in the intestines is
unaffected, or even shows alkaline agency.

The further down the intestinal contents are examined, the
more do all traces of albuminous matters disappear, as well as of
all the highly azotised™ principles of the pancreatic juice, these
being supposed to convert the unazotised principles of the vege-
table food into albumen: in man and carnivorous brutes no traces
of either are discoverable so low down as the cecum.

Dr. Prout remarks, that “ admitting that the decomposition of
the salt of the blood is owing to the immediate agency of gal-
vanism, we have in the principal digestive organs a kind of
galvanic apparatus, of which the mucous membrane of the
stomach, and perhaps that of the intestinal canal generally, may
be considered as the acid or positive pole; while the hepatic
system may, on the same view, be considered as the alkaline or
negative pole.” "

The hypothesis, that one great use of the liver was, like that of
the lungs, to remove carbon from the system, with this difference,
that the alteration of the capacity of the air caused a reception
of caloric into the blood, in the case of the lungs, while the he-
patic excretion takes place without introduction of caloric,— was,
I recollect, a great favourite with me when a student, principally
from the facts that a supply of venous blood—blood which has
been used by the system —runs to both liver and lungs, and to
no other organs; that the higher the temperature, the less carbon
passed off by the lungs (less caloric being demanded by the body),
and the more abundant, or more acrid, became the bile; so that
bilious diseases are most prevalent in hot seasons and climates.
The Heidelberg Professors have adduced many arguments to the
same effect. In the foetus, for whose temperature the mother’s
heat must be sufficient, the lungs perform no function, but the
liver is of great size, and bile is secreted abundantly, so that the
meconium accumulates considerably during the latter months of


" In examining the blood, we shall find that M. Raspail considers nitrogen
to exist in animal and vegetable substances, combined with hydrogen as am.
monia.

" Bridgewater Treatise, 496, Sq:


THE BILE. 103


pregnancy. We shall see, indeed, that at the very time the func-
tions of the lungs suddenly begin at birth, the liver suddenly loses
much of its supply of blood. Warm-blooded animals with large
lungs, living in the air, have the liver proportionally smaller than
those which live partly in water: in cold-blooded animals, and
reptiles, which have lungs with such large cells as but slightly to
decarbonise the blood ; in fish, which get rid of carbon but slowly
by the gills; and in the mollusca, which decarbonise still more
slowly by gills or lungs,—the liver is proportionally large.
More blood flows to the liver, accordingly as the lungs are less
active organs. In the mammalia and birds it receives the blood
of only the stomach, intestines, spleen, and pancreas ; but in the
cold-blooded, of many other parts; in the tortoise, of the hind
legs, pelvis, tail, and vena azygos; in serpents, of the right renal,
and all the intercostal veins ; in fish, of the renal veins, the tail,
and genitals. They assert, that in pneumonia and phthisis more
bile is secreted, and in the dlue disease, and other affections of the
heart, that the liver is enlarged. The constituents of the bile
contain a large quantity of carbon, which is chiefly in union
with hydrogen, and under the form of resin or fatty matter, and
resin is most abundant in the bile of herbivorous animals, whose
food contains a very large proportion of carbon and hydrogen.
In the lungs the carbon may be said to be burnt, whence animal
heat; in the abdomen it passes off still combustible.


104:


CHAP,, VI.
OF THE FUNCTION OF THE SPLEEN.


“Tue Spleen lies to the left of the liver, with which it has
considerable vascular communications; by its oblong figure », it
accommodates itself, as it were, to the contiguous viscera, but is
liable to great varieties in point of form, number, &c.°

“ Its colour is livid, its texture peculiar, soft, easily lacerated,
and therefore surrounded by two membranes, the interior of
which is proper to the spleen, and the exterior derived from the
omentum.

“ The situation and size of the spleen are no less various than
its figure, and depend upon the degree of the stomach’s reple-
tion; for, when the stomach is empty and lax, the spleen is tur-
gid; when the stomach is full, the spleen, being compressed, is
emptied.

““ It undergoes a continual, but gentle and equable, motion, de-
pendent upon respiration, under the chief instrument of which—
the diaphragm, it is immediately situated.

“Its texture was formerly supposed to be cellular, and com-
pared to the corpora cavernosa of the penis.”

Winslow says, “ there are no venous ramifications in the ox and
sheep. Having entered into the large end of the organ, the vein


* “Ch. Drelincourt, the younger, has carefully collected and concisely related
whatever was known up to his time, respecting the spleen; De lienosis, at the end
of his father’s Opuscula. Boerhaaye’s edition, p. 710. sq.

Consult, also, Chr. Lud. Roloff, De fabrica et Sunctione lienis. Frf. ad Viadr.
1750. 4to.

But among more recent writers, see L. J. P. Assolant, Recherches sur la
Rate, Par. 10. 8vo.

C. F. Heussinger, iiber den Bau und die Verrichtung der Milz. Isen. 1817,
8vo.

And Chr. Hellw. Schmidt, Commentatio (which gained the royal prize) de
pathologia lienis, &e. Gott. 1816. 4to.”

» « Walter, tab. iii, G.

Mascagni, tab. xiv. P.”
* « See Sandifort, Natwur en genees-kundige Bibl, vol. ii. p. 345, sq.”


THE FUNCTION OF THE SPLEEN. 105


goes about an inch and a half; then, instead of being like other
veins, it becomes perforated on all sides. The beginning of this
canal has still a portion of the coats of the vein, but the form of
the whole canal is gradually effaced, so that nothing remains but
grooves in the cellular structure.”’4

This opinion was proved,” says Blumenbach, “ to be erroneous
by more careful examination of the human spleen ¢, which consists
entirely of blood-vessels, of enormous size in comparison with the
bulk of the organ: they are, in fact, proportionably more con-
siderable than in any other part of the body.”

But Dr. Andral affirms, that “ by repeated washing, the spleen
is Shown to consist of an infinite number of cells, which com-
municate on the one hand together, and on the other directly
with the splenic veins. The latter, when the inner surface of the
large subdivisions of the splenic veins are examined, appear to
have a great number of perforations, through which a probe
passes directly into the cells of the organ. The farther the sub-
divisions of the vein examined are from the trunk, the larger are
these perforations; and still further on, the coats of the vein are
not a continued surface, but are split into filaments, which do not
differ from those forming the cells, and are continuous with them.”
‘“« The cells are produced in the following manner: from the
inner surface of the investing membrane of the spleen, a great
number of filaments, fibrous like itself, are detached, some of
which grow broad, and resemble flakes, and the latter chiefly
seem intended to support the divisions of the artery. In inter-
lacing each other, these filaments leave spaces, which are in fact
the cells of the spleen, and they terminate by insertion into the
walls of the veins, becoming continuous with the filaments into
which the veins are ultimately reduced.” These facts are readily
ascertained in the spleen of the horse; but may also be verified
in the human spleen

“The experiments of Wintringham demonstrate the great
tenuity and strength of the coats of the splenic artery. It is
divided into an infinite number of twigs, the terminations of which
resemble pulpy penicilli and give rise to the splenic veins, which
gradually unite into large, loose, and easily dilatable, trunks.”

Andral says, that the splenic artery, almost as soon as it enters


* Exposition Anatomique du Corps Humain, t. iv. p. 136. sqq.
* « See Lobstein’s Dissertation, Nonnulla de Liene sistens. Argent. 1773. 4to.”’
* Précis @ Anatomie Pathologique, t. ii. P.i. p. 416. sqq.


106 THE FUNCTION


the spleen, rapidly diminishes, and subdivides into twigs, which
cannot be traced, and appear to be distributed onthe sides of the
cells. The cellular structure of the spleen enables us to inflate
it by the veins. Winslow, a century since, did this ; and when in-
flated, it has a great resemblance to the lungs with large cells of
certain reptiles.

The spleen of brutes has been removed, from the most remote
period, without effect.

At least twenty hypotheses respecting the use of the spleen
have been advanced. In some, it has been regarded as a diverti-
culum to the blood.®

Above a century ago, Dr. Stukely‘, considering the spleen to
consist entirely of complications and inosculations of arteries,
veins and cells, nerves, and (as Malpighi asserted) “ a muscular
net-work of fibrillz,” supposed that it contracted and propelled
its blood through the splenic vessels into those of the stomach,
when this organ required a larger supply during digestion.
He maintained, likewise, that it accelerated the motion of the
blood in the mesenteric veins when the circulation in the vena
porte was sluggish, and that it answered various other purposes.
The whole is an hypothesis now forgotten.

Some have thought it a diverticulum for the blood whenever
this fluid is obstructed in any part of the body, as in the cold
stage of fever, great efforts, &c. To prevent too much from being
thrown upon organs which might be injured, the spleen, they con-
tend, is formed to allow an accumulation in its substance. This
is ingeniously defended by Dr. Rush.*

Dr. Haighton (Lectures at Guy’s Hospital), and Mr. Saumarez
(New System of Physiology), have explained its operations as a
diverticulum in avery different manner. When the stomach is
full, the compression experienced by the spleen impedes its cir-
culation, and the blood makes its way the more copiously into the
arteries of the stomach, liver, &c. But we have no proof that
the repletion of the stomach compresses the spleen materially,


& « J, H. Schulze, De splene canibus erciso. Hal. 1735. 4to.”
h « Vine. Malacarne, Memorie della Soc. Italiana, t. viii. P. 1. p. 233.
A. Moreschi, Del vero e primario uso della milza. Milan, 1803. 8vo.”

' Of the Spleen, its description and history, uses and diseases, particularly the
vapors, with their remedy. Being a lecture read at the Royal College of Physicians.
By Wm, Stukely, M.D. C.M.L. and §.R.S. London, 1722. folio,

* Cox’s Medical Museum, Philad. 1807.


OF THE SPLEEN. 107


and thus can impede its circulation: a fact, indeed, which will be
mentioned presently, renders this improbable. Besides, in rumi-
nating animals, as Blumenbach observes, it lies next the first
stomach or paunch, and if compressed, must be so before diges-
tion begins; and in proportion as the fourth stomach fills, and
digestion proceeds more actively, is the distension of the paunch
diminished. It varies in situation in different animals, not being
always attached to the stomach. The excitement, too, which the
liver must experience when chyme irritates the extremity of the
ductus choledochus, and still more the provision of a gall-bladder,
must render such aid from the spleen superfluous to the liver.
The infinite blood-vessels and excerning orifices of the stomach
cannot, likewise, but furnish sufficient gastric juice, from the
mere excitement which they must experience whenever the sto-
mach contains food. No other glands habitually excited to occa-
sional great activity have such a diverticulum.

A third view of its influence as a diverticulum is, that it serves for
receiving a great part of the venous blood of the alimentary canal
during chymification, and especially during chylification. When
this process is going on, there must be a great increase of blood
flowing to the alimentary canal; the vena porte, through which
it all flows, can dilate to only a certain extent, and, in order to pre-
vent such a congestion in the mesenteric veins as would retard
the circulation in the organs, the spleen allows an accumulation
in itself. Leuret and Lassaigne found the spleen of a dog weigh
a pound and a half in two hours after the application of a ligature
to the vena porte, while it ordinarily weighs but two ounces; and
observe that it has a vermilion tint when an animal is fasting, but
grows turgid and of a dark purple when the chyme has passed
the pylorus.

If the opinion of Erasistratus, that the spleen is useless, was a
little atheistical, the notion of Paley was not much better, — that
the viscera contained, and the abdomen containing, are so clum-
sily adapted to each other, that a pad is necessary to make them
fit, just as hatters put stuffing under the leather of a hat which is
made too big for the head, —“ It is possible, in my opinion, that
the spleen may be merely a stuffing, a soft cushion to fill up a
vacuum or hollow, which, unless occupied, would leave the pack-
age loose and unsteady.”! When I consider the stupendous


! Natural Theology, c. xi.


i08 THE FUNCTION


power and design displayed throughout nature, I instantly revolt
at such an explanation as Paley’s, to say nothing of its anatomical
absurdity.

Sir Everard Home once fancied that the spleen is intended to
receive “a great portion of our drink from the cardiac end of
the stomach, so that these may pass through a short cut, hitherto
unknown, from the stomach to the spleen, and thus into the mass
of blood.”™ His friends having, among other experiments, passed
a ligature around the pyloric extremity of the stomach of a dog,
injected into this receptacle a solution of rhubarb ; and, on killing
the animal, some few hours afterwards, none of the absorbents
of the stomach were found distended, nor could any trace of
rhubarb be detected in the liver, but evident traces existed in the
spleen and in the urine. When fluids had been drunk, the spleen
was turgid, and exhibited cells full of a colourless liquid that
were at other times collapsed and almost imperceptible, —a
circumstance rendering it unlikely, I may remark in reference
to Dr. Haighton’s hypothesis, that the spleen is diminished in
bulk by the distension of the stomach; for, first, compression,
sufficient to prevent the artery from sending into it the usual
quantity of blood, would prevent the entrance of fluids by any
other vessels; and, secondly, we learn that the spleen is actually
distended by the fluid portion of the contents of the sto-
mach.

During the distension of the spleen, when the pylorus was not
tied, the rhubarb appeared more strongly in the blood of the
splenic than in that of other veins. If coloured solids without
fluids were introduced into the stomach, the cells of the spleen
were not distended, nor did this organ or its veins give more signs
of the colouring matter than others.

Unfortunately, the size of the spleen is considerable, in those
warm-blooded animals which never drink ; as well as in bisulcous
animals, whose spleen adheres to the paunch, receiving the crude
food only, but never the drink, which is prevented from entering
it by the well-known mechanism of a semicanal running from the
cesophagus to the omasum.

From later experiments, published in 1811, the writer com-
pletely changed his opinion. It seems that traces of rhubarb were
discoverable in the bile as well as in the spleen: and that it tinged


™ Phil. Trans. 1808.


OF THE SPLEEN. 109


the urine if the spleen had been removed before the experiment :
so that the burner of John Hunter’s manuscripts abandoned
what he had before advanced as a discovery, and regarded the
spleen rather as a secreting organ, and its large and numerous
lymphatic vessels, running to the thoracic duct, as supplying the
place of an excretory canal.


110


CHAP. VII.
THE FUNCTION OF THE OMENTUM.


“Tr omentum gastro-colicum or magnum ® (to distinguish it
from the parvum or hepato-gastricum») is a peculiar process of
peritoneum, arising immediately from the external coat of the
stomach.

“ Although there are innumerable continuations of the peri-
tonzum in the abdomen ‘®, and every abdominal viscus is so covered
by it that on opening the abdomen nothing is found destitute of
that membrane, nevertheless, it is afforded in different ways,
which may be reduced to classes.

_ Over some the peritoneum is merely extended as a smooth
membrane, or it affords to them only a partial covering, as is the
case with respect to the kidneys, rectum, urinary bladder, and,
in some measure, with respect to the pancreas and gall-bladder.

“ To some which project into the cavity of the abdomen, al-
though adhering to its parietes, it affords a covering for the
greater part of their surface; v.c. to the liver, spleen, stomach,
uterus, and the testes of the very young fcetus.

“ The intestinal tube, with the exception of the rectum, pro-
jects so much into the cavity of the abdomen, that it is, as it
were, suspended in loose processes of the peritoneum, called
mesentery and mesocolon: the broad ligaments of the uterus are


~ similar to these.


‘«« The longest and most remarkable process of peritonzeum is
the omentum—a large, empty, delicate sac, hanging from the


a « Fustachius, tab. ix.

Haller, ZIcones anat. fasc. i. tab. iv. K. M., and the Appendix Colica, which
he himself investigated at Gottingen in 1740. ib. R.

Rob. Steph. Henry, Descript. omentic. icone nova. UHafn, 1748. 4to.”

> « Eustachius, tab. x. fig. 1. G. H.

Haller, 1. ¢, Q,”

© «C. J. M. Langenbeck, Commentarius de structura peritongi, &c. Gott.

1817. 4to, with copper-plates.”’


OF THE OMENTUM. ff) bet


large curvature of the stomach, extending over the greater part
of the small intestines, applying itself closely to their convolu-
tions, and, in some measure, insinuating itself into their inter-
stices.

“ Besides the blood-vessels seen upon the omentum, it is
marked by fatty strie or bands, which are every where reticulated
(whence the German name (Netzhaut) of this membrane), and in

7 corpulent persons increase occasionally to a large and even dan-
gerous size ; and, by their means, the whole omentum is lubricated
with a halitus, which one might almost call adipose.


ad, OMentum, ~-
 b, lungs.

c, mediastinum.
g d, diaphragm.
e, liver.

J; stomach.

g, Spleen.


=


“On the latter circumstance depends the use commonly
ascribed to the omentum, — of lubricating the intestines and
assisting their continual movements: this also appears the use of
those analogous small bursee which are found 4 in such numbers
about the rectum © and colon. f

‘“¢ The omentum also prevents the adhesion of the intestines to
the peritoneum, and the consequent impediment to the functions
of the prime via.


* “ T have lately seen similar appendices on the peritonzal covering of an
_ uterus unimpregnated, but which had formerly been pregnant.”
© « Walter, tab. ii. 2. m. m.”
* « Bidloo, Anatomia hum. corporis, tab. xxxix. fig. 6. C.C.C. D.D.D.”
ba


122 FUNCTION OF THE OMENTUM, _


“ There is another two-fold office attributed with great Pp P
_ bility to the omentum s, viz. that of facilitating the dilation of the
viscera to which it is contiguous, and of acting as a diverticulum

to their blood during their state of vacuity.
‘] on the sing structure of the omentum par-
« vum or hep ‘astricum especially, we may be inclined to be-
lieve that there is another, _ 7 principal office attached
to it, unknown at present, a discoverable by comparative


»C aUss oore -. de


[ 1784. Semestr, » i fe
*, *


3


113


CHAP. VIII.
4
THE FUNCTION OF THE INTESTINES. &
‘“’Tizx intestinal tube, over which the omentum is exte 1, and


which receives the chyme to elaborate it further and separate
the chyle from the faces, is divided into two principal portions—
the small and large intestines, of whose functions we shall speak
separately. if

“ The small* intestines are again divided into three: the duo-
-denum, jejunum, and ileum. m

«‘ The first is named from its usual length. ” ’

“The second from generally appearing collapsed and empty.

“ The third from its convolutions : it is the longest of the three,
fuller, and, as it were, inflated, and sometimes resembling the
large intestines by the appearance of bulle. ail

“ The coats of the small intestines correspond with those of
the stomach. a ”

_ “ The external is derived from the mesentery.

“The muscular consists of two orders of fibres: the one lon-
gitudinal, interrupted, external, and found especially about the
part opposite the mesentery ; the other, annular and falciform,
possessing the power of narrowing the canal, while the former
shortens it- Upon both depends the very great and permanent
irritability of the intestines, formerly mentioned. ;

“ The nervous coat is condensed cellular membrane, easily
reduced by handling, or more particularly by inflation, into a
spumous tela»; in it the intestinal blood-vessels, which arise from
the mesenteric’, are distributed in a beautifully arborescent


* «Chr. Bernh. Albinus, Specimen anat. exhibens novam tenuium hominis
inlestinor. descriptionem. LB. 1724. 8yo.”
° « B.S. Albinus, Annotat. Academ. L. ii. tab. iy. fig. 1, 2.”
“« Eustachius, tab, xxvii. fig. 2. 4.”


13


114 THE FUNCTION


form4; the intestines, no less than the stomach, are indebted to
it for their tenacity and strength.

“ The interior, lined by its delicate epithelium, and deserving
the name of villous in the small intestines more than in any other
part of the canal, forms, in conjunction with the inner surface of
the former coat, here and there, undulated ridges and rugous
plice, which, in dried and inflated intestines, resemble the blade
of a scythe, and are termed the valvule conniventes or Kerk-
ringhianz.°

“ The villi, which are innumerable upon the inner surface of
the intestines, and whose beautiful and minute vascular structure
was first carefully investigated, though described with exagger-
ation, by Lieberkiihn’, may be, perhaps, compared, while desti-
tute of chyle, to little loose pendulous bags, internally soft and
spungy; but, when distended with chyle, they have the appear-
ance of a morel.

“ The base of these villi is surrounded by innumerable glan-
dular follicles, adhering chiefly to the nervous coat, and opening
into the intestinal canal by a very small orifice, through which
they discharge the mucus that lines the whole track of the in-
testines. ‘

«© These are distinguished into three orders. The Brunnerian,
largest, solitary, found in most abundance in that part of the
duodenum which is contiguous to the pylorus. h The Peyerian,
smaller, aggregated, found chiefly at the termination of the small
intestines,— about the valve of the colon. Lastly, the Lieber-


>

4 B, §. Albinus, Dissert. de arteriis et venis intestin. hominis, with coloured
plates. LB. 1736. 4to.

Also his Annotat. Acad. L. iii. tab. i, ii.” -

© « Kerkring, Spicilegiwm anatomicum, tab. xiv. fig. 1, 2.”

f « He estimated their number, in the small intestines of an adult, to be about
500,000.” ;

& “ De fabrica et actione villorum intestinor. tenuium hominis. LB. 1745. 4to.

J. Bleuland, Descriptio vasculorum in intestinorwm tenuium tunicis. Ultraj.
1797. Ato.

R. A. Hedwig, Disquisitio ampullarum Lieburkiihnii. Lips. 1797. 4to.

C. A. Rudolphi, Anatomisch-physiologische Abhandlungen. Berlin. 1802. 8yo,
p- 39.”

h « J. Conr. a Brunn, Glandule duodeni s. pancreas secundarium. Francof.
1715. 4to. fig. 1.”

' «J, Conr, Peyer, De Glandulis intestinorum. Scafhus, 1677. 8vo, especially
fig. 3.”


OF THE INTESTINES. 115


kiihnian, the smallest, said to be distributed in the proportion of
about eight to each villus The two former orders are so in-
constant, that I am inclined to consider the view given of them
in the plates alluded to, as morbid}; for I have more than once
been unable to discover the slightest trace of fungous papille
with a single pore, in the small intestines of healthy adults;
while, on the contrary, in aphthous subjects, I have found nearly
the whole intestinal tube beset with them in infinite numbers,
both solitary and aggregated.

“ As the gastric juice is poured into the stomach, so an enteric
or zntestinal fluid is poured into the small intestines, demon-
strated, among other ways, by the common experiment, first, we
believe, instituted by Pechlin,” of including a portion Fie.
tine between two ligatures, so that the fluid secreted into it may
be collected. “ An accurate investigation of it is a physiological
desideratum. We can say nothing respecting its quantity, but
Haller’s estimate —eight pounds in the twenty-four hours —is
certainly excessive.

“ The intestines agree with the stomach in this particular, that
they have a similar, and, indeed, a more unquestionable, or, at
least, a more lively, peristaltic action®, which occurs principally
when the chymous pulp enters them. ‘This it agitates by an un-
dulatory constriction of different parts of the canal, and propels
from the duodenum towards the large intestines. Although the
existence of an antiperistaltic motion, causing a retrograde course
to their contents, cannot be disproved, it is in health much
weaker, and less common and important, than the former.

‘“‘ By these moving powers, and by these solvents which are
afforded by means of secretion, the chyme undergoes remark-
able changes.” |


k « Lieberkiihn, I. c. p. 17. tab. iii.”

!'« The eminent Rudolphi thinks differently, 1. c. p. 212.”

m «¢ These intestinal aphthe exactly resemble those tubercles which Sheldon, in
a work which we shall presently quote, exhibits (Tab, 1.) as small ampulle full
of chyle.”’

" De purgantium medicamentor. facultat. p. 509. — tab. iy.”

° “ Benj. Schwartz, De vomitu et motu intestinorum. LB. 1745. 4to.

J. Foelix, De motu peristaltico intestinorum. Trevir. 1750. 4to.”

P “ Consult the excellent observations and experiments of A. E, Ferd, Emmert,
Archiv fiir die Physiologie, t. viii, p. 145.”


I 4


116 THE FUNCTION


Albumen and albuminous substances, which are the source of
the chyle and so abundant in the duodenum and jejunum, gra-
dually disappear, so that a great part of the chyle is generally
formed and absorbed before the digested mass reaches the ileum.4
The contents become of a brownish yellow colour, and of a dis-
gusting odour.

«« After becoming more and more inspissated in their long
course through the ileum, they have to overcome the valve of
the colon and pass into the large intestines. To facilitate this,
the extremity of the ileum is lubricated very abundantly by
mucus.

“ The valve of the colon’, or, as it may deservedly be termed
after its discoverer, the valve of Fallopius’, is a short process or
continuation of the portion of the ileum that penetrates into
and is surrounded by the cavity of the large intestine. Its
external lips, while a neighbouring fold of the large intestine at
the same time projects considerably, are composed‘, not like
other similar folds, merely of the interior and nervous coats, but


4 Dr. Prout, Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy. 1819.

* « Haller, Devalvula coli. Gotting. 1742. 4to., reprinted in his Oper. minor.
t.i, p. 580. sq.

T. Mich. Roderer, De valvula coli. Argent. 1768. 4to.”

s ¢ The various opinions respecting the discoverer of this remarkable valve are

well known. Haller’s Elementa, t. vii. P. I. p. 142., may be consulted on this
point.
In the mean time I am certain that, long before the period at which its aioe.
very is in general dated, it was accurately known to that immortal anatomist
Gabr. Fallopius. In the library of our university there is a manuscript of Fal-
lopius, containing, among other things, his anatomy of the monkey, in which is an
account of the structure and use of the valve of the colon, delivered in a public
demonstration at Padua, Feb. 2. 1558, in the following words: ‘ The use of the
cacum in the monkey is to prevent the regurgitation of the food during progression
on all fours. This is proved by the circumstance of water or air, thrown into the
rectum, reaching the cecum, but not passing beyond the large intestines. But, if
impelled from above, it passes into them. The reason is this, — at the insertion of
the ileum are two folds, which are compressed by inflation and repletion, as occurs
in the heart, and prevent retrogression; wherefore, in man, clysters cannot pass
and be rejected through the mouth, unless in a weak and diseased state of the intes-
tines.’ ”

* « A view of a recent and entire valve is exhibited by B. S. Albinus in his
Annotat. Acad, L. iii. tab. v. fig. 1.

And overcharged by inflation and drying, in Santorini’s Posthumous 'T ables,
xiv. fig. 1, 2.”


OF THE INTESTINES. 117


of fibres from the muscular coat also. Hence it performs the
double office of preventing the passage of too great a quantity


of feeces into the large intestines, and regurgitation into the
small.”


‘ en
Seti Y AAG


uu


on mi a, ileum.
UD b, cecum,

Ty = Cc colont

d, valve.


It probably always prevents regurgitation even of air, while
entire: and the contents of the ileum are so often seen fecal in
dissection, that stercoraceous vomiting is no argument that the
valve occasionally allows retrogression of the intestinal contents.Y

“ The large intestines, divided like the small into three parts,
commence by the cecum (which has a vermiform process whose
use in man is unknown *), and afford avery ample receptacle, in
which the feeces may be collected and retained, till an opportunity
for discharging them arrives.

“ They exceed the small intestines in thickness and strength,
as well as in capacity. The muscular coat has this peculiarity —
that its longitudinal fibres, excepting at the extremity of the
rectum, are collected into three bands, called ligaments of the
colony; and the intestines themselves are divided into a kind of
bulbous segments. The inner coat is not so beautifully floc-


culent as that of the small intestines, but more similar to that of
the stomach.


“ New Views of the Process of Defecation, &c. By James O’ Beirne, M.D.
Dublin, 1833, p. 16. sq.


Syne ss : é :
“ Lieberkuhn, De valvula coli et usu processus vermicularis. LB. 1739. 4to.


Joach. Vosse, De intestino ceco ejusque appendice vermiformi. Gotting. 1749,
Ato.”


* “ Eustachius, tab, x. fig. 2. 4, 5.”


118 THE FUNCTION


“ Their peristaltic motion is much fainter than that of the
small intestines. On the other hand, they experience to a greater
degree the pressure of the abdominal parietes, to which the
whole length of the colon is contiguous.”

On arriving in the large intestines, the mass of contents under-
goes fresh changes, at present unexplained, and is converted
into true excrement or feeces.* Here it is that a peculiar succus
entericus must be poured forth, for the secretion into the small is
probably nothing more than mucus and a simple watery fluid.
Tiedemann and Gmelin support, in some measure, the old idea of
the cecum being a subsidiary stomach, from its contents being
acid although acidity had disappeared higher up in the canal,
and more acid as the aliment is less digestible; and from albu-
men often reappearing suddenly in this part of the canal. Dr.
Prout found the fluids of the large intestines coagulate lymph
even as low as the rectum.

The excrementitious mass, consisting of the indigestible part
of the food, the resinous colouring and fatty matters of the bile,
with intestinal mucus, loses its fluids gradually as it descends,
and in the lower part of the intestines becomes particularly dry.#

The faeces appear to accumulate in the sigmoid flexure of the
colon, the lower and greater part of which, when empty, falls into
the pelvis, hanging doubled over. As the feces accumulate,
this turns upon the rectum, until at length, like the stomach, its
greater arch is placed forwards and upwards, and its contents are
brought somewhat perpendicular to the upper end of the rectum.
When the accumulation amounts to a certain degree, that intestine
and the abdominal muscles and diaphragm are excited to simul-
taneous action, the whole contents pass down into and force open
the rectum, which, in its turn, is presently excited in the same
way, and the same powers > “ overcome the resistance of the os
coccygis and of both sphincters, the inner of which is a re-
markable bundle of circular fibres, the outer, a truly cutaneous
muscle. After the excretion, the effort of the abdomen having
ceased, the levator ani chiefly retracts the intestine, which is
again closed by its sphincter.” °


* See Abernethy, Surgical Observations, Part II. p. $4.

* The excrements of brutes have been analysed, but not to an extent capable
of affording general views.

> Dr. O’Beirne, 1. c.

* “ All these parts may be seen as they exist in each sex, in Santorini’s Posth.
Tables, xvi. and xvii.”


It is generally believed that the feces collect in the rectum, till their quantity


OF THE INTESTINES. 119


* The discharge is facilitated by the absence of transverse ruge,
and especially by the great quantity of mucus at the extremity
of the bowels.”


The alimentary canal always contains gaseous substances,
which, being chiefly disengaged from its contents, must vary at
different parts of the canal. These serve the important purpose
of gently causing the canal to open progressively for the advance
of soft or solid contents.


stimulates it to discharge them. Dr. O’ Beirne, in his very original work, argues
successfully against this, 1st, from the inconvenience to the bladder and the con-
stant irritation of the sphincter ani, were accumulation to occur there, so that the
rectum is ill circumstanced for accumulation, whereas the cexcum and colon
really appear constructed for receptacles. 2d, The sigmoid flexure is a great
depot for feecal matter, and therefore a free passage at all times into the rectum
isunlikely. 3d, Great force is usually required to force injections up the rectum,
as if it were naturally contracted and close. 4th, The finger or an instrument
introduced into the rectum is rarely soiled by feces. 5th, Adhesions within the
rectum have often been found, but seldom or never in the other intestines, and they
must require an empty condition of the cavity for the necessary contact of the
sides. 6th, After division or destruction of the lower sphincter of the anus,
the feces are generally retained as usual. 7th, He has examined the rectum
with a long tube in many healthy persons several times a day, and never found
feces init. Besides the muscular fibres possessed by the rectum in common
with the colon, it has strong fleshy fibres, circular and longitudinal, and it alone
receives nerves of sense and motion from the spinal marrow.

Dr. O’ Beirne considers, also, that an accumulation naturally occurs in the
czcum as well as in the colon, from the great acuteness of the angle at which the
ileum enters the cecum; the greater capacity of the cecum than of either the
ileum or colon; the course of the colon against gravity; the necessity of the
cecum being filled before it can be excited to or supported in an expulsive
effort; and the distention of the colon all the way from the cecum to the sigmoid
flexure by gas, which prevents the ascent of the faces from the cecum till it
escapes from the lower bowel. He conceives that the whole contents are trans-
ferred at once: and as, at the time of defecation, there is usually one mass in the
sigmoid flexure and one in the cecum, that the amount of the two is the evacu-
ation; and as two distinct acts of expulsion are always required before the
bowels in health are sufficiently freed, that the capacity of the rectum may be re-
ceived as the measure of that of the cecum. When he has had every reason to
believe that no faces were in the sigmoid flexure, from a hollow bougie passed
into it remaining unsoiled, flatus escaped ; and, on passing the instrument again
in five minutes, its upper extremity has been coated with feces, and a solid evacu-
ation soon occurred.

I think that the sympathy between the stomach and the large intestines, when
these are charged, deserves notice. When the intestinal contents have accumu-
lated, the repletion of the stomach by even a moderate meal excites the lower
portion of the canal to discharge its contents, so that a meal at such a time causes
a desire for relief, and the more as the meal is greater,


120 THE FUNCTION OF


The gas of the stomach contains, besides azote and carbonic
acid gas, oxygen, and very little hydrogen; while that of the
small intestines contains, besides the two former gases, no oxygen,
and abundance of hydrogen: that of the large intestines has less
hydrogen and carbonic acid, and likewise no oxygen. Little or
no gas is found in the stomach during chymification.

The following are the results of MM. Magendie’s and Che-
vreuil’s analysis of the gases of the alimentary canal :

In the stomach of a man just executed,—


Oxygen - - - 11-00
Carbonic acid . - - 14-00
Pure hydrogen - ~ 3:55
Azote - - - 71°45

100°00


In the small intestines of a subject, four-and-twenty years of
age, who had eaten, two hours before execution, bread and
Gruyére cheese, and drunk eau rougie, —


Oxygen - - - 0:00
Carbonic acid - - 24°39
Pure hydrogen . - 55°53
Azote - - . 20:08

100.00


twenty-three years of age, who had eaten the same
food, and was executed with the former, —


Oxygen - - - 0-00
Carbonic acid - - 40:00
Pure hydrogen - - 51°15
Azote - - - 8°85

100:00


twenty-eight years of age, who, four hours before
execution, had eaten beef, bread, lentils, and drunk red wine, —


Oxygen - - - 0:00
Carbonic acid - - - 25°00
Pure hydrogen - - 8:40
Azote - - - 66°60


100:00


THE INTESTINES. 121


In the large intestines of these three criminals, were found, —


Oxygen - - - 0:00
Carbonic acid - - 43°50
Carburetted hydrogen and some \ BAT
traces of sulphuretted hydio gen

Azote - 51:03

100:00
Oxygen - - = 0:00
Carbonic acid - - 70:00
Hydrogen and pure carburetted 11-06

hydrogen -

Azote - - - 18°04

100-00

The gas of the caecum and rectum of the third was examined
separately.
Czecum, —

Oxygen ™ - - 0:00
Carbonic acid - . 12°50
Pure hydrogen - - 7°50
Carburetted hydrogen - 12°50
Azote - - - 67°50

100°00

Rectum,—

Oxygen - - - 0:00
Carbonic acid - = 42:86
Carburetted hydrogen - 11°18
Azote - - - 45:96

100-00


Some traces of sulphuretted hydrogen appeared upon the mer-
cury before the last analysis was commenced.
Berzelius finds human excrement to consist of


Water . - - 13S

Remains of vegetable and animal 7.0
matter = rc =

Bile “ a A 0-9


Albumen - - “ 0:9


122 THE FUNCTION OF THE INTESTINES.


Peculiar extractive matter . |
Matter composed of altered bile,
: : 140
resin, animal matter, &c. -
Salts - - " 1:2
100°0 4


Besides the gases disengaged from the contents of the canal,
at least the stomach contains a portion of air that has been
swallowed with the food, and many persons can easily swallow
air by itself. Air is perhaps generated occasionally in the womb,
and is undoubtedly generated by serous membranes. Emphysema
has occurred without any wound of the lungs. I believe, with
John Hunter’, that the alimentary canal also often secretes
gaseous fluids, For mental emotion will suddenly cause extreme
discharges of air from the stomach, and the intestines to swell
with wind. Want of food fills the stomach with wind. In many
diseases the same will occur, although no fermentation or unusual
change is discernible in the contents of the canal.

Air in the serous membranes, or in the cellular, even when
introduced, is known to be absorbed. f

Every one knows that the intestines are usually relieved once
in twenty-four hours, but that some little variety occurs in this
respect. In cases of extreme abstinence, they of course discharge
their contents very rarely, as I mentioned formerly. Heberden,
however, mentions a person who naturally had a motion once a
month only, and another who had twelve motions every day
during thirty years, and then seven every day for seven years,
and rather grew fat than otherwise. Habit has the greatest
influence upon defecation.

Pouteau’s young lady, mentioned at page 55., had no stool,
he says, for upwards of eight years, although during the last year
she ate abundantly of fruit, and drank coffee, milk, and tea, and
broth with yolks of eggs: but she had copious greasy sweats.


* Traité de Chimie, tom. vii. Traduit par M. Esslinger.

“ Observations on certain Parts of the Animal Economy.

* See Dr. Baillie in Transact. of Society Sor Improvement of Med. and Surg.
Knowledge, vol. i.

® Commentarii, p. 14


123


CHAP. IX.
THE FUNCTION OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. ®


“'T'ym course of the chyle, from the intestines to the blood
is through a part of the absorbent system.”

“ This is divided into four parts —/acteal and lymphatic vessels,
conglobate glands,” (or ganglia, as they are now often termed, )
‘¢ and the thoracic duct. ach of these will be now considered.

“ The dacteals originate among the villi of the internal coat of
the intestines ;” but most writers have been unable to detect
their origin. Lieberkithn and Cruikshank, however, appear to
have been successful. The former says, that each villus is a
lacteal with valves, swelling into a bulb or ampulla at its termin-
ation, on the summit of which is an orifice. The latter opened
a woman who had died suddenly of convulsions after taking a
hearty supper in perfect health. “ Many of the villi,” he says,
“were so full of chyle that I saw nothing of the ramifications
of the arteries and veins; the whole appeared as one white
vesicle, without any red lines, pores, or orifices whatever. Others
of the villi contained chyle, but in a small proportion; and
the ramifications of the veins were numerous, and prevailed
by their redness over the whiteness of the villi. In some hun-
dred villi I saw the trunk of a lacteal forming a beginning
by radiated branches. The orifices of these radii were very
distinct on the surface of the villus, as well as the radii them-
selves seen through the external surface, passing into the
trunk of the lacteal: they were full of a white fluid. There
was but one of these trunks on each villus. The orifices in
the villi of the jejunum, as Dr. Hunter himself said, (when I
asked him, as he viewed them in the microscope, how many he


* « A very copious list of writers upon the absorbents will be found in Sém-


merring’s work, De morbis vasorum absorbentium corporis humani.  Francof.
1795. 8vo.”


» “ Ant. Miller, Experimenta circa chylum. Heidelb. 1819. 8yo.”


124 THE FUNCTION


thought there might be,) were about fifteen or twenty in each
villus; and in some, I saw them still more numerous.” °

M. Cruveilhier opened a man who had died with scrofulous
disease of the mesenteric ganglia and coats of the lacteals and
intestines, the latter being ulcerated. The lacteals were dis-
tended with both a cheeselike substance and another like cream.
This circumstance displayed them fully. From the floating
margin of the valvule conniventes, innumerable lacteals ran
straight and parallel to each other; their numbers were such,
that the cellular membrane between the layers of the mucous
membrane almost seemed to consist of them. They, few or
more, united, and terminated, sometimes at nearly right angles,
in long vessels, which ran pretty much in the direction of the
valvule conniventes at their fixed margin, and each of these
passed a considerable way under the peritoneal coat without
connection, not forming a network, as is usually represented.


M. Cruveilhier states, that some papillae of the intestines have
black summits, and in these he could never detect a lacteal:
that others have yellow summits, and in the centre of such he
has found a lacteal, thread-like, conical, or bulbous, according
to its degree of distention. The papilla, each with its lacteal,
project and float about in water like the fibres of roots. He
has never detected the orifices.¢

«“ The trunks just mentioned run some inches along the surface
of the intestines, under the external coat, sometimes meandering
in an angular course, before they reach the mesentery.”

The lacteals are abundantly supplied with valves.

‘In their course through the mesentery they run into the
mesenteric glands,” (or ganglia,) “ of which there are two series.


© Anatomy of the Absorbing Vessels, p. 59s
4 Anatomie Pathologique du Corps Humain. Deuxiéme livraison, p. 1. sqq.
Paris, 1830.


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 125


The one nearer the intestines, dispersed, small, and resembling
beans in shape; the other, nearer the receptaculum chyli, large
and aggregated.”


a, Small intestine, so pushed
aside as to display the
lacteal vessels running
from them to their glands
or ganglia in the mesen-
tery.

6, The thoracic duct, ascend-
ing in front of the spine.

¢, The aorta cut short,


YOO


SNM Au ml


If a gland is well injected, the numerous ramifications of the
absorbents prevent cells from appearing, and it seems only a
closely compacted collection of lacteals; but, if injected less
minutely, cells are very evident, and distinct from the convolu-
tions and ramifications of vessels.“ ‘ If an absorbent gland of
a horse is filled with quicksilver and dried, and then carefully
slit open, the cells will be seen of a large size, and bristles may
with ease be passed through the openings by which they com-
municate.” It is imagined that the vasa inferentia (or vessels
running into a gland) pour their contents into these cells, and that
the efferentia (or the vessels running from a gland) afterwards
absorb it from them. The inferentia are fewer, in general, than
the efferentia of the same gland.

“It has been enquired whether lacteals exist also in the large
intestines, and their existence has been advocated, from the
effects of particular injections, nutrient, inebriating, &c., and also
from the circumstance that the feces, if retained for any length

* Wilson, Lectures on the Blood, &c. p- 203. Mr. Abernethy described them


in the whale, as well as in the horse. Phil. Trans. 1796.
K


126 THE FUNCTION


of time, become hard and dry. Although these arguments do
not demonstrate the absorption of genuine chyle below the valve
of Fallopius, nevertheless it is rendered probable by the visible
existence of an abundance of lymphatics in the large intestines ‘,
having the same structure and function with the lacteals ; for
these absorb lymph from the intestines¢ during the absence of
chyle.

“ But the very different structure of the internal coat of the
large intestines from that of the villous coat of the small, strongly
argues that they are not naturally intended to absorb chyle.”

Some contend that the lacteals take up nothing but chyle.

Dr. Magendie* asserts that neither he nor Hallé has ever
seen the chyle in these vessels tinged by coloured ingesta, and
that neither he nor the veterinary surgeon Flandrin ever found
any thing but chyle enter the lacteals. Lister’s experiment: of
making puppies swallow indigo, and finding the contents of the
lacteals blue, has succeeded with Musgrave, Haller, Blumen-
bachk, John Hunter, Fordyce!, and numerous others ; and J.
Hunter, in the presence of several persons, poured milk into the
intestines of a dog, and they all observed it quickly to fill
the lacteals. Among other insignificant objections, Dr. Magen-
die urges that J. Hunter should have first noticed whether the
vessels contained chyle, whereas it is expressly mentioned that,
before the milk was poured into the intestine, the lacteals were
seen distended by a nearly colourless and pellucid fluid.™

Tiedemann and Gmelin, however, have made an abundance of
these experiments with the same result as Magendie, though in
some few instances the substance introduced into the canal was
discovered in the chyle. Fiscinus and Seilar™ say exactly the
same as Tiedemann and Gmelin. They occasionally could detect
metallic salts, and even turmeric and madder, in the chyle. Fran-
chini® says, that, when the contents of the lacteals look blue,


f « Mascagni, tab. xvi.”

& « See Nuck, De inventis novis ep. Anatomica, p. 146. sq.”

h Précis Elémentaire, &c. t. iis p- 178. sq.

i Phil. Trans. No. 143. compared with No. 275.

k Instit. Physiol. § 422.

" On the Digestion of the Food, p. 122.

™ Medical Commentaries:

" Dresden. Republished in the Journ Complémentaire du Dictionnaire des
Sc. Med.

° Bologna. 1823.


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 127


they prove limpid on being let out ; and that when red substances
have been swallowed, and they look red, this arises from the
abstinence, which always causes the fluid of both lacteals and
lymphatics to become red.

“The ultimate trunks of the lacteals, arising, like the lympha-
tics, from the combination of a great number of small twigs P,
unite into the receptaculum or cisterna chyli, — the appellation by
which the lower and larger part of the thoracic or PECQUETIAN
duct is distinguished.

*« This duct is? a membranous canal,” consisting of an external
fibrous, and a smooth inner serous coat, “ slender, strong, more or
less tortuous, subject to great varieties in its course and division’,
and possessing here and there valves. At about the lowest cer-
vical vertebra, after passing the subclavian vein, it turns back
agains, and is inserted into this, being furnished with a peculiar
valve at the point of insertion.


b


a, receptaculum chyli.

6, upper end of the thoracic duct,
which bends behind

c, the internal jugular vein, and
terminates in

d, the angle of the jugular and sub-
clavian veins.

e, vena azygos.


A Aa alis LA
P ¢ Sheldon, I. c. tab. v.”’
1“ See Haller, Observationes de ductw thoracico in theatro Goltingensi facia.

Gotting. 1741. 4to.

B.S. Albinus, Tabula vasis chyliferi. LB. 1757. large folio.
Mascagni, tab. xix.”
" “ See v. c. J. C. Bohl, Vie lactee. c. h. historia naturalis. Regiom.1741. 4to.

Sommerring, Commentat. Soc. Scient. Gottingens. t. xiii. Peg lalticne
* “v Haller, Opera Minora, vol. i. tab. xii.”

K 2


128 THE FUNCTION


“ The motion of the chyle throughout its course is to be
ascribed to the contractility of its containing vessels, to their
valves, and to the vis-a-tergo.”

The force of their contraction is shown by the rupture of the
thoracic duct from over-distention when a ligature is passed
around it.t Tiedemann and Gmelin saw the thoracic duct con-
tract from exposure to air.

« The use of the valve placed at the opening of the thoracic
duct is probably not so much to prevent the influx of blood, as
to modify the entrance of the chyle into the vein, — to cause
it to enter by drops.

“ By this contrivance, fresh chyle is prevented from having ac-
cess to the blood so rapidly as to stimulate the cavities of the
heart too violently and be imperfectly and difficultly assimilated.

*« These lymphatics", which constitute the third part of the ab-
sorbent system, and resemble the lacteals in their structure and
function, are much more, and perhaps, indeed, universally, dif-
fused.* They arise principally from the cellular membrane, which
we may call the grand bond of connection between the sanguifer-
ous and absorbing system; but in great numbers likewise from
the external common integuments ¥, from the fauces, oesophagus,”
and all mucous membranes, “ the pleura, peritoneum,” and all
serous membranes, from all excretory ducts, from arteries”, and


t Sir Astley Cooper, Med. Records and Researches. A ligature of the thoracic
duct does not necessarily deprive the body of nourishment, because there are
sometimes two ducts, and sometimes one or more small trunks which unite with
it or have a different termination in the venous system.

Dr. Magendie observed in the dog, that the contents of the thoracic duct flow
but slowly ; though more quickly during compression of the abdominal viscera.

On wounding it after a meal, he obtained half an ounce in five minutes, and
they flowed for some time.

« « Consult, among others already and hereafter quoted, J. F. Meckel, De vasis
lymphaticis glandulisque conglobatis. Berol. 1757. 4to.

And Al. Monro, filius, De venis lymphaticis valvulosis. Ib. same year. 8vo.”

x Dr. W. Hunter, Medical Commentaries, P. i. p. 5. sq.


y « J, Elliotson has adduced new arguments showing that cutaneous absorption


has been doubted of late without good reason, in his notes to the English trans-
lation of these Institutions, p. 129. 3d edit. 1820.”


* Lymphatics may be injected from arteries. Lippi says that he finds many,


—_


arise from arteries; and they probably originate from them as they do from every).


other part of the body. But to imagine they arise from arteries only is incorrect ;:


and to imagine their sole function to be absorption from arteries, absurd. Dr.


wr =~


Magendie, however, attempts to revive the old opinion of lymphatics arising from»


arteries only and being destined to convey lymph from them.


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 129


from the substance of the “ thoracic and abdominal viscera,” in
short, from every part, at least, where there is moisture. 4

“‘ Their origin is similar to that of the lacteals in the intestines,
so that the radicle of each lymphatic absorbs the fluid from the
surrounding spot, as from its territory, and propels it onwards.

“ The lymphatics,” like the lacteals, “ have double valves, set
more or less thickly in different parts; they almost all enter con-
globate glands,” perfectly similar to the mesenteric, diffused
throughout the body, and aggregated in some Situations, as in the
groins and axillz : “those lymphatics which are contiguous to each
other anastomose here and there, and those found on the surface
ot certain viscera, as the lungs, liver, &c., form a most beautiful
network.” In the extremities, they run in two sets, — one deep-
seated and accompanying the arteries, the other superficial and
accompanying the subcutaneous veins.

“ Besides other aids to their functions, evident from what has
already been said, no inconsiderable assistance is derived from
the combination of great strength with thinness of their coats
by which they are enabled to support a heavy column of quick. |
silver. In the limbs, especially, the motion of the muscles,
pressing them on every side, is highly useful in increasing their
power.”

Dr. Carson argued that the thoracic vacuum, which is ex-
plained in the chapter on respiration, would not only draw the
blood along the veins, but draw it into their open mouths, thus
being an agent of absorption. He concluded that the blood of
the corpora cavernosa penis enters the veins in this way, but,
as the lymphatics only were believed the organs of absorption,
properly so called, when he first wrote, he had not a more extended
idea of the co-operation of the vacuum in producing venous
absorption. It must, however, evidently extend to every absorb-
ing vein, and if the veins absorb generally, as some now believe,
it must be general. As the great trunk of the absorbents ter-
minates in a vein, they must be circumstanced in this respect
exactly like veins, and equally subject to the influence of the
thoracic vacuum. Indeed, Dr. Barry, in a work quoted in the
chapter on respiration, found that while a cupping-glass was
applied over a wound to which poison was applied, no ab-


* « Mascagni, tab. i. ii. iii,


T. Gottl. Haase, De vasis cutis et intestinorum absorbentibus, &e. Lips. 1786,
fol. tab. i.” ;


K 3


130 THE FUNCTION


sorption occurred, no poisonous effects ensued; nor did
they, even for some time afterwards; and when they became
apparent, they instantly subsided on the re-application of the
glasses. The pressure of the rim of the glass, he says, was not
the cause of the non-appearance of poisoning, because if the
deleterious substance was passed under the skin beyond the
boundary of the glass, no ill effect occurred as long as the glass
remained over the wound: an incision between the site of the
poison and the rim destroyed the efficacy of the glass.» Yet
others have found the same result from the cupping-glass pressed
down and not exhausted, and even from the pressure of a solid
body. ¢

Dr. Barry’s experiments, however, would not prove that at-
mospheric pressure is the cause of absorption: they would merely
show its co-operation, and that the propulsive powers of the
absorbents are insufficient when opposed by the removal of it.
Pecquet, nearly two centuries ago, considered whether the chyle
was absorbed by suction; and concluded against the opinion, by
observing, that, if a ligature was placed upon the thoracic duct
or the lacteals of the mesentery, and all effect of vacuum thus
prevented, the lacteals swelled on the intestinal side ; therefore,
said he, “ non trahitur chylus sugiturve.” 4

The pressure of ordinary respiration and of muscular efforts
is also seen to drive the chyle forwards in the lacteals.

“ But their principal action, by which they take up fluids more
or less rapidly, eagerly absorbing some and absolutely rejecting
others®,” like the lacteals, “ depends upon the peculiar modifica-


> Experimental Researches, p. 102. The application of a vacuum in poisonous
wounds has been recommended from the days of Hippocrates to those of Dr.
Parry (Cases of Tetanus and Canine Hydrophobia), but its effects never shown so
beautifully as by Dr. Barry. He recommends that the cupping-glasses should be
first applied for an hour ; that, the suppression of absorption for some hours being
thus ensured, the part should be excised, and then the glasses re-applied to remove
any portion of the poison that may remain, for the vacuum was found to extract
some of the poison.

© See the translation, by Drs. Hodgkin and Fisher, of Dr. Edwards’s work,
hereafter quoted, p. 401. sq.

“ Dissertatio Anatomica de circulatione sanguinis et chyli motu, p.'76. Paris,
1651.

© « On this remarkable difference consult T. Fr. Lucr. Albrecht, Commentatio
(honoured with the Royal Prize) in gua proponitur recensus eorum alimentor. et
medicaminum, quibus, sive tubo alimentario sint ingesta, sive communibus corporis
integumentis applicata, ingressus in systema vasor. sanguifer, aut concessus a natura,
aut negatus sit. Gotting. 1806, 4to.”


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 13]


tion of their vitality, and is acribed by the very acute Brugmans
to a certain vita propria.

“ A great part of these lymphatics terminate in the thoracic
duct; not, however, those of the right arm, the right side of
the neck, the right lung, and the right portion of the diaphragm
and liver, which terminate in the subclavian vein of the same
side.” Many other connections have been seen between absorb-
ents and veins. Mr. Bracy Clarke discovered communications in
the horse between the thoracic duct and lumbar veins%, and
Mr. Abernethy, Steno, Seiler, Mertrud, &c. traced lymphatic
vessels to veins; Wepfer traced the absorbents of the broad
ligaments into the hypogastric veins; Nuck, those of the arm
into the lumbar veins; Lobstein, those of the spleen into the
vena porte; Tiedemann and Gmelin, like many before them,
have propelled mercury into the vena porte by absorbents; Mr.
Cruikshanks long ago remarked, that, in animals destroyed by
violence, the lymphatics about the spleen and in the cavity of
the abdomen, in peritoneal inflammation sometimes the lacteals,
and in peripneumony the lymphatics of the lungs, are tinged
with blood, though no extravasation has occurred, and there-
fore he believed that lymphatics arise from the internal surface
of arteries and veins"; the connection of the lymphatics with
the veins, in the four classes of vertebrated animals, has of late
years been demonstrated by Lippi, Fohmann, and Louth, and
in the Anatomical Museum of Heidelberg are numerous beau-
tiful specimens, showing this facti; Lippi* has shown that the
absorbents of the abdomen terminate abundantly in the branches
of the vena portee, as well as in the iliac, spermatic, renal, lumbar
veins, &c. in the venous trunks, and in the veins issuing from
conglobate glands, and become continuous with the capillary
veins; indeed, that many terminate in the very pelvis of the


f « Conr. Jer. Ontyd (Presidente Seb. Just. Brugmans), De causa absorptionis
per vasa lymphatica. Lugd. Bat. 1795. 8vo. p. 45.

v. Al. Van Hees, De causa functionis absorbentis systematis lymphatici. ib. 1817.
4to. p. 38.”

& Rees’s Cyclopedia : Anatomy, Veterinary.

» On the Absorbents, p. 50.

i Mr. Coulson’s edition of Mr. Lawrence’s translation of Blumenbach’s
Manual of Comparative Anatomy, p. 172.

® Tlustraxioni Jisiologiche e pathologiche del sistema linfatico-chilifero mediante
la scoperta di un gran numero di communicazioni di esso col venoso, par Regolo
Lippi. Firenze. 1825.


K 4


132 THE FUNCTION


kidney. These terminations explain circumstances which have
led many to believe in absorption by veins, and even by veins
only, and some to believe in the existence of other canals between
parts. Such are the extreme rapidity with which fluids taken
into the stomach are discharged by urine: the existence in the
urine, but not in the contents of the thoracic duct, of certain
articles which have been swallowed, as prussiate of potass: and
the existence in the blood, and not in the thoracic duct, of
others: and again the detection of others in the urine, and not in
the blood, saliva, or nasal mucus.! In Tiedemann and Gmelin’s
experiments, among a variety of substances taken, coloured,
odorous, or saline, very few could be detected in the chyle,
but many were found in the blood. Raspail says, “ The milk
of women and other females almost always contains the ve~
getable juices of their food unchanged, although these are
not to be found, I suspect, in the chyle; consequently, I
should be inclined to admit that unknown connections exist
between the breasts and the mucous surface of the stomach. I
should say the same respecting the liver, pancreas, and spleen.” ™
Three ounces of diluted alcohol were given by Dr. Magendie to
a dog; in a quarter of an hour the blood of the animal had a
decided smell of alcohol; the lymph (of the thoracic duct) had
none.

Dr. Magendie relates two experiments in which a decoction of
nux vomica, introduced into the alimentary canal, produced its
usual effects, notwithstanding the thoracic duct was tied and
ascertained to be single. In fact, Sir Everard Home, many years
ago, found substances to be taken into the circulation and into the
urine from the stomach, though the thoracic duct was tied.o In
a similar experiment, instead of the thoracic duct being tied, Dr.
Magendie separated the portion of intestine containing the solution
from the body, except in one artery and one vein. In another
experiment, not only was every part of a limb separated from the
body except the large artery and vein, but even these were
cut asunder, quills having been previously introduced into them
and fixed to carry on the circulation, and yet some upas plunged
into the paw of the animal exerted its peculiar influence, which
besides was suspended and permitted at pleasure by compress-


! Dr. Wollaston, Phil. Trans., 1811. Mm deos prB57.
” Précis de Physiol. t. ii. p. 202. sq. ° Phil. Trans. 1811.


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 133


ing or liberating the vein under the finger and thumb.? Dr. Se-
galas cut a portion of living intestine from the rest of the
canal, and passed a ligature around its blood-vessels, leaving the
absorbents free, and introduced a solution of nux vomica for an
hour without ill effect: he then liberated the vein, and the
animal was poisoned in six minutes. Dr. Magendie mentions
the following experiments, which, if to be depended upon,


P When the poison was placed in a wound, it might contaminate the blood
without being taken up by absorbing extremities of vessels; and, if Magendie is
right in believing that fluids soak through even diving solids, we see how very
readily it might all reach the blood. It is universally known, that, after death,
fluids penetrate through the various textures of the body ;—the aqueous humour
diminishes in the eye, which consequently becomes flat, the intestines near the gall-
bladder become yellow, and water poured into the stomach or intestines exudes.
(A. Kaau, Perspiratio dicta Hippocrati, 563.)—Hence, especially in a hot atmo-
sphere, if the examination of a dead subject is long delayed, parts may become so
dyed with imbibed blood, that their redness may be, and often is, mistaken for
inflammation. (See an important paper by Dr. John Davy, Med. Chir. Trans.
vol. x. ; also the more recent statements in Dr. Andral’s Précis d’_Anat. Pathologie,
t. i. p. 63. sqq.)—Dr. W. Hunter contended that this imbibition occurs also dur-
ing life, although not in the case of blood-vessels, and others admitted it. (Med.
Commentaries.)—Dr. Magendie supports the same opinion. After separating a
blood-vessel from the surrounding cellular membrane, and laying tincture of nux
vomica upon it, the animal was poisoned, and the blood within tasted bitter ; ink,
placed in the pleura of a young dog, dyed, in less than an hour, the pericardium,
heart, and intercostal muscles. Dr. Fodera introduced a solution of prussiate
of potass into the pleura, and of sulphate of iron into the abdomen, of a living
animal, when the two fluids became blue by union at the diaphragm, in five or
six minutes, and instantaneously if a galvanic current was established. (Jowr-
nal de Physiologie, t. iii.) —Still there is not the slightest reason to imagine that
the natural fluids of parts penetrate their substance during life and in a sound
condition. (See Hewson’s arguments against transudation, Experimental In-
quiry, p. ii.) —Dr. Magendie found absorption (of poisonous matters, for example,
applied to surfaces) greatly impeded on rendering the vascular system turgid by
injecting water into the veins, and equally accelerated on lessening the repletion
by blood-letting. We should expect that the greater the repletion of the san-
guineous system, the more difficulty must the contents of the absorbents have
to advance, and y. v.; and from the wise arrangements observed in every function,
we should conceive, that, supposing absorption a vital action, (as I cannot but
believe it to be, as soon as a substance has fairly entered the vessel perhaps by
mere physical attraction, ) the vessels would be less disposed to propel their con-
tents in proportion as repletion exists. How it favours, as Dr. Magendie fancies,
the idea of absorption being a mere imbibition through the coats of the absorbents,
—a notion unsupported and contradictory to established facts, —I cannot see.
(In this I fully agree with Dr. Bostock, dn Elementary System of Physiology,
vol, ii, p. 587, sqq-)


134 THE FUNCTION


would perhaps show that heterogenous fluids are taken up by
absorbents running to veins pretty readily, though rejected by
the lacteals which run to the thoracic duct. In the horse, the
usual contents of both the large and small intestines are mixed
with a large quantity of fluid that gradually decreases towards
the rectum, and is therefore absorbed as it passes along the
canal. Now, Flandrin, having collected the contents of the
lacteals, did not find them smell like this intestinal fluid, whereas
the venous blood of the small intestines had a taste distinctly
herbaceous; that of the caecum a sharp taste, and a slightly
urinous smell; and that of the colon the same qualities in a more
marked degree: the blood of other parts presented nothing ana-
logous. Half a pound of assafcetida dissolved in the same quan-
tity of honey was given to a horse, which was afterwards fed as
usual, and killed in sixteen hours. The smell of assafoetida
was perceptible in the veins of the stomach, small intestines,
and cecum; but not in the arterial blood, nor in the lymph.4
But similar experiments, with opposite results, have been made by
others. John Hunter, after pouring water coloured by indigo into
the peritoneum of an animal, saw the lymphatics filled with a blue
fluid. In the hands of MM. Magendie, Flandrin, and Dupuytren,
this experiment likewise has failed. Magendie does, however,
allow, that, in a woman who died with a collection of pus in the
thigh, the surrounding lymphatics were distended with pus to the
size of a crow’s quill; —a pretty decisive proof that lymphatics
absorb, as the lymphatics are not said to have been diseased. The
absorbents of fish have no valves except at their termination in
the red veins, and may therefore be injected from the principal
trunks: the injection passes out of the mouths of the absorbents
in numerous streams, and especially on the back, if the skate is
employed ;— another decisive fact. Peyer, Fallopius, and Kerk-
ring saw bile in lymphatics about the liver. Seiler, Walter, and
Lippi, have injected absorbents from various excretory ducts.
Mr. Kiernan always readily injects them, and sometimes even the
thoracic duct, from the hepatic ducts of the liver. Oudmann and
Schreger have more lately made many experiments, and proved
absorption by the lymphatics, though they have not proved it does
not take place also by veins. Down to Boerhaave and Haller
the doctrine that the lymphatics absorb was maintained, and it


1 Précis de Physiol. 1. c. t. ii. p. 267.


~


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 135


was first seriously attacked by Dr. William Hunter. Dr. Monro
secundus soon afterwards did the same, and commenced a very
acrimonious quarrel with Dr. William Hunter for the honour of
priority of attack. Dr. Baillie expressly states, that Dr. Hunter
had delivered such opinions six years before Dr. Monro professes
to have made his discovery, and the world has generally given
priority to Dr. Hunter. Dr. Monro had also an equally acri-
monious dispute with Mr. Hewson for the honour of the discovery
of the lymphatics in fish, but the Royal Society adjudged Hewson
the Copley medal in 1769 for the discovery. It is amusing to
reflect that the very doctrine, for the honour of having first
attacked which so much violence was shown, is now again in
high favour with some ; and that Dr. Monro would be now lauded
had he shown that Dr. Hunter only had attacked it. John
Hunter deposited various fluids in the intestines; but, although
he found manifest traces of them in the absorbents, he could
discover none in the mesenteric veins. In the experiments of
Oudmann and Schreger, substances were found in the lympha-
tics, and not in the veins.

It may be difficult not to suppose that both parties were inac-
curate in some of their negative observations.

This appears certain ;—1. That the lacteals absorb chyle; and
usually, but not invariably, nothing else. 2. That the lymphatics
absorb ; and, as they terminate so abundantly in veins, and a lym-
phatic running to a minute vein has just the same right to be
called a vein as a lymphatic, we may say that the veins absorb.
3. That lymphatics do not absorb quite indiscriminately ; and
those which run to veins, perhaps, absorb more indiscriminately
than those which continue on as lymphatics and run to absorbent
ganglia or glands.

“ From the universal existence of the lymphatics, and espe-
cially from their great number on the surface capable of absorb-
ing fluids from without, the heterogeneous nature of the lymph
must be obvious; and this is further proved by accurately ex-
amining it in different parts of a subject; v.c. that contained in
the hepatic or splenic lymphatics is perfectly different from that
in the uterine.

“ We will enumerate the principal fluids which are continually
absorbed during health, to say nothing of many different kinds of
substances taken up during disease. ‘There is, besides the chyle
separated from the faces in the small intestines, the halitus of the


136 THE FUNCTION


cavities, properly so called, especially that of the fauces and of all
the mucous membranes, the more watery part of those secreted
fluids which are retained for some time in their ducts, v. c. in the
breast, the vesicule seminales, the gall-bladder, &c. and not a
small portion of the stillatitious fluids which are applied to the
common integuments. f

“ The solids, after performing their purpose in the economy,
insensibly melt away and are absorbed, as is proved by the ab-
sorption of the greater part of the thymus gland during infancy,
of the roots of the first teeth, and of the alveoli after the second
teeth have fallen out. The constant change of the whole osseous
system, arising from the insensible renovation of the bony matter,
of which we have treated elsewhere professedly., may also. be
adduced.

“It is therefore evident, since so great a variety of matter
is absorbed, and at the same time nothing crude or improper
allowed to enter the blood, that there is a necessity for some
peculiar medium to previously subact and assimilate the various
substances.

“It appears to be the chief office of the conglobate glands, which
constitute the last part of the absorbent system, to prevent the
ill effects upon the heart of the improper admixture of crude
fluidt with the blood, by assimilating the extremely various
fluids more and more to an animal nature, by retarding their
motion, and perhaps also by superadding to them some fresh-
secreted fluid.”

This will appear from the following information given us by
chemists : —

The fluid collected from the thoracic duct scarcely differs
from milk. It is opaque and white; without smell; sweetish and


* « Consult, among others, Valer. Lud. Brera, Anatripsologia ; fourth edition,
Pavia, 1799. 2 vols. 8vo.

A. J. Chrestien, De la méthode iatroliptice. Montpell. 1803. 8vo. In German,
Gotting. 1813. 8vo.”

* & Decade 1. Collection of the crania of different nations, p. 27.”

* « Tf we consider the winding course which nature has provided for the purpose
of changing and assimilating the absorbed fluids before their admixture with the
blood, and, on the other hand, the dreadful symptoms, such as palpitation, con-
yulsions, &c., which ensue upon the artificial infusion of a minute portion of any
mild fluid into the blood, we shall be inclined to believe that those absorptions,
which Haller (De c. h. Funct. vol. i. p. 281. sq.) endeavours to prove are accome-
plished by the veins, do really take place by means of the lymphatic system.”


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 137


alkaline; and separates, like the blood, into a solid and a serous
portion : the former is insoluble, and rises to the surface sometimes
covered with an oleaginous layer. It contains the same salts as
milk, and is affected by re-agents in the same manner.” If formed
from vegetable food only, it is nearly transparent, may be kept
weeks or even months without putrefying, and affords a faintly pink
coagulum. If from animal food, it is white and opaque, begins
to putrefy in a few days, affords an opaque coagulum which
acquires a more marked pink hue by the influence of the atmo-
sphere, and throws upon its surface a white creamy substance.
The former gives three times as much carbon as the latter; but
the latter, being so much richer gives much more carbonate of
ammonia and heavy fixed oil, when subjected to the destructive
distillation.*

Chyle collected from lacteals is whiter, coagulates less per-
fectly, or not at all, and does not acquire a red colour by ex-
posure to the air , so that sanguification proceeds gradually
as the chyle passes towards the left subclavian vein.

Although some albumen is discovered actually in the duo-
denum, and, as Dr. Prout allows, even in the stomach if animal
food has been taken, and some fibrin in the first lacteals, the
contents of the absorbents are found to possess more and more
of these substances in proportion to their progress towards
the left subclavian vein. The chyle contains a certain fatty
matter, which is considered as incipient albumen, and, in pro-
portion as this decreases, does the quantity of fibrin and albumen
increase.

The pink colour, acquired by the coagulum of chyle when
exposed to the atmosphere, shows the use of the lungs in san-
guification.

White globules exist in the chyle even at a very early period
of its formation, and these most probably it is that become co-


u Raspail, |. c. p. 356.

x Dr. Marcet, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. vi. His observations were of course
made upon the fluid obtained from brutes. Yet MM. Macaire and Marcet, of
Geneva, say that the chyle as well as the blood of herbivorous and carnivorous ani-
mals is identical in its ultimate analysis ; that whatever food an animal habitually
eats, the quantity of nitrogen is essentially the same in both the chyle and blood.
There is less nitrogen, they say, in chyle than in blood. Mém. de la Soc. de
Phys. et d’ Hist. Nat. de Genéve, t. v- p. 389.

Y Emmert, Annales de Chimie, t. 1xxx.
2 Dr. Prout, in Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy. 1819. p. 274.


138 THE FUNCTION


loured when the chyle grows pink by the action of the air. There
are also much larger white particles in the chyle, appearing to
be formed of the caseous-like and oily principles, and, being in-
soluble in the serum, naturally assume the globular form. #

Dr. Marcet had reason to believe that the appearance of creamy
matter floating in the serum of blood occurs most frequently when
the food is chiefly animal, and when therefore rich chyle is poured
into the blood faster than it can be assimilated. The serum at
first appears milky; but it gradually becomes clear, from the
creamy matter separating and rising to the surface.

The coagulum of the fluid of the thoracic duct is much less
firm than that of blood; and after a few days, if allowed to remain
in a separate vessel, it passes almost entirely to the fluid state.
Vauquelin regards it as unfinished fibrin, something between al-
bumen and fibrin.

I once saw a young married woman whose urine contained
very large coagula of chyle. She always dined at noon. In the
evening the coagula were white; in the morning pale with pink
streaks. After fasting twenty-four hours at my request, the coa-
gula still appeared in the urine, extremely pale, and showing
more pink streaks: and this is the more worthy of notice, as others,
we see, have found chyle and lymph to grow reddish from absti-
nence (p.124.) She had been some months in this way, was
in very fair health, and had a great appetite, and perhaps some
other general symptoms of diabetes; but there was no sugar in
the urine. Notwithstanding the fluid discharged seemed to
present as much coagulum as it did urine, the quantity of chyle
proved on drying to be very minute, and from its looseness to
have been extremely distended by the urine. As this was a
state of disease, I draw no inference from the case respecting
the time necessary for the change of chyle to blood. She would
not allow me to take any blood from the arm for observation.

Similar cases have been published by Dr. Prout», and there may
be several on record¢, but the only one besides of which I have read
is quoted in Shenkius. ‘I saw,” says the author whom he quotes,
(in Castro Itri, Comitatus Sundorum,) “a young man, thirty years
of age, who daily made a considerable quantity of urine, depo-
siting a white substance like the curd of milk, sufficient to fill


* Dr. Prout, in Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy. 1819. p. 275.
> A Treatise on Gravel, &c. 2d ed. 1825.
© See Ephem., Dec. 1. ann. i. obs.89.


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 139


a common pot de chambre, besides the urine which was above
it. He was in perfect health, not experiencing the slightest ill
effect.”

Lymph from the hind extremities of a horse was found by Em-
mert to be white, with straw-coloured globules, to contain rather
less albumen, to coagulate more imperfectly, and become less
easily red on exposure to air, than the contents of the thoracic
duct.e

According to the recent observations of Tiedemann and Gmelin,
the chyle has no fibrin, so as scarcely to coagulate, nor any red
particles, before it passes through the mesenteric: glands ; but
immediately afterwards, and especially after it is mixed with the
lymph of the spleen, —a fluid abounding with them and fibrin,
—presents both, and still more copiously than the lymph of the
extremities.

No fatty matter is discoverable in the lymph, nor indeed in the
chyle if the animal fasts or takes food destitute of fat. The fatty
matter is merely diffused through the chyle, and found even in
the blood after butter has been eaten.

Ligature of the choledochus they found to augment the
quantity of fibrin and red particles, and to diminish that of fatty
matter in the chyle. ’

Dr. Prout has just published his belief in something like the
opinion always entertained by Blumenbach, that the lymph, on
account of being a highly animalised fluid, contributes greatly to
the formation of blood. He goes farther than Blumenbach:
yet perhaps Blumenbach’s opinion may, in reality, though not


* Observat. Med. rariores, lib. iii. obs. 27. Dr, Charles Smith, of New Jersey,
relates an example of ascites in a boy twelve years of age, where the fluid accu-
mulated was of a chalky white colour, had pretty nearly the smell, taste, and
appearance of milk, and threw up good cream after standing a night. Between
seven and eight quarts of this were twice removed by tapping. Philos. Mag.,
vol. ix. p. 168.

Shenkius is generally thought a credulous collector of incredible cases, and
no doubt some of his histories as well as of his opinions are ridiculous. But
careful modern observation discovers facts precisely similar to the greater number
that he has collected. I might have doubted the history just related, more espe-
cially the good health of the patient, had not the case of the woman occurred to
me. For example, he gives some instances of black urine made by persons in
perfect health, and Dr. Marcet has published two such (Transactions of the
Medical and Chirurgical Society, vol. xii.). Dr. Prout showed me a specimen of
urine from one of these, and a specimen of blue urine, containing indigo.

© See also Vauquelin, Annales de Chimie, t. 1xxxi. 181.


140 THE FUNCTION


in words, amount to his.‘ Dr. Prout conceives that “a sort of


digestion is carried on in all parts of the body, to fit for absorption
and future appropriation those matters that have been already assi-
milated.’ Wis chief reasons for this opinion are — 1. That, if the
contents of the absorbents were really and wholly excrementitious,
they would be rejected, and not poured into the blood. 2. If they
are highly animalised, we have a reason for their admixture with
the crude chyle before it is poured into the blood. 3. The gra-
dual developement of the staminal principles of organised bodies,
by repeated organising processes, agrees with the general truth
of the operations of nature being never abrupt, but always slow
and gradual; and matters already assimilated to the body must
be better adapted for its immediate use than the imperfectly as-
similated chyle. 4. Many animals can and do live for a con-
siderable time on their own bodies. *

I agree entirely in these reasons, and consider it a great mistake
to regard the lymph as a collection of excrementitious matters.


f Blumenbach’s words are, — “‘ Since the blood is a peculiar fluid, various
means are required to assimilate the foreign fluids which pass to the thoracic
duct. We must remember that a great part of the lymph has been derived from
the substance of the viscera and other soft parts formerly secreted from the blood,
and therefore already imbued with an animal nature.” (Inst. Physiol., §§ 446.
448.)—Raspail also says,—‘“* Lymph is alcaline, and, in fact, to be considered as
a variety of chyle or colourless blood.” p. 455.

® Bridgewater Treatise.


Dr. Magendie denied the existence of lymphatics in nearly all birds, but has
been amply refuted by Dr. Louth and many others. Birds have few lymphatic
ganglia; and amphibia and fish still fewer (Blumenbach’s Manual of Comp.
Anat. translated, p. 174.) ; and invertebrate animals have no lymphatic vessels.
These, therefore, are considered a refinement of organisation, and lymphatic
ganglia a still greater. Professor Miiller of Bonn has lately discovered in the
lymphatic system, under the skin of the frog, and several other amphibia, /ymph-
hearts, pulsating regularly, though not simultaneously either with each other
or the blood-heart, and destined to advance the lymph in its vessels, Phil.
Trans. 1833.


caeeeneeneeenemeeeneeeeeeee ee


A short account of the first discovery of the absorbent system may be accept-
able at the close of this section.

Hippocrates knew that the nutritive portion of the contents of the alimentary
canal was conveyed by certain vessels to the system. Erasistratus actually saw
the lacteals containing chyle — dprnpias, yakantos mAnpeic. From Galen we learn


OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS. 141


that they were known also to Herophilus. From the year 150 to 1622 no ad-
vance was made, except that in 1563 Eustachius discovered the thoracic duct, but
he remained ignorant of its use. In 1622, Aselli in Italy saw the lacteals by
chance, when demonstrating the recurrent nerves to some friends. Thinking
they were nerves, he at first paid no attention to them; but, soon observing tat
they did not pursue the same course as the nerves, and “ astonished at the novelty
of the thing, he hesitated for some time in silence,”’ while all the circumstances of
the controversy and quarrels of anatomists passed before his view. He had by
chance been reading Costus on this subject the day before, and, in order to ex-
amine the matter further, he “took a sharp scalpel to cut one of those chords,
but had scarcely struck it when,” he continues, “ I perceived a liquor white as
milk, or rather like cream, to leap out. At this sight, I could not contain myself
for joy, but, turning to the by-standers, Alexander Tadinus and the senator Sep-
talius, I cried out E%pnxa! with Archimedes, and at the same time invited them
to look at so rare and pleasing a spectacle, with the novelty of which they were
much moved. But I was not long permitted to enjoy it, for the dog now ex-
pired, and, wonderful to tell, at the same instant the whole of that astonishing
series and congeries of vessels, losing its brilliant whiteness, that fluid being
gone, in our very hands and almost before our eyes, so evanished and disap-
peared, that hardly a vestige was left to my most diligent search.” The next day
he procured another dog, but could not discover the smallest white vessel. « I
now,” he says, with the same admirable naiveté, ‘‘ began to be downcast in my
mind, thinking to myself that what had been observed in the first dog must be
ranked among those rare things which, according to Galen, are sometimes seen
in anatomy.” At length he recollected that the dog had been opened “ athirst
and unfed,” and therefore opened a third, after feeding him “ to satiety.” « Every
thing was now more manifest and brilliant than in the first case.” He gave his
whole attention to the subject, and was so diligent that not a week, or certainly
not a month, passed without a living dissection of dogs, cats, lambs, hogs, and
cows; and he even bought a horse, and opened it alive. “ A living man, which
Erasistratus and Herophilus of old did not fear to anatomise, I confess I did not
open.”

Notwithstanding this discovery of distinct chylous vessels, a large number of
high authorities adhered firmly to the old opinion of Galen, that they were only
mesenteric vessels. ‘ There is not one among the doctors,” we read in a letter
of ‘Thomas Bartholin, written at Montpellier, during his journey to Italy, “ who
acknowledges the lacteal veins, so wedded are they to the authority of Galen, for
which they contend as pro aris et focis, and disregard the experiments of the
moderns.” Unluckily, he did not trace the lacteals to the left subclavian vein,
but fancied they went to the liver, distributing the chyle through it for sanguifica~
tion ; this organ, according to the established doctrine, receiving the chyle from
the mesenteric arteries and veins to convert it into blood.

In 1649, Pecquet, a physician at Dieppe, was removing the heart of a dog,
when he noticed a quantity of white fluid pouring from the upper cava mixed
with blood. He at first thought he had opened some strange abscess ; and, after
pressing first upon one part and then upon another, he compressed the mesentery,
whose lacteals were full of chyle, when instantly a large quantity of this poured

L


142 THE FUNCTION OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS.


from the superior cava. He traced the lacteals to the thoracic duct, and thus
overthrew the doctrine of the liver being the great seat of hamatosis.

Of course, there was as great an outcry against this innovation in doctrine, as
there had been against the existence of lacteals, and even Harvey, who was now
nearly eighty years of age, could not at once loosen himself from the bonds of
early prejudice, and Thomas Bartholin, whose eyes had always been open to im-
provement in medicine, still thought that perhaps the finer parts of the chyle went
by the new ducts to the chest, ** while the grosser, needing a larger concoction,
enter the liver.”

About eighty years after the discovery of Asellius, Rudbeck, professor at
Upsal, or Thomas Bartholin who was professor at Copenhagen and son of Cas-
par Bartholin, or Joliff, an English student, discovered the lymphatics.” Rud-
beck says, he first happened to see them while examining the hemorrhoidal
vessels of a dog, Jan. 27.1651. He published in 1653. Bartholin, that he
first chanced to see them while dissecting a dog, Dec. 15, 1651, but did not
notice them particularly till Feb. 28. 1652. He published in 1653. As to
Joliff, we only read in Glisson, that, at the beginning of June, 1652, going to
Cambridge for his doctor’s degree, he showed them to Glisson, who was then
professor of medicine. Glisson published in 1654; Joliff never published, and
probably had learnt the continental discovery while travelling. Bartholin is
thought to have received a hint of Rudbeck’s discovery. Haller gives the dis-
covery to Rudbeck.


h See an interesting history of these discoveries, by Dr. Meigs, Philadelphia
Journal, 1825. No.2. New series.


143


CHAP. X,


THE BLOOD.


Tue fluid into which the chyle and lymph are converted, is blood.
‘The dlood is” a slightly alcaline fluid, of a red colour; “ of a
peculiar odour; its taste is rather saline and nauseous; its tem-
perature about 96° of Fahrenheit; it is glutinous to the touch;
its specific gravity, though different in different individuals, may
be generally estimated as 1050, water being 1000.” Blood from
arteries is florid, and from veins of a dark red which the trans-
lucence of the venous coats renders bluish when seen through
them: and the specific gravity of the former is said by Dr. John
Davy to be 1049, and of the latter 1051.2 ‘ When fresh drawn
and received into a vessel, it exhibits the following appears
ances >; —

“‘ At first, especially while still warm, it emits a vapour
which,” “if collected in a bell glass, forms drops resembling dew,
of a watery nature, but affording a nidorous smell, which is most
remarkable in the blood of carnivorous animals, is peculiar, and
truly animal. Much of this watery liquor still remains united
with the other parts of the blood, hereafter to be mentioned.

“ In the mean time the blood” “ begins to separate into two
portions. A coagulum is first formed, from the surface of which
exudes, as it were, a fluid of a yellowish slightly red colour,
denominated serum: the more abundantly this exudes, the greater
is the contraction of the glutinous coagulum, which has received
the appellations of crassamentum; and, from some resemblance
to the liver in colour and texture, of hepar sanguineum ; of pla-
centa; and, from the circumstance of its being surrounded by
the serum, of insula.”

Some have thought that heat is evolved during its coagula-


* Journal of Science and Arts, No. iv.

> « J, Martin Butt, De spontanea sanguinis separatione. Edin. 1760. 8vo.
reprinted in Sandiford’s Thesawrus, vol. ii. J. H. L. Bader, Experimenta circa
sanguinem. Argent. 1788. 8yo.”


Tie


144 THE BLOOD.


tion’; others have denied this.4 M. Raspail says that the tem-
perature falls.¢

“The crassamentum may, by agitation or repeated ablution,
be easily separated into two constituent parts, — the cruor, which
gave to the blood its purple colour —and the fibrin, which on
washing is forsaken by the cruor, and called, from its greater
solidity, the basis of the crassamentum.

‘«« Besides the watery fluid first mentioned, these are the three
constituents of the blood, viz. the serum, the cruor, and the
fibrin, of each of which we shall presently treat more particu-
larly. These, however, while perfectly recent, and in possession
of their native heat, are intimately mixed, and form an equable,
homogeneous fluid. Their relative proportion is astonishingly di-
versified, according to age, temperament, diet, and similar cireum-
stances which constitute the peculiar health of each individual.”

The quantity of blood in a well-formed adult is estimated by
“ Allen, Mullen, and Abildgaard, at little more than 8 pounds;
by Harvey, at 9; Borelli, 20; Haller, 30; Riolan,40; Hamberger,
80; and Keil, 100. The former are evidently nearer the truth.”
M. Le Canu says, that the quantity of its water, in a healthy per-
son, varies from 853-135 to 778-625 in 1000 parts, and the medium
quantity is greater in females and in the phlegmatic tempera-
ment: of its albumen, from 78-270 to 57:890, and has no relation
to sex, age, or temperament : of its fibrin dry, from 1°360 to 2-236,
is the greatest in the young or middle-aged, in the sanguine tem-
perament, and in the inflammatory state ; least in the phlegmatic
temperament, the aged, and under congestion or hemorrhage: of
its globules, from 148°450 to 68'349 — being the most remarkable
variation — is greatest in males, the same between the ages of
twenty and sixty, much greater in the sanguineous than the
phlegmatic temperament, and much less after losses of blood,
which do not affect the quantity of the albumen.

© Dr. Gordon, Annals of Philosophy, vol. iv. Scudamore, dn Essay on the
Blood, 1824, p. 68. sqq.

4 Dr. J. Davy, Journal of Science and Arts, No. iv. © L.2.p. B61,

* Journal de Pharmacie, Sept. and Oct. 1831. In various diseases, Dr. Clanny,
of Sunderland, and Dr. Stevens, have found the salts of the blood exceedingly
deficient. In fevers, the proportion of water increases as the disease advances,
and that of the salts diminishes ; and it is said that, in the latter stages, the ex-
hibition of neutral salts is very beneficial, as recommended by Boerhaave, Hux-
ham, &c. in the early part and middle of the last century, and Dr. Stevens at
present in his Observat. on the healthy and diseased Properties of the Blood. Lon-


don, 1832, Dr. Priestley remarked that different specimens of blood differed in
their susceptibility of change of colour from air. Ph. Tr. 1776,


— «


THE BLOOD.


145


The blood, according to M. Le Canu, consists of the following
constituents : —


Ist Analysis. | 2d Analysis.
Water - “ - 4 - | 780°145 | '786°590
Fibrin i . * 9100 | 3°565
Albumen - = - 65:090 69°415.
Colouring matter - - =| 133-000 | 119°626
Crystallisable fatty matter - ~ 2-430 — 4°300
Oily matter - - - - 1310 2-270
Extractive matter soluble in alcohol and
water - . - - 1-790 1920
Albumen combined with soda_ - - 1-965 2-010
Chloruret of sodium and _ potassium,
alkaline phosphate, sulphate, and
sub-carbonates - - - 8°370 7-304:
Subcarbonate of lime and magnesia,
phosphates of lime, magnesia, and
iron, peroxide of iron - - 2-100 1:414
Loss - - ~ - 2-400 2°586
1000-000 | 1000-000


When blood, venous or arterial, is immediately placed in the
vacuum of an air pump £, or coagulates in the air}, or is received
from a vein into pure hydrogeni, it emits a large quantity of car-
bonic acid gas. Professor Brande obtained two cubic inches from
every ounce of blood; Sir C. Scudamore, less than half a cubic inch
from six ounces.“ The quantity is said to be much greater after
a meal, and much less if the blood is buffy.


® Vogel, Annales de Chimie, t. xciii.

» Professor Brande, Phil: Trans. 1818. p. 181.

i Dr. Stevens, London Medical Gazette, 1834, No. xxviii.
id. 1833, No. xxvi.

* Phil. Trans..1820, p. 6.” 1.,c. ps 107.

Blumenbach, found, in 1812, that a small portion of the purest air, infused
into the jugular vein, excited palpitations, drowsiness, convulsions; and, if the
quantity was a little increased, even death ensued. (Medicin. Biblioth. vol. i.
p- 177.) Bichat observed the same effects in his experiments. (Journal de
Santé, §-c. de Bordeaux, t. ii. p. 61.) But Dr. Magendie stated, in 1809, to the
Institute, that this assertion is incorrect. If air is injected rapidly, the animal
screams and dies in a moment: but if slowly, he informs us that no inconve-


Mr. Hoffman,


nience results, and that some animals bear the injection of enormous quantities

without perishing. (Précis Elémentaire de Physiologie. 2d edition, 1825. t. ii.

P: 433. sqq.) Dr. Blundel injected five drams into the femoral vein of a very
Eg


146 THE BLOOD.


Chevreul, Lassaigne, and others discover a yellow colouring
matter like that of the bile and urine. Dumas and Prevost and
others discern something like urea, which M. Raspail suggests
may be the effect of their experiments, as Woehler discovers urea
to be a cyanite of ammonia, and capable of artificial produc-
tion by passing cyanogen (bicarburet of nitrogen) through am-
moniacal gas. 7

« The serum is a peculiar fluid, the chief cause of the viscidity
of the blood, and easily separable by art into different constituent
principles. If subjected to a temperature of 150° Fahr., a por-
tion is converted into a white scissile substance, resembling
boiled white of egg,” and is in truth albumen; the watery por-
tion which remains was termed serosity by Cullen, and contains
various substances.

If mixed with six parts of cold water, serum does not coagulate
by heat.

Under the influence of the galvanic pile, soda collects at the
negative wire, and the albumen coagulates at the positive, on
account, M. Raspail says, probably, of the decomposition of the
salts and also of the water, and the consequent oxygenation of
every thing at the positive pole, where the oxygen collects ; and


small dog, with only temporary inconvenience, and subsequently three drams of
expired air even without much temporary disturbance. (Med. Chir. Trans. 1818,
p- 65. sq.) Nysten has established that many gases soluble in the blood, as
oxygen and and carbonic acid, may be thrown into the circulating system in very
large quantity without serious inconvenience ; while danger often ensues upon
the introduction of those which are sparingly or not at all soluble in the blood.
(Magendie, 1. c.)

In the same way, if about 15 grains of bile are rapidly introduced into the
crural vein of an animal, instant death occurs ; but, if slowly, no inconvenience
results. This quantity may be even rapidly injected into the vena portz without
injury, and so likewise may atmospheric air, probably because the extreme sub-
division of the vessel acts like slowness of introduction, — causes the complete
diffusion and dilution of the bile, and solution of the air, before it reaches the
heart.

If warm water is introduced (an equal quantity of blood being first removed,
to prevent over distension) mere debility ensues, proportionate to the quantity ;
but if oils, or mucilages, or an inert impalpable powder, are injected, life is at
once destroyed by the obstruction of the minute ramifications of the pulmonary
artery. (Magendie, Journal de Physiologie, t. i., and 1. ¢. t. ii. p. 260.) Poisons
act powerfully if injected into the veins ; and, as will presently be mentioned,
medicines, thus introduced, exert their specific powers on the different organs.


THE BLOOD. 147


of the increase of temperature attending the decomposition of
organised bodies. !
M. Le Canu gives the following analysis of serum : —


Ist Analysis. 2d Analysis.
a St.


_
Water - - - =| 906-00 | 901-00
Albumen - - - - 78°00 de 81°20
Animal matter soluble in water and al-
cohol - - - - 1:69 9:05
Albumen combined with soda = - 2:00 55
Crystallisable fatty matter - - 1°20 Z:10
Oily matter - - - - 1:00 1-30
Muco-extractive matter - : was - lei
Extractive matter soluble in alcohol and
acetate of soda - - - — =o
Hydrochlorate of soda and potas - 6:00 5°32
Sub-carbonate and phosphate of soda and
sulphate of potass - - - 2°10 2-00
Phosphate of lime, magnesia, and iron,
with sub-carbonate of lime and magnesia 0°91 0°87
Loss . - - - - 1:00 161


1000:00 | 1000°00


The cruor consists of globules; and Mr. Hewson asserts that
they have a nucleus and an enveloping coloured portion.™ The
nucleus is said to be colourless: perhaps about =55,5 of an inch
in diameter, and the whole globule nearly one fourth larger..
M. Raspail says, that, though the form and dimensions of the par-
ticles are different in different species, and nearly the same in the
same individual, they still vary within very narrow limits in in-
dividuals, and the dimensions in even the same drop of blood,
especially if not examined immediately that the blood is taken
from the vessels. In man, he says, they are from +45 to z1, of a
millimetre, flat and circular. MM. Prevost and Dumas believe °
that the internal portion is spherical, but the outer or vesicular, as
Hewson noticed ?, flattened. The inner part, according to these


Mec. 202.
™ Experimental Inquiries, part. 3. p. 16. 1777.
n On these measurements consult Phil. Trans. 1818. Dr. Young’s Medical


Literature, p. 571. sqq Prevost and Dumas, Annales de Chimie, Nov. 1821.
Hodgkin and Lister, Ph. Mag. Aug. 1827. Particularly M. Raspail.

© ],c. Hodgkin and Lister find no nucleus. A

P le. p. 8. Sq. Hewson says, that dilution with water, or a change towards


L A


148 THE BLOOD.


enquirers, rolls in the outer, and, in the frog’s web and bat’s
wing, at least, the whole particle is carried, steadily balanced,
in the current of blood, sometimes flat, sometimes oblique,
sometimes gently turning upon itself, and lengthening if driven
into a vessel of diameter hardly sufficient for its admission; the
old assertion of Reichel 4 being thus corroborated. Kalk, Tre-
viranus, and others have noticed a rotatory motion of the entire
particles, each at a distance from the other; and Professor
Schultz of Berlin has confirmed their observations. But M. Raspail
considers these motions as accidental and mechanical results, such
as have deceived so many microscopic investigators. Mr. Bauer
says he has discovered a third set of smaller colourless glo-
bules in the blood, 5/55 of an inch in diameter, which appear
to belong to the fibrin, and are accordingly denominated lymph
globules; and it is thought probable that the central globule of
the red particles is the same, and thus really fibrin. Colourless
globules gradually form also in serum.t The globules of pus
also are asserted to form gradually, and it to be originally an
homogeneous fluid.

The globules of the blood, independent of their covering of
red substance, M. Raspail regards as mere particles of albumen
not dissolved in the serum, and, after proving their albuminous
nature, shows how albumen dissolved in an excess of con-
centrated hydrochloric acid forms minute, spherical, equal glo-
bules, in proportion as the decanted acid spontaneously evapor-
ates, scarcely distinguishable from the globules of the blood.
One takes breath while reading M. Raspail, after the strange
and varying statements of so many experimenters, especially of
those who use microscopes.


putrefaction, makes the vesicles giobular, and that farther putrefaetion breaks them
down, The effects of dilution with water are, according to Raspail, extension,
sometimes spherical, sometimes elliptic, and at length complete solution.

1 G, Chr. Reichel, De sanguine ejusgue motu experimenta. Lips. 1767.
p: 27. fig. 3. g. g.

" Phil. Trans. 1819. p. 2. sq. The globules of milk, healthy pus, and chyle,
in different animals, are said by Prevost and Dumas to be of the same form and
dimensions; and likewise those of the muscular fibre, and of albumen, when co-
agulated, for particles, we are told, are not previously seenin it. But Dr. Hodg-
kin finds the particles of pus to be quite irregular in size and figure, and those of
milk, though globules, to be some twice, some only one tenth, the size of the par-
ticles of the blood. Phil. Mag. Aug. 1827, and translation of Dr, Edward’s
work. I shall refer to M, Raspail in the proper place.


a


THE BLOOD. 149


If arterial blood is exposed to ammoniacal gas, it becomes of
a cherry red; if to gaseous oxide of carbon, the deutoxide of
azote, or carburetted hydrogen, of a violet red; if to carbonic
acid, though covered by two inches depth of serum, azote, hy-
drogen, or protoxide of azote, of a brown red; if to arseniuretted
or sulphuretted hydrogen, of a deep violet inclining to a greenish
brown; if to hydrochloric gas, of a chestnut brown; if to sulphu-
reous gas, of a blackish brown; and if to chlorine, of a blackish
brown inclining to a greenish white.t These gases are of course
partly absorbed or decomposed. ‘The dark colour produced in
arterial blood by carbonic acid or azotic gas takes place if blood
is placed in vacuo¥, though less rapidly and deeply than if ex-
posed to hydrogen gas, and in vacuo, though covered by two
inches and a half of serum.* Arterial blood extravasated or in-
cluded between two ligatures in an artery’, nay, left in contact with
oxygen, gradually acquires the same dark colour, and no oxygen
will afterwards render it scarlet. Acids, if stronger than just
enough to neutralise a weak salt, and alcalies, darken arterial
blood. If deprived of all saline matter by washing, the reddest
clot of blood becomes black, and will not grow florid by oxygen:
whereas if saline matter is added, it becomes florid, even in an
atmosphere of carbonic acid.”

Venous blood acquires a florid colour by exposure to oxygen
or atmospheric air (and it does so even when covered by a blad-
der, provided this is moistened*), carbonic acid gas is formed,
and an equal volume of oxygen gas disappears, and this the
more if the temperature is high. If exposed to nitrous oxide, it
becomes of a brighter purple, and much of the gas is absorbed ;
carbonic acid gas renders it darker, and is a little absorbed:
nitrogen and hydrogen have the same effect. Electricity blackens
the blood, and, according to Dr. Stevens, the poison of the rattle-
snake, and other poisons, though floating only in the air. Putre-
faction makes the blood dark. Alcaline and some other neutral


Ss Dr. Priestley, Ph. Tr. 1776.

t Raspail, 1. c. p. 361.

" Beccaria, who experimented at the request of Cigna. Misc. Taur, t. i.

x Dr. Priestley.

y Hunter, On the Blood, p. 65. sq-

z Dr. Stevens.

A layer of serum or milk does not prevent this change of colour, while a
layer of water, saliya, and every other animal fluid, or oil, does. Dr, Priestley.

> Dr. Stevens.


150 THE BLOOD.


salts, make venous blood florid®; and this, if added in consider-
able quantities, even when the blood is exposed, not to oxygen
or air, but to a blackening gas.

Dr. Stevens seems to have proved that the colouring matter of
the blood is really black, and acquires redness only by the action
of the salts upon the hematosine; and that venous blood is of a dark
red through the presence of carbonic acid, and but for the salts
would be black. If blood is black from want of salts, very little
of them will make it florid; if it is black from the presence of
carbonic acid, azote, &c., the quantity of salts requisite will be
proportionate to the quantity of the blackening agent. Oxygen in-
directly renders blood florid, by removing the carbonic acid gas,
and thus allowing the salts of the serum to brighten it; for if
these are washed away, we see that oxygen has no effect, and we
see that in proportion to the disappearance of oxygen is carbonic
acid evolved. The same interchange of carbonic acid takes place
in hydrogen, and the blood remains black; but then hydrogen
blackens blood as well as carbonic acid. It is possible that oxygen
may have the property of making blood florid, just as hydrogen,
nitrogen, carbonic acid, &c. have to make it dark. But if it have,
still it does not make the blood florid unless salts be present,
and carbonic acid always appears ; and when blood is darkened by
putrefaction, so that air will not make it florid, the addition of
most neutral salts instantly brightens it. Such are the state-
ments of Dr. Stevens.

Berzelius finds the colouring particles only concerned in these
changes. Prevost and Dumas found more fibrin and red parti-
cles in arterial than in venous blood; and the venous must contain
a larger quantity of carbonic acid, and the arterial an abun-
dance of oxygen: Macaire and Marcet, on wltimate analysis,
find about five per cent more oxygen in arterial, and five per
cent more carbon in venous, blood. 4%

It is in the red covering of the particles, or hematosine, as the
colouring matter is now called, that the iron of the blood exists,
Berzelius informs us that serum, although able to dissolve a
small portion of the oxides, not indeed of the phosphates, of
iron, does not acquire ared colour by their addition, and that
he has never discovered iron nor lime in the entire blood, al-
though both are so abundant in its ashes. He concludes that


* Boyle, Ph. Tr. 1666-7. Haller, El. Phys. lib. v. 1757. Hewson, Ph. Tr.
1770. Dr. Priestley, Ph. Tr. 1776. He adds that the urine makes blood florid
because of its saline nature. Dr. Stevens, more minutely, I, ¢. 1832.

4 Mém. de la Soc. Phys. et @ Hist. Nat. de Geneve, t. v» p. 400.


THE BLOOD. 151


the blood contains the elements of phosphate of iron and of lime,
and of carbonate of lime, and also of phosphate of magnesia,
united in a manner different from their combination in the salts.
M. Raspail, seven years ago, showed that certain coagulable sub-
stances will protect a metal from the strongest re-agent — that
a mixture of oil and the salts of iron will afford no signs of the
metal till some days after it has been placed in acidulated ferro-
chyazate of potass. Rose obtained the same result on mixing
albumen or gelatine with peroxide of iron. But Dr. Engelhart
has shown iron to exist in blood, by the usual liquid tests, after
passing a stream of chlorine through a solution of red particles. ¢

“‘ The last constituent principle of the blood to be noticed, is
the plastic lymph, formerly confounded with the serum. ‘This has
been called the basis of the crassamentum, the glutinous part, the
fibre or fibrous matter of the blood.” It is now termed fibrin.

«Tt is properly denominated plastic, because it affords the chief
materials from which the similar parts, especially the muscles, are
immediately produced; nourishes the body throughout life; re-
pairs wounds and fractures in an extraordinary manner ; fills up
the aree of large blood-vessels when divided‘; and forms those
concretions which accompany inflammations, and that remark-
able deciduous membrane found in the recently impregnated
uterus for the attachment of the ovum.”


We will now consider the coagulation of the fibrin more
minutely.

Blood coagulates when it has escaped from the body, whether
warm or cold, in the air or in vacuo, diluted within certain limits
or undiluted, at rest or in motion. Within the vessels, rest, which
causes a cessation of intercourse between the motionless portion
and the general mass, always disposes it to coagulate. Yet its


© Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, Jan. 1827. Engelhart’s Essay
obtained the prize at Gottingen in 1825.

f« T, I. D. Jones, On the process employed by nature in suppressing the he-
morrhage from divided &c. arteries. London. 1805. 8vo. ‘Translated into
German, and supplied with notes by G. Spangenberg. Hanoy. 1813, 8vo.”

& « Such are those spurious membranes found exuded on the surface of inflamed
viscera, v.c. those cellular connections between the lungs and pleura after
peripneumony, and the tubes observed within the bronchia afte? croup ; such also
are those artificial ones, called, from their inventor, Ruyschian, and made by
stirring fresh blood about with a stick.” Although they are fibrinous, they contain
a fluid in their cells that is albuminous.


152 THE BLOOD.


coagulation, after escape from the body, is said to be accele-
rated by motion, a high temperature, and a vessel calculated to
preserve its temperature, by a vacuum, and by the stream from
the blood-vessel being slow, and vice versd: in short, by every cir-
cumstance which favours the escape of carbonic acid gas, and to
be proportioned to the quantity of carbonic acid gas evolved; this
being evolved during the coagulation, and ceasing to escape
when the coagulation is complete." Galvanism and oxygen gas
raise its temperature and hasten coagulation, while carbonic acid
gas, azote, and hydrogen, have the opposite effects. Dilute mi-
neral acids coagulate the blood: alcalies and their carbonates
retain it fluid.

The coagulation of the blood is ascribed by J. Hunter to its
lifei; by Mr. Thackrahk, on the contrary, to its death, as the
separation of a portion from the mass, by escape from a vessel, is
likely to kill it if alive; as every change likely to impair life
promotes coagulation, for example, debility, fainting; and as
blood frozen, and therefore likely to be killed if alive, and again
thawed, instantly coagulates. But the coagulation appears, in
most instances, if Sir C. Scudamore’s experiments be accurate,
though others have not found the same results 1, attributable
merely to the escape of carbonic acid; and as coagulated blood
or fibrin (and the coagulated part of effused blood is fibrin)
becomes vascular, one can hardly, if the fluid is alive, regard a
coagulum as necessarily dead. a

Large quantities of blood are found fluid in every dead body,
showing that simple loss of vitality is not sufficient to cause coa-
gulation. Indeed, the blood of the various parts of the heart and
vessels is found, most frequently, in opposite states, fluid in one
part, coagulated in another ; yet it is all equally dead. From all
these contradictory circumstances, I regard the coagulation of the
blood as quite unconnected with its vitality or lifelessness, and as
entirely a chemical result. That it, however, is influenced by the
vital properties of the containing vessels is possible, but these
may operate upon the blood, in this respect, as a mere chemical
compound; and even, if it be alive, and they influence its life,
still the influence, as far as respects coagulation, may in effect
be chemical.


® Scudamore, 1. c. 1 A Treatise on the Blood, &c.


* An Enquiry into the Nature and Property of Blood. By C. Turner Thack-
rah. London, 1819,


1 Dr. Turner, Elements of Chemistry, 1827. p- 638.


THE BLOOD. 153


The blood generally coagulates in the living body on escaping
from its vessels, and even in its vessels if its motion be prevented
by ligatures; and when it does not, its subsequent escape from
the body almost always produces instant coagulation.™ It almost
always coagulates also in the vessels running through healthy parts
to others in a state of mortification, and in large vessels adjoining
a pulmonary abscess; in which cases, the final cause or purpose
— prevention of hemorrhage, is evident. The efficient cause,
however, in all these examples, is unknown. In all, the blood is
still in contact with living parts: in the last two, it is perhaps not
at rest till it coagulates. J. Hunter, after mentioning that in a
mortification of the foot and leg he found the crural and iliac
arteries completely filled with strongly coagulated blood, adds,
that this could not have arisen from rest, because the same thing
ought then to happen in amputation, or in any case where the
larger vessels are tied up." Besides, coagulation after extrava-
sation, or when a quantity is included in a vessel between two
ligatures, is not an invariable occurrence.

These facts, in addition to those stated above, show that
fluidity or coagulation is not dependent on the simple presence or
absence of vitality. Whatever connection coagulation out of the
body may have with the escape of carbonic acid gas, there is no
proof of it in the case of internal coagulation.

Some have imagined the globules to be not only endowed,
through vitality, with spontaneous motion, but with repulsion,
which ceases with life, and thus by their death to run together
and produce the phenomenon of coagulation. But M. Raspail
contends, as we have noticed, that such spontaneous motion is a
microscopic accident, and that, so far from being organised, they
are merely minute precipitations of albumen ; and he shows that,
when the blood coagulates, the globules are seen under the mi-
croscope enveloped in the coagulum, which, therefore, cannot be
a mere union of them. He asserts, that fibrin and albumen are
identical, and that the fibrin is preserved liquid by the alcalies of
the blood, — soda and ammonia; which, if they become saturated
by the carbonic acid of the atmosphere and that which forms in
blood when exposed to the air, can no longer act as a solvent,


™ J, Hunter mentions the coagulation of blood let out from the tunica va-
ginalis, in which it had lain fluid sixty-five days after a wound. On the Blood,
p- 25.

CH Dy 28s


154 THE BLOOD.


and the fibrin accordingly coagulates.e The escape of the am-
monia and of a certain quantity of the water of the blood aug-
ments this effect, and blood coagulates the sooner in proportion
as it is less watery. Coagulation within the blood-vessels he
regards as produced by the escape of some of the water of the
blood through the coats of the vessels. Some glutinous saps, as
that of the chara hispida (stone-wort), coagulate, like the blood,
chyle, and milk, and they all have albumen in the state of globular
precipitation and solution, have the same salts, and their coagu-
lation ceases when the solvent of the albumen is saturated, eva-
porated, or weakened. In sap, the solvent is acetic acid.P

The fibrin may be separated from the red particles by agitation,
and in inflammatory diseases it very frequently separates when
drawn. Some conceive, that in health the cruor has a greater affinity
for fibrin than for the serum, and therefore unites with it in prefer-
ence. But to suppose any affinity of the red particles for either
the fibrin or the serum is erroneous. Leeuwenhoek and Hart-
soeker long since proved that serum merely suspends them; for if,
when separated, they are triturated in some serum, part of them
is taken up and the serum assumes a red colour; but, if the fluid
is allowed to settle in a cylindrical glass, they slowly precipitate
themselves to the bottom, and the serum above becomes clear
as before. When blood is drawn, the serum easily separates on
the coagulation of the fibrin, But the fibrin coagulates before
the colouring particles have time to fall to the bottom, and en-
tangling them acquires a red colour, forming the crassamentum :
if, however, the fibrin coagulates slowly and is thinner 4, as in the
phlogistic diathesis and pregnancy, the greater specific gravity of
the cruor detaches it very considerably from the fibrin, which
remains colourless above, constituting what is called the inflam-
matory coat, crust, or buff. Berzelius even believes the fibrin
to be in a state of solution in the serum, while the cruor is simply
suspended in this solution. In the phlogistic diathesis both the
fibrin and the serum are more abundant, and the blood lighter. *

Thinness of the blood and a disposition to slow coagulation

.

° Dr. Prout also says, “ A portion of soda is requisite to preserve the weak
alcaline condition, essential to the fluidity of the blood.” 1. c. p. 496.

P ic. p. 872. aqq, .

1 Hewson, Experimental Enquiries into the Blood and the Lymphatic System,
P. 1. p. 45. sq.

® Scudamore, 1. c,


THE BLOOD. 155


generally co-exist. But the rapidity of the stream greatly affects
the rate of coagulation, so that one portion of the same blood
coagulates slowly that is drawn quickly, and another quickly that
is drawn slowly.

The appearance of the buffy coat does not arise from the
slow coagulation, though increased by it; because, of two por-
tions of the same blood, one has afforded no buffy coat, although
it remained fluid at least ten minutes after the buffy coat began
to be formed on the others, proving, too, if the buffy coat arise
from thinness of the fibrin, as appears from Mr. Hewson’s ex-
periments, the red particles continuing of their usual weight, that
slow coagulation is not altogether dependent on mere thinness of
the blood, though generally connected and proportional with it.
Yet rapid coagulation, by means of a slow stream when the blood
is thin, may prevent the buffy coat, by not allowing time for the
difference in the weight of the fibrin and red particles to have
effect. Stirring such blood, or receiving it into a shallow vessel,
has the same consequence, and the slower the coagulation of thin
blood, occasioned, for instance, by rapid bleeding, the greater will
be the buffy coat.

If one portion of the same blood is received into a shallow, and
another into a deep vessel, the coagulum of the former is looser
and spongy, and the quantity of separated serum less.

The different cups of blood drawn in an inflammatory disease
may vary as to the buffy coat, according to accidental variations
in the stream; but generally it is the first cup that abounds in
buff, and the last frequently has none. This occurs when there
is no difference in the stream.‘ Therefore, if the buff arise from
thinness of the fibrin, we must conclude with Hewson" that its
qualities may be changed even during bleeding. Sir C. Scuda-
more finds much more fibrin in buffy blood; and, consequently,
that not merely the thinness, as Hewson observed, but the quan-
tity, of fibrin may vary during the flow of blood. *

The greater the strength of the patient and the intensity of the
inflammation, the firmer is the coagulum of fibrin and the more
cupped its appearance.

Sir C. Scudamore did not find a buffy coat in blood drawn im-
mediately after violent exercise.


8 Hewson, l. c. p. 90. * Ic. p. 52. sqq,
"loc. p. 56. sqqe Pvc, p. 96)


156 THE BLOOD.


Fibrin is inodorous and tasteless, whitish, insoluble in alcohol
and acids, slightly soluble in boiling water long applied; coagu-
lates, as already said, when separated from the body; dries hard,
brittle, and semitransparent.

Albumen is inodorous, tasteless, colourless, soluble in water,
and coagulates by a temperature of 150°, by pure potass, the
mineral acids, tannin, and many metallic salts, especially by bi-
chloride of mercury, and by prussiate of potass if a little dilute
acid is previously mixed with it. Acetic and some other acids
dissolve it, and even render it to a certain point soluble in alco-
hol and boiling water, according to M.Raspail; who also, under
the microscope, discovers albumen to consist of two substances,
the one an insoluble and organised tissue, the other a fluid con-
tained in the cells of this.y The insoluble portion, however,
forms gradually only, and in fresh eggs can scarcely be distin-
guished from the soluble; just as is the case with the woody
fibres of vegetables, that gradually form from a gum. Dr. Wol-
laston stated, that the soda of albumen prevents it from all coagu-
lating by heat, and the addition of an acid, by neutralizing the
alcali, renders it completely coagulable.* Raspail says“, “ alcaline
solutions, even alcaline carbonates,” prevent heat from coagulat-
ing albumen. Mr. Brande thinks it liquid only through alcali.>

Chemists all allow that fibrin, albumen, and colouring matter
afford, on decomposition, the same saline and gaseous products.
-Berzelius views them all three as modifications of the same sub-
stance. Albumen contains a greater proportion of oxygen than
fibrin, and has sulphur for a constituent part, which, however,
cannot be detected while the albumen is entire, any more than
the iron while the cruor is entire. The chief differences between
the colouring matter and fibrin are, colour ; the spontaneous co-
agulation of fibrin at all temperatures, while the colouring matter
may be dried without losing its solubility in water and becomes
insoluble only at a certain temperature; and the peculiarity in
the latter of not diminishing in volume like fibrin during exsic-
cation. According to most chemists, albumen is intermediate
between the two; and its only character of distinction from fibrin
is, that it does not coagulate spontaneously, but requires a high
temperature or some chemical agent. M. Raspail maintains that
albumen and fibrin are identical; and that the slight differences


Y Hewson, |. c. p. 191. sqq. Sora. ir. 18],
* Hewson, 1. c. p. 198. > Ph. Tr. 1809.


THE BLOOD. 157


between the two are referable to the natural and adventitivus
salts of albumen, varying according to the organs from which it
is obtained. The following results are givene by Gay-Lussac
and ‘Thénard, in regard to them and gelatine: —


Carbon. Hydrogen. Oxygen. Nitrogen.


Gelatine = = - 47°881 7°924 27 °207 16:998
Albumen - - - §2°883 7°540 23°872 15°705
Fibrin - - - 53:°360 7-021 12°685 19°934


Besides which, they, as well as the colouring matter of the
blood, contain a very minute portion of the earthy phosphates.

We formerly saw that Dr. Prout is of opinion, at present, that
when oxygen and hydrogen exist united, it is in the form of
actual water, as an essential constituent of unazotised vegetable
bodies, one atom of carbon being united with one. of water.
Now M. Raspail makes it highly probable, that the nitrogen of
vegetable gluten, of albumen, fibrin, gelatine, and other animal
matters, exists combined with another portion of hydrogen in
the form of ammonia, which again is combined, as a base, with
some acid, making an ammoniacal salt. The remaining small
quantity of the hydrogen, not united with oxygen into water,
is united with carbon into carburetted hydrogen; so that sub-
stances called azotised are really not azotised. He shows that
the numbers given by Thénard are such as will give so much
water, ammonia, and carburetted hydrogen, with pure carbon.
Vegetable substances have been hitherto considered as ternary
compounds of oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon: animal substances,
and vegetable gluten, quaternary compounds of oxygen, hydro-
gen, carbon, and nitrogen; for most animal substances usually
afford nitrogen, and but few vegetable substances excepting
gluten. In M. Raspail’s views, organised bodies consist of water,
ammonia, carbon, and salts. And here [ must remark, that the
alcaline, earthy, and other substances, found in minute quantities
in animal and vegetable compounds, and which have usually been
regarded as foreign and unimportant, are, with great reason, con-
sidered by Dr. Prout as integrants in the compounds, and chiefly
productive of the striking differences observed in substances
having otherwise the same essential composition. The importance
of minute quantities of matter is shown, he remarks, in the expe-
riments of Sir John Herschel, who found that a power not less


© Recherches Physico-Chimiques, t.ii.
M


158 THE BLOOD.


than 50,000 times greater than the power of gravity, is constantly
generated (under the galvanic influence, for example) by the
alloy of mercury with a millionth part of its weight of sodium.
Dr. Prout regards these incidental particles as in a state of mutual
repulsion, because, instead of being equally diffused as they are,
they would otherwise be collected into a mass or crystal.*

I may mention, that Dr. Prout says perhaps it may be stated
as a general law, that no substance, entering into the com-
position of a living plant or animal, is so pure as to be capable of
assuming a regularly crystallised form. Instead, therefore, of
being defined by straight lines and angles, all solid organised
substances are more or less rounded, and their intimate structure
is any thing but crystallised. The composition of organised fluids
is equally heterogeneous ; and, though the basis of nearly every
one of such fluids is water, many of them contain a variety of
other matters.

M. Raspail remarks further, that the constituents of organic
solids or fluids are not combined in definite proportions, like those
of inanimate bodies, but are ever variable, so that the varieties of
each compound are infinite. ¢


4 Bridgewater Treatise, p. 425. sq.

Sl eep. 78.8:

‘< The idea of succession and developement leads to the conclusion, that, if the
products are examined at a certain period, they will be found chemically more or
less heterogeneous, and more or less mixed. In some, the combined water and
carbon are not yet combined with a base, or at the utmost are mixed with one ;
then we have gum. In others, the carbon is mixed with hydrogen only, or
at the utmost with a small quantity of water: that this may assume the charac-
ters of a substance fit for organisation, it must obtain sufficient oxygen aspired by
the cellular apparatus, to transform all the hydrogen into water ; till then the
compound was an oil, or resin. Finally, the carbonic acid absorbed, instead of
uniting with a quantity of hydrogen sufficient to convert the oxygen of the acid
into water, may unite with a fresh quantity of water or other substances, even
with a quantity of salts insufficient to neutralise them, and then, becoming an
acid of a new form, it will serve as a brute unorganised body for the elabo-
ration or the decomposition of the salts which are necessary for the developement
of the tissues.”


Most cold-blooded animals, as fishes and the amphibia, have a much smaller
proportion of blood and fewer blood-vessels than those with warm blood, though
a much greater number of colourless vessels arising from the arteries. In an
experiment which Blumenbach made on this subject, he “ obtained from twenty-


THE BLOOD. 159


four adult water-newts (lacerta palustris), which had been just caught, and
weighed each an ounce and a half, OQ iijss. of blood. The proportion to the
weight of the body was as 24 to 36, while in healthy adult men it is as 1 to 5.”
(Compar. Anatomy, ch. xii. ed. i. p. 245. Translated by Mr. Lawrence.)

The blood of different brutes coagulates in different times, Mr. Thackrah
imagines the rapidity to be inversely as the strength and size. Thus, while in
health, human blood coagulates in from 3 or 4 to 7 minutes, that of the


Horse, in from 2 tor ts
Ox, 2 to 10
Dog, 3% to 3
Sheep, hog, rabbit 5 to 1%
Lamb, x to 1
Fowls, % to 1%


Mice, in a moment.
Fish, according to Hunter (1. c. p.211.), also in amoment.


The blood of brutes has the same general character as our own, and Rouelle
obtained the same ingredients, though in different proportions, from the blood of
a great variety of them. Berzelius finds a larger proportion of nitrogen in
that of the ox, and analogy would lead us to suppose there is a peculiarity in
the blood of every species. Muscles look pretty much alike in various animals,
yet when cooked they disclose the greatest diversities. Transfusion, or pouring
the blood of one system into another, satisfies us, that the blood, whether arterial
or venous, of one individual, agrees well enough with another of the same
species ; but some late experiments of Dr. Leacock (Medico-Chirurgical Jour-
nal, 1817, p. 276.), and subsequently of Dr. James Blundel (Medico-Chirurgical
Transactions, 1818), render it unlikely, contrary to the opinion of former ex-
perimentalists, that the blood of one species suits the system of another. Dr.
Young found the large outer globules of the skate to be somewhat almond-
shaped, and Hewson found them of different shapes in different animals, and
Rudolphi observed them to be more or less oval in the common fowl and many
amphibia. (Grundriss der Physiologie, 159.) MM. Prevost and Dumas have
noticed, in their microscopic experiments, a great difference in the blood of
different animals as to the globules, and in this way explain the impossibility of
transfusing the blood of some animals to others without danger to life. They
assert that the quantity of the particles is proportionate to the temperature of the
animal, and that, consequently, most exist in the blood of birds: that the size
and shape also vary, although the size of the central portion is the same in
animals in which they are spherical, and is about 5), of an inch in diameter :
and that the shape of the external part is circular in the mammalia, and elliptical
in birds (M. Raspail says, in oviparous quadrupeds also) and cold-blooded
animals, thus confirming and generalising the observations of others, for Hew-
son observed the difference of their size in different animals, and that this bore
no relation to the difference in the size of the animal (I. c. part iii. p. 10. sqq.) :
and they find the shape of the central portion correspondent with that of the
external, — spherical when the latter is circular, oval when elliptical. They
assert that, if the blood of two animals of different species, the blood of one
of which was transfused into the other, differed in the size only of the globules,

M 2


160 THE BLOOD.


temporary restoration of energy took place; but that, if it differed in their
shape, convulsions and death were the result. They also find a larger propor-
tion of fibrin and red globules in warm than in cold blooded animals, and a
larger in the former according to the height of the temperature — (of 10,000
parts by weight; in pigeons, 1557; man, 1292; frogs, 690) ; —a smaller, also,
accordingly as animals are bled; it thus appearing that bleeding promotes the
absorption of watery fiuid. (4nnales de Chimie, t. xviii. xxiii. 1821 and 1823.)
The colour of the particles differs in different animals: hence red and white
blooded animals.

Hewson (l.c. partiii. p. 39.) saw the red particles of the blood of the foetal
chicken and viper larger than those of the adult animal: and Prevost and
Dumas have observed the red particles of the foetal goat to be as large again as
those of the adult ; and those of the chicken to be circular, till about the sixth
day, when some elliptic ones are first seen ; and on the ninth, from their progres-
sive multiplication, none but elliptic ones can be detected. (Annales des Sciences
Naturelles, 1824, 1825.)

In the frog the particles are },, and in the salamander even };, of a millimétre,
—the largest known.

The blood of invertebral animals is colourless, but has not been analysed.

The temperature of the blood, in general, varies with that of the animal.

The sap of vegetables is different, accordingly as it is examined when ascending
from the roots, or descending again. The ascending sap is chiefly a watery solu-
tion of alcaline, earthy, and even metallic matters, and the proportion of water is
very large, on account of the little solubility of many of these ; the descending, or
returning sap, is the same concentrated by exhalation from the leaves, and loaded
with carbon, obtained in them from the atmosphere.

The former may be compared to chyle, the latter to blood; and this is more
and more elaborated and converted into various organic substances, so as to
be saccharine, fecular, glutinous or milky, oily, resinous, gum-resinous, and
oleo-glutinous.

All vegetable principles are divided by Dr. Prout (Bridgewater Treatise,
p- 454.) into three great classes—those in which oxygen and hydrogen are com-
bined in the proportions which form water —the saccharine ; those in which hy-
drogen, or rather carbon and hydrogen, predominate — the oily; and those in which
oxygen predominates —- the acid. Some contain azote also, like animal principles,
from which, indeed, it is never absent; and some, weak alcaline powers, as
quinine, morphine, &c.


About forty years after the discovery of the circulation of the blood, trans-
fusion was practised upon brutes, and at length upon the human subject, though
some contend that the operation was known to the ancients. Experiments were
made upon the effects of injecting medicated liquids into the blood, first by
Wahrendorf, in Germany. It was ascertained that they exert their specific
powers exactly as when swallowed, —cathartics, v. c. purging, and emetics
emptying the stomach. Among other liquids, Dr. Christopher Wren proposed
that blood should be injected, and Dr. Lower first put this into practice, It


THE BLOOD. 161


was found that if an animal was drained of its blood, and lay faint and almost
lifeless, and the blood of another was transfused into its circulating system, it
soon revived, stood up, and presently ran about as before, apparently none the
worse for the operation. If too much was poured in, the animal became
drowsy, breathed with difficulty, and died of plethora, An idea of curing
diseases in this way, by substituting the blood of the healthy for that of the
diseased, was immediately entertained when the possibility of the operation was
proved.

But the first case of human transfusion proved fatal, and the unfortunate
results of some careless trials caused the Pope and the King of France to pro-
hibit the practice.

The extravagant hopes of curing diseases and restoring youth, at first enter-
tained in France, were disappointed, and the operation fell into complete neglect,
notwithstanding that Denys, in France, was declared to have made a fool clever
by a supply of lamb’s blood; a Mr. Cox, in England, to have cured an old
mongrel of the mange with the blood of a young spaniel; and a M. Gayant to
have made a blind old dog frisk with juvenile bound, which before could hardly
stir; till Dr. Leacock brought it again into notice a few years ago, and Dr. James
Blundel prosecuted this gentleman’s researches. Dr, James Blundel conceived it
might be rationally expected to be of benefit in cases of dangerous hemorrhage,
and he soon proved it to be void of danger in the human subject, if properly
performed. Many women, who would probably otherwise have perished from
uterine hemorrhage, now owe their lives to his disinterested zeal in establishing
the practice.

I should think it applicable to many cases of exhaustion, besides those
arising from hemorrhage. The original history of transfusion will be found in
the early numbers of the Philosophical Transactions; the successful cases of its
employment as a remedy, in the late English journals. The double pump
employed for emptying the stomach, or a common syringe, capable of holding
four or six ounces, answers very well. But Dr. Blundel at present, when he
has able assistants, sometimes receives the blood from the blood-vessel into a
funnel, the tube of which is very long, and inserted in the vein of the subject
supplied, so that the blood enters by its gravity only.

Very lately salts of potass and soda, dissolved in various quantities of
water, have been injected into the veins of persons exhausted by the Asiatic
epidemic, improperly called Cholera. The effect is often astonishing. The
patient, apparently almost lifeless, often revives, sits up, speaks, and takes
nourishment, The improvement is transient, but frequently recurs on repeating
the injection, and sometimes life has probably been saved by the measure. Many
pints of saline fluid have thus sometimes been introduced in a few hours. Oc-
easionally, oppression of the head has been induced ; but generally a greatly
increased discharge of fluid from the alimentary canal occurred.


CHAP, XAT.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


“Pie blood, to whose great and multifarious importance in
the system we have slightly alluded, is conveyed, with a few ex
ceptions, into the most internal and extreme recesses. This is
proved by the minute injection oi the vessels, and by the well-
known fact of blood issuing from almost every part on the
smallest scratch.

“This red fluid does not, like an Euripus, ebb and flow
the same vessels, as the ancients imagined, but pursues a circular
course ; so that, being propelled from the heart into the arteries,
it is distributed throughout the body, and returns again to the
heart through the veins.

“ We shall, therefore, say something at present of the vessels
which contain the blood, and afterwards of the powers by which
they propel and receive it.

“ The vessels which receive the blood from the heart, and dis-
tribute it throughout the body, are termed arteries.

“These are, upon the whole, less capacious than the veins ;
but in adult, and advanced age especially, of a texture far more
solid and compact, very elastic and strong.

“« The arteries consist of three coats » :—

“JT. The exterior, called, by Haller, the TUNICA CELLULOSA
PROPRIA; by others, the nervous, cartilaginous, tendinous, &c.
It is composed of condensed cellular membrane, externally more
lax, internally more and more compact: blood-vessels are seen


* « Among warm-blooded animals, the egg, especially at the fourth and fifth
day of incubation, if placed under a simple microscope, such as the Lyonetian,
is most adapted for the demonstration of the circulation.

Among frogs, the most proper is the equuleus of Lieberkiihn, described in the
Mém. del’ Acad. de Berlin, 1745.”

> « For the various opinions respecting the number and differences of the
arterial coats, consult, among others, Vine. Malacarne, Della Osservat. in Chirurgia.
Turin. t. ii. p. 103.

And C. Mondini. Opuscoli scientifici, t. i. Bologna, 1817, 4to. p. 161.”


*


9


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 163


creeping upon it®; it gives very great tone and elasticity to the
arteries.

‘“ TJ. The middle coat consists of transverse fibres “, lunated
or falciform, and almost of a fleshy nature: hence this has the
name of muscular coat, and appears to be the chief seat of the
vital powers of the arteries.

“III. The inner coat lining the cavity of the arteries is highly
polished and smooth,” and is called the serous coat. It is brittle,
so as to be cracked by a blow, a ligature fixed around the
whole artery, or torsion of the vessel, while the external coat
remains entire. The middle coat may give way at the same time,
but frequently lacerates, through the pressure of the blood, by
degrees only; and the external coat will remain entire, merely
dilated into a pouch, for a length of time, —a state called
false aneurysm. Dr. Hales found the carotid of a dog burst at
once by the pressure of a column of water less than 190 feet
high. ¢

“ This is much more distinct in the trunks and larger branches
than in the smaller vessels.

“« Every artery originates, either

‘From the pulmonary artery (the vena arteriosa of the
ancients), which proceeds from the anterior ventricle of the
heart, and goes to the lungs ;

‘“ Or from the aorta, which proceeds from the posterior ven-
tricle, and is distributed throughout the rest of the system.

“These trunks divide into branches, and these again into
twigs, &c. .

“ According to the commonly received opinion, the united
capacity of the branches, in any part of the sanguiferous system,
is greater than that of the trunk from which they arise. But I
fear that this is too general an assertion, and even that the
measure of the diameter has been sometimes improperly con-
founded with that of the area. I myself have never been able
to verify it, although my experiments have been frequently
repeated, and made, not on vessels injected with wax, after the


« « Fr, Ruysch, Respons. ad ep. problematicam. iii. Also his Thesaur. Anat. iv.
tab. 3.”


* « B.S. Albinus, Annot. Academ. |. iv. tab. 5. fig. 1.”
“ Hemastatics.


M 4:


164 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


bad example of some illustrious physiologists, but on the undis-
turbed vessels of recent subjects, v.c. on the innominata and its
two branches—the right carotid and subclavian, on the brachial
and its two branches—the radial and ulnar.f

“The inconstancy of the proportion between the capacity of
the branches and that of the trunks is clearly shown by the various
sizes of the vessels under different circumstances, v. c. by the
relative capacity of the inferior thyreoid artery in the infant and
the adult; of the epigastric artery in the virgin and the mother
near her delivery; and also of the uterine vessels in the virgin
and the pregnant woman; of the omental vessels during the
repletion and vacuity of the stomach.

“ The arteries, after innumerable divisions and important
anastomoses" connecting different neighbouring branches, termi-
nate at length in the beginning of the veins. By this means the
blood is conveyed back again to the heart. The distinction
between artery and vein, at the point of union, is lost.”

Some arteries terminate in cells; for instance, many of the
penis and spleen. -

“ Another description of vessels arise universally from the
arteries, and are called colourless, from not containing pure blood,
either on account of their minuteness, or of their specific irrita-
bility, which causes them to reject that fluid.”

“The blood conveyed from the heart throughout the body by
the arteries is carried back by the veins.i

“ These are very different in function and structure from the |
arteries, excepting, however, the minutest of both systems,
which are indistinguishable.

‘‘ The veins, except the pulmonary, are universally more
capacious than the arteries; more ramified ; much more irregu-


_ f « See also J. Theod. Van Der Kemp, De Vita. Edin. 1782. 8vo. p 51.

And Seerp Brouwer, Questiones Medic. varii argum. Lugd. Batav. 1816.
4to. Pi.

® « This is remarkably observable in the adult stag, by comparing the arex of
the external carotid and its branches, during the spring, just before the horns
have attained their full growth, and when they are still covered with their downy
integuments (called in German, der Bast), with such as they are after this cover-
ing has fallen off.”

h “ Ant. Scarpa, Sul’? Aneurisma, Pav. 1804. fol. cap. 4.”


1 ¢ HA. Marx, diatr. premio ornata, de structura atque vita venarum.  Carlsr.
1819. 8vo.”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 165


lar in their course and division; in adult age, softer and far less
elastic, but still very firm and remarkably expansile.

“© Their coats are so much thinner that the blood appears
through them, They are likewise less in number, being solely
a cellular external, somewhat resembling the nervous of the
arteries ; and a very polished internal, feo nearly agreeing with
that of the arteries.

« A muscular coat exists only in the trunks nearest the heart.

‘‘ The interior coat forms, in nearly all veins of more than a
line in diameter, very beautiful valves of easy play, resembling
bags, generally single, frequently double, and sometimes triple,
placed with their fundus towards the origin of the vein, and
their edge towards the heart.

«‘ These valves are not found in some parts: not in the brain,
heart, lungs, secundines, nor in the system of the vena porte.

“The twigs, or, more properly, the radicles, of the veins,
unite into branches, and these again into six principal ‘trunks :
VviZ. — :

‘‘ Into the two cava, superior and inferior ;

** And the four trunks of the pulmonary vein (the arteria
venosa of the ancients).

“ The vena porte is peculiar in this, that, having entered the
liver, it ramifies like an artery, and its extreme twigs pass into
the radicles of the inferior cava, thus coalescing into a trunk.

«That the blood may be properly distributed and circulated
through the arteries and veins, nature has provided the heart * ,
in which the main trunks of all the blood-vessels unite, and which
is the grand agent and mover of the whole human machine, —
supporting this —the chief of the vital functions, with a constant
and truly wonderful power, from the segue or third week after
conception to the last moment of existence.’

The heart is essentially a muscular organ, conical, with four
cavities, placed in the left half of the chest, not quite vertically,
but rather obliquely to the left, and from behind forward. Its
size is usually about that of the closed fist of the individual.

‘Jt is loosely contained in the perzcardium!, which is a mem-
branous sac,” consisting of two layers: the one fibrous and of the


k « W. Cowper, Myotomia Reformata. (Posth.) Lond. 1724. fol. max,
Tab. xxxvi—xl.”

1 « Haller, Elementa Physiol. t.i. tab.i.

Nicholls, Philos. Trans. vol. lii, P.i. p. 272.”


166 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


=
=
Pe@
a, lungs. d, pulmonary veins. g, left auricle.
_6, trachea. eé, aorta. h, right ventricle.
c, pulmonary artery. J; right auricle. i, left ventricle.


same nature as the dura mater, though thinner ; the other a true
serous membrane, lining the inside of this, closely enveloping the
substance of the heart, and “ very firm, accommodated to the
figure of the heart, and moistened internally by an exhalation.”

It lies between the two pleure, and behind the anterior, and
before the posterior, mediastinum. “Its importance is evinced by
its existence being, in red-blooded animals, as general as that of
the heart ; and by our having but two instances on record of its
absence in the human subject. ™

“‘ The heart alternately receives and propels the blood. Receiv-
ing it from the whole body by means of the superior and inferior
vena cava, and from its own substance through the common orifice
of the coronary veins, that is supplied with a peculiar valve », it
conveys that fluid into the anterior sinus and auricle, and thence
into the corresponding ventricle, which, as well as the auricle,
communicates with both orders of the heart’s own vessels by the
openings of Thebesius. °


™ « Consult, v. c. Littre, Hist de l’ Académie des Sc. de Paris. 1712. pie.

Baillie, T'ransactions of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Chirurgical
Knowledge, t. i. p. 91.”

" « Casp. Fr. Wolff on the origin of the large coronary vein, Act. Acad. Scient.
Petropol. 1777. P. i.

Petr. Tabarrani on the same subject, déti di Siena, vol. vi.”


° ** Respecting these openings, consult, among others, J. Abernethy, Philos.
Trans. 1798. p. 103.”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 167


a, sinus of right au-
ricle.

6, appendix of right
auricle.

c, original seat of the
foramen ovale.

d, tricuspid valve.

e, right ventricle.


‘From this anterior, or, in reference to the heart of some
animals, right, ventricle, the blood is impelled through the pulmo-
nary artery into the lungs: returning from which, it enters the


a, right ventricle.

6, semilunar valves of pulmonary ar-
tery.

, pulmonary artery: the aperture is
the commencement of its , right
branch.


168 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


four pulmonary veins, and proceeds into their common sinus and
the left, or, as it is now more properly termed, posterior, auricle. P


a, left auricle.
6, mitral valve.
c, left ventricle : a probe
is passed through its
opening into the aorta.


“ The blood flows next into the corresponding ventricle ; and


Dy 4 left ventricle.
|i) 4, semilunar valves of aorta.
c, aorta.


* « James Penada, Memorie della Societa Italiana, t. xi, p. $55.”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 169


then, passing into the aorta, is distributed through the arterial
system of the body in general and the coronary vessels of the
heart itself.4

“ Having proceeded from the extreme twigs of the general
arterial system into the radicles of the veins, and from the
coronary arteries into the coronary veins, it finally is poured into
the two vene cave, and then again pursues the same circular
course.

“The regularity of this circular and the successive motion
through the cavities of the heart is secured, and any retrograde
motion prevented, by valves, which are placed at the principal
openings, viz. at the openings of the auricles into the ventricles,
and of the ventricles into the pulmonary artery and aorta.”

‘‘ Thus the ring, or venous tendon, which forms the limit of
the anterior auricle and ventricle, descending into the latter
cavity, becomes these tendinous valves. These were formerly
said to have three apices, and were, therefore, called triglochine
or tricuspid: they adhere to the fleshy pillars, or, in common
language, the papillary muscles.

“In a similar manner, the limits of the posterior auricle and
ventricle are defined by a ring of the same kind, forming two
valves, which, from their form, have obtained the appellation of
mitral.” §

They are duplicatures of the lining membrane, with the addition
of intervening fibrous membrane.

«“ At the opening of the pulmonary artery* and aorta" are
found the triple semz/unar or sigmoid valves *, fleshy and elegant,
but of less circumference than the mitral.”

These are merely duplicatures of the lining membrane.

‘Tt is obvious how these differently formed valves must pre-
vent the retrocession of the blood into the cavities which it has
left. They readily permit the blood to pass on, but are expanded,


4 « Consult Achil. Mieg, Specimen ii. Observationum Botanicarum, &c. Basil,
1776. 4to. p.12. sq.”

r « Kustachius, tab. viii. fig. 6.— tab. xvi. fig. 3.— Santorini. Tab. Posth. ix.
fig. 1.”

§ « Kustachius, tab. xvi. fig. 6.”

t « Eustachius, tab, xvi. fig. 4.”

u « Eustachius, tab. xvi. fig. 5.— Morgagni, ddversar. Anat. i. tab. iv. fig. 3.
Santorini, |. c.”

x « Consult Hunter, who treats very minutely of the mechanism of these valves
in his work On the Blood, p. 159.”


170 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


like a sail, against it, by any attempt at retrograde movement,
and thus close the openings.” The mere attempt at retrocession
by the blood closes the semilunar valves: but the contraction of
the muscular bands attached by tendons to the edges of the
tricuspid and mitral valves during the systole of the ventricles
will assist in closing the auriculo-ventricular openings.

“ The texture of the heart is peculiar: fleshy, indeed, but very
dense and compact, far different from common muscularity. *

‘It is composed of fasciculi of fibres, more or less oblique, here
and there singularly branching out, variously and curiously con-
torted and vorticose in their direction, lying upon each other
in strata, closely interwoven between the cavities, and bound by
four cartilaginous bands at the basis of the ventricles, which
thus are, as it were, supported, and are distinguished from the
fibres of the auricles.”

The heart was shown by Dr. Alexander Stewart 4, about the
beginning of the last century, to be resolvable by boiling water
into a semicircular muscle, with all its fibres running parallel to
the base. Being rolled round in a funnel form, the left ventricle
is produced with the apex, which thus belongs entirely to it; and
the second turn produces the right ventricle, by the space between
it and the first layer. The walls of the left ventricle, except the
septum, are strengthened by another turn, which the right ven-
tricle has not; so that the left ventricle is thicker than the right.
The auricles are distinct, and by boiling drop off from the ven-
tricles. They are very thin.

The interior of the heart is lined by the same membrane which
forms the inner coat of the arteries and veins, being firmer and
more opake in the left or arterial cavities, which are continuous
with the arteries, than in the right or venous cavities, which are
continuous with the vene cave.

M. Gerdy has arranged the fibres of the ventricles into three
orders —the one running from the heart’s apex towards its
base, and ending in tendons which are attached to the tricuspid


¥ «& Leop. M.A. Caldani, Memorie lette nell’ Acad. di Padova. 1814. 4to.


sy 2


p. 67.
7 « Casp. Fr. Wolff, Act. Acad. Scientiar. Petropol. for the year 1780. sq.,
especially for 1781. P.i. p. 211. sq., on the cartilaginous structure of the heart,
or on the cartilagineo-osseous bands, and their distribution at the base of the
heart.”
4 Phil. Trans. vol. ix. abridg.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. eH


and mitral valves ; the second detached in their centre, and fixed in
the substance of the heart by their two extremities only; and
the third fixed altogether in the substance of the organ.>

“The fleshy fibres are supplied with very delicate nerves ¢,
and an immense number of blood-vessels, which arise from
the coronary arteries, and are so infinitely ramified 4, that Ruysch
described the whole structure of the heart as composed of them.” ¢

‘* By this structure the heart is adapted for its perpetual and
equable motions, which are an alternate systole and diastole, or
contraction and relaxation, of the auricles and ventricles in suc-
cession. ‘

“The systole of the ventricles is performed in such a way that
their external portions are drawn towards their septum, and the
apex of the heart towards the base.f This at first sight seems
disproved by the circumstance of the apex striking against
the left nipple, and, consequently, appearing elongated, — a
circumstance, however, to be attributed to the double impetus of
the blood flowing into the auricles and expelled from the ven-
tricles, by which double impetus the heart must be driven against
that part of the ribs.”

Dr. W. Hunter accounted for it thus in 1746 :—

*« The systole and diastole of the heart, simply, could not pro-
duce such an effect ; nor could it have been produced, if it had
thrown the blood into a straight tube, in the direction of the axis
of the left ventricle, as is the case with fish, and some other
classes of animals: but by throwing the blood into a curved tube,
viz. the aorta, that artery, at its curve, endeavours to throw itself
into a straight line, to increase its capacity ; but the aorta being
the fixed point against the back, and the heart in some degree
loose and pendulous, the influence of its own action is thrown


upon itself, and it is tilted forwards against the inside of the
chest.” g


>» Manuel d’ Anatomie descriptive. Par Jules Cloquet. Paris, 1825.


* “ Scarpa, Tabule Neurologice ad illust. Hist. Anat. cardiac. nervor. tab. iii,
iv. v. vi.”


4 « Ruysch, Thesaur. Anat. iv. tab. iii. figs 1, Oe

“ “ Brandis has proposed an ingenious hypothesis to explain the use of so great
an apparatus of coronary vessels. Versuch iiber die Lebenskraft, p. 84.”

f « Consult Ant. Portal » Mémoires sur la Nature & le Traitement de plusieurs
Maladies, t. ii. 1800, p. 281.”

® Treatise on the Blood, &c., by John Hunter, p. 146. Note.

Dr. Barclay has the following passage on this point ; —


172 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD,


Though this is generally allowed, Haller remarks that in the
frog also, which has a straight aorta, the apex of the heart moves
forwards during the contraction; and, in opposition to Blumen-
bach’s explanation, some say that while the heart of a dog, rabbit,
&c., continues to palpitate, after being extracted from the chest,
the apex is lifted up at each contraction of the empty ventricles.'

The occurrence is ascribable likewise, in some measure, to the
distension of the auricles; for Haller found the apex give the
usual stroke at the nipple, on his distending the left auricle with
airk, and Senac! has shown a similar influence from the right
auricle also. When the ventricles are contracting, no blood can
leave the auricles, which must, therefore, become distended by
its accumulation.
elt is equally evident, that, when the ventricles dilate again, the
blood must rush into them from the auricles.

These considerations show, without experiment, that the auri-
cles and ventricles are always in opposite states, —that, when the
ventricles are in systole, the auricles are in diastole, and vice
versa. ;

On applying the ear or a stethoscope to the region of the heart,
two successive sounds may be distinctly perceived. At the mo-
ment of the stroke of the heart against the ribs (which stroke
may be felt more strongly if the person lies on the left side), and


‘«« When the blood is forced into the arteries, their curvatures, near where they
issue from the ventricles, are from their distension lengthened and extended to-
wards straight lines; and, causing the heart to participate in their motions, com-
pel it to describe the segment of a circle, when the apex moving atlantad and
sinistrad, is made to strike against the left side. The same kind of motion hav-
ing also been observed by the celebrated Haller, in distending the left or sys-
temic auricle, it must follow, that the stroke which is given to the side, may be
the effect of two distinct causes, either acting separately, or in combination: but
acting on a heart obliquely situated, as ours is, in the cavity of the thorax, where
the aspect of the base is atlantad and dextrad, and that’ of the apex sinistrad and |
sacrad. In combination, as the first of the two, by removing the pressure, will
facilitate the influx of the venous blood into the left or systemic auricle, which is
situated dorsad ; so the second, by the influx of blood into the auricle, will con-
tribute in its turn to facilitate the circular motion of the heart, proceeding from
the arteries.” The Muscular Motions of the Human Body, p. 567.

" El. Physiol. t. i. p. 394.

' Professor Mayo, Outlines of Human Physiology. 1827. p. 68. Dr. Hope, &e.

* 1. c. ibid. where he refers to Senac and Ferrein.

 Traité du Cour, p. 357.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 173


at the moment of the pulse of the arteries, at least of those
nearest the heart, is heard a dull sound; and immediately after-
wards, without any interval, a clearer sound, similar to the noise
of a valve or to the licking of a dog. The first sound occupies
about ? of the whole time; the second sound + or 4, and then a
pause occurs of about another i. This is termed the rhythm of the
heart’s action.™ The sounds of the heart are ordinarily heard in
health between the cartilages of the fourth and seventh left ribs,
and under the inferior part of the sternum; those of the left side
of the heart in the former situation, and those of the right in the
latter. The first sound is usually loudest at the lower part. of
the heart’s region; the second, at the higher part, in the situation
of the auricles.

Whatever may be the cause of these sounds, the first occurs
at the moment the ventricles contract : for it occurs at the instant
the aorta receives blood from the left ventricle; and we know
that both ventricles contract simultaneously. We might presume
that the second sound occurs at the moment the auricles contract,
and that therefore. the auricles part with their blood immedi-
ately after the action of the ventricles. Again, when we reflect
that the moment the ventricles have contracted, they relax, as is
proved by our feeling and seeing the walls of the chest instantly
recover their position after being forced outwards by the stroke
of the heart, and as their relaxation is the production of a cavity
for the blood of the auricles, we may hence be certain that
the auricles discharge their blood into the ventricles instantly
after the ventricles have discharged theirs.

In truth, those who open living animals assert that they see
the apex of the heart recede from the walls of the chest, and
the ventricles expand, instantaneously after their contraction, and
that, at this moment of expansion, the blood rushes into them from
the auricles, and a retractile motion of the auricles occurs most
observable at the sinus." It requires no vivisection to show that
this must be the case.


™ See the lamented Dr. Laennec’s immortal work, Traité de 0 Auscullation
Médiate, et des Maladies des Poumons et du Ceur. (Edit. 1. 1819.) Edit. 3.

The force and extent of the sounds and shock, and the rhythm of the heart’s
action, are variously altered in disease, and other sounds superadded, resembling
that of a bellows, a file, a saw, a drum, a dove, &c., all highly interesting to a phi-
losophic mind, and indispensable to be known to all practitioners but empirics,

" Dr. Hope’s Treatise on the Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels. London,
1832. p. 40.

N


174 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


Dr. Whytt, and all old writers, declare, that, on opening living
animals, they saw the auricles (that is, the appendix of the
auricles) contract the first ; and this is the modern experience of
many. I have seen this in an ass stupified with prussic acid,
opened by the desire of Dr. Hope. But in the same ass I re-
peatedly saw the appendices of the auricles contract many times
to one contraction of the ventricles, resembling the tongue in
the act of lapping, and repeatedly saw them contract after the
ventricles. Whytt, though in experimenting upon a frog he saw
the contraction of the auricle regularly precede that of the ven-
tricle, says that the auricle continued to beat long after the
ventricle had ceased: in an experiment upon a rabbit by Dr.
Stevens, presently to be mentioned, it contracted for nearly three
hours, though the ventricle was almost motionless. Sir B. Brodie,
in all his experiments on dogs, rabbits, &c. never saw “ any regular
systole of the auricles corresponding to, and alternating with,
that of the ventricles, and often used to observe several slight
contractions of the auricle, especially of the appendix of the
auricle, for one of the ventricle.”° ;

The contraction of the appendices of the auricles is allowed
to be very slight?, and can hardly have much share in the circu-
lation. The sinuses are always charged with blood, as reservoirs,
and the appendices are probably intended only to enlarge the
space by yielding under congestion. The contraction of the
appendices is perhaps partly to prevent the blood from coagu-
lating in them, as it might do, from their being blind pouches,
were it not continually expelled. The sinuses of the auricles
must part with some of their blood whenever the ventricles ex-
pand; and this period, —the moment after the contraction of the
ventricles, — is the period at which the systole of the auricles
must occur.

When the ventricles are nearly filled, and still more when con-
tracting, the blood must accumulate in the auricles, and the stop-
page be felt even in the large veins ; for which reason, just before,
or rather at, the moment of the systole of the ventricles, we some-
times see the jugulars swell.1 Some have adduced the swelling
of the jugulars before the stroke of the heart, as a proof that the
auricles contract before the ventricles; but I have always found


v
Dr. Hope’s work, p. 37. sq. ? Dr. Hope, 1. c. p. 39.
1 See my Lumleyan Lectures on the recent Improvements in the Art of distin-


guishing the various Diseases of the Heart, p. 16. folio, with copperplates, London,
1830. :


3


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 175


it occur at the same moment with their stroke’; and the impos-
sibility of passage into the ventricle explains the fact. Indeed,
not only, according to my experience, does the swelling of the
jugulars occur after the moment assigned by these writers to the
contraction of the auricles, but, as, at the moment the auricles
lose their blood, the ventricles are relaxed or expanding, there
can be no reason for the blood moving at all backwards when the
auricles contract. .

The object of the appendix of each auricle usually contract-
ing later than the sinus, that is, just before the ventricle, if
it really does, is probably, by pouring its blood into the sinus
which has just parted with much of its own to the ventricle, and
by lessening the space for the blood streaming to the auricles
from the veins, to bring the distension of the ventricle, which is
already in diastole, to the highest pitch; or, if the expansion of
the ventricle is spontaneous, to thus cause it to be supplied with
blood in proportion to its expansion.

Many hypotheses have been invented to explain the two sounds;
and the periods of the action of the auricles and ventricles relative
to each other and to the arterial pulse been strangely misrepre-
sented. But Laennec was right in asserting that the first sound
occurs when the ventricles part with their blood, and the second
when the auricles part with theirs; for the first occurs when the
heart strikes against the ribs and the aorta receives a fresh quantity
of blood from the heart, and the second, when the ventricles expand
and the blood must rush from the auricles: the first is loudest
in the ventricular region, the second in the auricular: and,
when the appendices of the auricles were contracting with all
sorts of irregularity, — with no relation to the contraction of the
ventricles in the ass, I heard, by means of the stethoscope, the
two usual sounds occur with the greatest regularity. We may
therefore presume that the first arises from the rush of blood
from the ventricles, and the second from the rush of blood from
the sinuses of the auricles.


“‘The impulse imparted by the heart to the blood is com-
municated to the arteries, so that every systole of the heart is
very clearly manifested in those arteries which can be explored
by the fingers and exceed } of an inch in the diameter of their

" J have at this time a patient whose external jugulars are enormously dis-
tended, and immediately above the clavicles, the most frequent spot, their puls-


ation may be seen and felt exactly synchronous with the radial pulse,


nN 2


176 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


canal, and in those also whose pulsation can be otherwise dis-
covered, as in the eye andear. The effect upon the arteries
has been called their diastole, and is perfectly correspondent and
synchronous with the systole of the heart,” in vessels not distant
from it; but, in distant arteries, the pulse has long been ob-
served sometimes a very little later than the systole of the heart.

If an artery of tolerable size is divided, the blood escapes in
jerks ; if of smaller dimensions, it flows continuously, but is pro-
jected further at the moment of the pulse; and if the artery is
very small, it flows in an uniform stream.

“The quickness of the heart’s pulsations during health varies
indefinitely; chiefly from age, but also from other conditions
which at all ages form the peculiar constitution of an individual,
so that we can lay down no rule on this point. I may, however, be
permitted to mention the varieties which I have generally found in
our climates at different ages, beginning with the new-born infant,
in which, while placidly sleeping, it is about 140 in a minute.


Towards the end of the first year, about - 124

second year : - 110
—_—— —— third and fourth year - 96
When the first teeth begin to drop out - 86
At puberty about - - . - 80
At manhood about - + - - 75
About sixty - - - - 60


“In those more advanced, I have scarcely twice found it alike.”
Like many others, I have counted it distinctly before birth, by
applying the stethoscope to one side of the mother’s abdomen.
My observations have been made near the end of pregnancy,
and Ihave counted 128 pulsations ina minute, while the mother’s
pulse was but about 80.

“ The pulse is, ceteris paribus, more frequent in women than
in men, and in short than in tail persons. A more constant
fact, however, is its greater slowness in the inhabitants of cold
climates. t

“‘ Its greater frequency after meals and the discharge of semen,
during continued watchfulness, exercise, or mental excitement,
is universally known.”


* «© My observations differ but little from those made by W. Heberden in
England, Med. Trans. vol. ii. p. 21. sq-”

* « J. H. Schonheyder, De Resolutione et Impotentia motus Muscularis. Hafn.
1768. p. 15. With which work compare the obseryations of F, Gabr. Sulzer,
Naturgesch. des Hamsters. p. 169.”


YHE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. ey 7


It is commonly believed that the pulse fof every person is
quicker in the evening than in the morning, and some have sup-
posed an increase of quickness also at noon. Upon these suppo-
sitions Dr. Cullen builds his explanation of the noon and evening
paroxysms of hectic fever", as others had theirs of the evening ex-
acerbations of all fevers’, regarding them as merely aggravations
of natural exacerbations. ‘The existence of the noon paroxysms
is doubtful, and the evening one cannot be so explained, if Dr. R.
Knox is correct’, though he is opposed to Haller, &c. His ob-
servations make the pulse to be slower in the evening, and quicker
in the morning.

Dr. Heberden saw a woman fifty years of age, who had always
an intermitting pulse, yet an able anatomist could discover nothing
unusual after death; and two persons whose pulse was always
irregular in strength and frequency when they were well, and be-
came quite regular when they were ill.x

‘“‘ The heart rather than the arteries is to be regarded as
the source of these varieties, which we have, therefore, detailed
here.

“ Its action continues in this manner till death, and then all its
parts do not at once cease to act; but the right portion, for a
short period, survives the left. y

“ For, since the collapsed state of the lungs after the last ex-
piration impedes the course of the blood from the right side,
and the veins must be turgid with the blood just driven into them
from the arteries, it cannot but happen that this blood, driving
against the right auricle, must excite it to resistance for some
time after the death of the left portion of the heart.

“ This congestion on the right side of the heart, during the
agony of death, affords an explanation of the small quantity of
blood found in the large branches of the aorta.


u Practice of Physic.

¥ Haller, Hl. Physiol. t. ii. p. 263.

W Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal. 1815.

* Transactions of the College of .Physicians. London. vol. ii. p. $1. * Similar
cases are mentioned by Shenkius, De Haen, Monro, Rasori, and Andral.

y « Stenonis, Act. Hafniens. t. ii. p. 142.

Sometimes, though rarely, it happens that the right portion of the heart,
oppressed with too much blood, becomes, contrarily to what usually takes place,
paralysed before the left. This I have more than once observed on opening
living mammalia, particularly rabbits.”

nN 3


178 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


“ Weiss”, and after him Sabatier, ascribe to this cause like-
wise the comparatively larger size» of the right auricle and ven-
tricle after death, especially in the adult subject.

“‘ The motion of the blood is performed by these two orders
of vessels in conjunction with the heart. Its celerity in health
cannot be determined ; for this varies not only in different per-
sons, but in different parts of the same person.

“ Generally, the blood moves more slowly in the veins than
in the arteries, and in the small vessels than in the large trunks,
although these differences have been overrated by physiologists.

“The mean velocity of the blood flowing into the aorta is
usually estimated at eight inches for each pulsation, or about fifty
feet in a minute.

“ Some have affirmed that the globules of the cruor move more
in the axes of the vessels, and with greater rapidity, than the
other constituents of the blood. I know not whether this rests
upon any satisfactory experiment,-or upon an improper applica-
tion of the laws of hydraulics; improper, because it is absurd to
refer the motion of the blood through living canals to the mere
mechanical laws of water moving in an hydraulic machine. I
have never been able to observe this peculiarity of the globules.

“« My persuasion is still more certain that the globules pass on
with the other constituents of the blood, and are not rotated
around their own axis ;— that besides the progressive, there is no
intestine motion in the blood, although indeed there can be no
doubt that the elements of this fluid are occasionally divided, —
where they are variously impelled, according to the different di-
rection, division, and anastomoses of the vessels.

“The moving powers of the sanguiferous system are now to
be examined: first, those of the heart, by far the greatest of all;
afterwards, those which are only subsidiary, though indeed highly
useful.

“‘ That the powers of the heart cannot be accurately calculated
is clear, upon reflecting that neither the volume of blood pro-
jected at each pulsation, nor the celerity nor distance of its


* «J. N. Weiss, De Dextro Cordis Ventriculo vost MORTEM ampliort. Altorf,
1767. 4to.”
* « Ant. Chaum. Sabatier, EZ. in vivis Animalibus Ventriculorum Cordis eadem
Capacitas. Paris, 1772. 4to.”
b * #76 . . .
“ Sam. Aurivilius, De Vasorum Pulmonal. & Cavitat. Cordis inequali Ampli-
tudine. Gotting, 1750. 4to,”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 179


projection, much less the obstacles to the powers of the heart,
can be accurately determined, &c.

“ A rough calculation may be made by taking every probable
conjecture together ; v.c., if the mean mass of the blood is con-
sidered as 10 pounds, or 120 ounces; the pulsations 75 in a
minute, or 4500 in an hour; and the quantity of blood expelled
from the left ventricle at each contraction, as 2 ounces; it
follows that all the blood must pass through the heart 75 times
every hour.

«The impetus of the blood passing from the heart may be
conceived by the violence and altitude of the stream projected
from a large wounded artery situated near it. I have seen the
blood driven at first to the distance of above five feet from the
carotid of an adult and robust man. °

‘¢ This wonderful, and, while life remains, constant, strength of
the heart, is universally allowed to depend upon its zrritability,
in which it very far surpasses, especially as to durations, every
other muscular part.¢

“ That the parietes of the cavities are excited to contraction
by the stimulus of the blood, is proved by the experiment of
Haller, who lengthened, at pleasure, the motion of either side of
the heart, by affording it the stimulus of the blood for a longer
period than the other.”


¢ «¢ The experiments of Hales, in which the blood was received into very long
glass tubes fixed to the arteries of living animals, and the length of its projection
measured, are indeed beautiful, like every thing done by this philosopher, who
was calculated by nature for such enquiries. But, if the force of the heart is to
be estimated in this way, we must take into account the pressure of the column
of blood contained in the tube and gravitating upon the left ventricle.

“‘ The result of Hales’s calculations was, that, the blood being projected from
the human carotid to the height of seven feet and a half, and the surface of the
left ventricle being fifteen square inches, a column of blood, weighing 51°5 Ibs.
was incumbent upon the ventricle, and overcome by its systole. Statical Essays,
vol. ii. p. 40. London, 1733. 8vo.”’

d « Thus, to say nothing of the phenomena so frequently observed in the cold-
blooded amphibia and fishes, I lately found the heart of the chick to beat for
twelve hours, in an egg, on the fourth day of incubation.”

© ¢ Consult Fontana, who treats of this prerogative of the heart minutely in
his Ricerche sopra la Fisica animale, and limits it too much. Haller answered
him in the Literary Index of Gottingen.”

f «© See Haller on the motion of the heart from stimulus. Comment. Soc. Scient.
Gottingens. tom. i.

G. E. Remus, Experimenta circa circulat. sanguin. instituta. Gotting. 175
d4to. p. 14.”

N 4


180 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


The heart, however, of frogs, for instance, contracts and relaxes
alternately, for a length of time, when out of the body and des-
titute of blood.

Sir B. Brodie divided the great vessels in rabbits, and found the
action of the heart “ apparently unaltered, for at least two minutes
after that viscus and the great blood-vessels were empty of
blood.” s But the quantity of blood greatly influences the action
of the heart.

«« Since a supply of nerves and blood is requisite to the action
of the voluntary muscles, it has been enquired whether these,
both or either, are requisite to the heart also.»

“ The great influence of the nerves over the heart, is demon-
strated by the size of the cardiac nerves, and by the great sym-
pathy between the heart and most functions, however different.
A convincing proof of this is, the momentary sympathy of the heart
during the most perfect health with all the passions, and with
the prime vie in various disorders.

“The great importance of the blood to the irritability of the
heart is evident from the great abundance of vessels in its mus-
cular substance.

“‘ Besides these powers of the heart, there is another which is
mechanical, dependent on structure, and contributing greatly, in
all probability, to sustain the circulation. For, when the blood
is expelled from the contracted cavities, a vacuum takes place,
into which, according to the common laws of derivation, the blood
from the venous trunks must rush, being prevented, by means of
the valves, from regurgitating.” *


& Dr. Cooke, 4 Treatise on Nervous Diseases, vol. i. p- 63.

* « On this dispute consult v. c. R. Forsten, Question. select. Physiol. Lugd.
Bat. 1774. Ato.

J. B. J. Behrends, Dissert. gua demonstratur Cor Nervis carere,
1792. 4to.

And on the other side, J. Munniks, Odservationes varie. Groning. 1805. 4to.
Luce, Obs. cirea Nervos Arterias adeuntes. Francof, 1810. p: 37. tab: ii.”

* « And how much more so when the heart is diseased, is shown ». c. in Caleb
Hillier Parry’s Inquiry into the Symptoms and Causes of the Syxcorr ANGINOsA,
commonly called Ancina Pecroris. Bath, 1799. p. 114.”


Mogunt.


k « Andr. Wilson, Inquiry into the moving Powers employed in the Circulation
of the Blood. Lond. 1784. 8vo. p. 35. sq:

And at great length in J, Carson’s Inquiry into the Causes of the Motion of the
Blood. Ibid. 1815. 8yo.” Second edition, 1833. :


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 181


The influence of a vacuum, pointed out by Rudiger!, enlarged
upon by Dr, Andrew Wilson, and mentioned as probable by
Haller™, John Hunter", &c., has been very ably displayed by
Dr. Carson of Liverpool.

The quantity of the blood, the length of its course, and the
various obstacles opposed to its progress, render, in his opinion,
the mere propulsive power of the heart insufficient to maintain
the circulation perpetually. But assistance must be given by the
vacuum which takes place in all the cavities of the organ, when
the contraction of the muscular fibres is over. The blood is thus
drawn into each relaxed cavity, and the heart performs the double
office of a forcing andasuction pump. The situation of the valves
of the heart is thus explained. There are valves at the mouths
of the two great arteries, because behind each of these openings
is a cavity of the heart, alternately dilating and affording a va-
cuum, into which, were there no valves, the blood would be drawn
retrograde. There are valves between the auricles and ventricles,
because the contraction of the ventricles tends to impel the blood
back into the auricles, as well as into the pulmonary artery and
aorta. At the venous openings of the auricles no valves exist,
because they do not open from a part ever experiencing a va-
cuum and the blood does not appear to leave the sinuses of the
auricles so much by their contraction, which would impel it in
all directions, like the ventricles, as by the vacuum offered it in
the dilated ventricle; and therefore the blood of the auricles will
not move retrograde, but will necessarily pass forwards into the
ventricles, which are offering a vacuum. The inferior elasticity and
irritability of the veins are also explained. If veins were capable


1 Quoted by Haller, El. Physiol. t. ii. lib. vi. p. 325.

m Fis words are— “ Sanguinem in auriculam dextram, tanquam in vaewwm cas-
tellum approperare, ne id quidem videtur absque specie veri dici.” l.c. An idea
of the same kind appears to have been entertained before the time of Rudiger,
whose work, De Regressu Sanguinis per Venas mechanico, was published at Leipsig
in 1704. Forin Pecquet’s Experimenta nova Anatomica, published in 1651, argu-
ments are adduced against those who conceived that the diastole sucked the blood
towards the heart, (num, ut quibusdam placuit, arrRanENDO pelliciat exuGarvr,
investigandum.” Chap. vii. sqq.) At that time suction was not generally known
to be merely a means of removing or diminishing the resistance to the pressure
of air, but supposed to be an occult principle. He details experiments to show
its true nature, but urges nothing against suction in the proper acceptation of the
term, and his adversaries were right in their fact, though ignorant of its true nature.

" A Treatise on the Blood, &c. p. 185:


182 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


of contracting equally with arteries, on the diminution of their
contents, the suction influence of the heart would constantly re-
duce their cavities to a smaller capacity than is compatible with
their functions. The collapse of the veins by pressure, during
the suction of the heart, is prevented by the fresh supply of
blood afforded by the vis a tergo, which does exist, although it is
not considered by him as of itself adequate to convey the blood
back to the right auricle.

All allow that when the heart is relaxed its cavities enlarge,
though some ascribe this to its elasticity, and others regard it as
a necessary consequence of the arrangement of its fibres. Ex-
periment proves the same. Dr. Carson extracted the hearts of
some frogs, and immediately put them into water, blood-warm.
They were thrown into violent action, and, upon some occasions,
projected a small stream of a bloody colour through the trans-
parent fluid. The water could not have been projected unless
previously imbibed. It was thought that a stream of the same
kind continued to be projected at every succeeding contraction ;
but that, after the first or second, it ceased to be observable, in
consequence of the liquid supposed to be imbibed and projected
losing its bloody tinge and becoming transparent, or of the same
colour with the fluid in which the heart was immersed. The
organ was felt to expand forcibly during relaxation, —a fact
stated long ago by Pechlin®, and subsequently by many others.
Indeed, some consider the expansion of the heart as a change
equally active with its contraction: conceiving, perhaps, that
different fibres may act alternately, and produce expansion and
contraction, just as the tongue may be retracted and protruded,
and the iris lessened or enlarged.

Dr. Carson accounts, however, for the full dilatation of the
heart upon another principle, upon the consideration of which it
will be impossible to enter before the next section, where the
subject will therefore be prosecuted.

** We must now enquire what powers are exerted by other
organs in assisting the circulation. The existence of some
secondary powers, and their ability to assist, or even in some cases
to compensate for, the action of the heart, are proved by several
arguments: v. c. the blood moves, according to many persons,”
in some parts to which the influence of the heart cannot reach,


° De Corde.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 183


—/in the vena porte and placenta; not to mention instances of
the absence of the heart. p

“ The principal of these powers is the function of the arteries,
not easy indeed to be clearly understood and demonstrated. 1. It
is well known, that they have a peculiar coat, which is all but
muscular. 2. That they are irritable, has been proved by re-
peated experiments.4 3. The size of the soft nerves arising
from the sympathetic, and surrounding the larger arterial branches
with remarkable networks, particularly in the lower part of the
abdomen", argues the importance of these vessels in assisting
the motion of the blood. *

‘«‘ All know that the arteries pulsate, and indeed violently,
so that if, v.c. we place one leg over the other knee, we find not
only that it, but even a much greater weight, may be raised by
the pulsation of the popliteal. Hence an alternate systole and
diastole, corresponding with those of the heart, have long been
assigned to them.

« But this, although commonly believed on the evidence of
sense, is open to much question’: it may be asked, especially,
whether this pulsation is referable to the power of the artery, or
only to the impulse given by the heart to the blood propelled into
the aorta.


P «& See v. c. C. W. Curtius, De monstro humano cum infante gemello. Lugd.
Bat. 1762. 4to. p. 39.

W. Cooper, Phil. Transact. vol. xv. p. 516.

And, instar omnium, Fr. Tiedemann, Anatomie der Kopflosen Missgeburten-
Landshut, 1813. fol. p. 70. sq.”

4 « Walter Vershuir, De arteriar. et venar. vi irritabili: ejusque in vasts excessu ;
et inde oriunda sanguinis directione abnormi. Groning. 1766. 4to.

Rich. Dennison, Diss. arterias omnes et venarum, partem irritabilitate praditas
esse. Edinb. 1775. 8vo.

Chr. Kramp, De vi vitali arteriarum. Argent. 1785. 8vo.””

r «¢ Observe, for instance, in Walter’s Tabule nervor. thorac. et abdominis, the
right hepatic, tab. ii. O. tab. iil. 1.—the splenic, tab. ii. P., tab. ili. m., tab. iv. 0.—
the superior mesenteric, tab. ii. Q., tab. iii. f—the inferior mesenteric, tab. ii. T.
—and many others.

Consult Soemmerring, De c. h. fabrica. t. iv. p. 362.”

s ¢¢ Haller, we Nervor. in arterias imperio. Gotting, 1744, 4to.

Lucz, J. c.”

t « T. Kirkland, Inquiry into the present state of Medical Surgery. London,
1783. 8yo. vol. i. p. 306. sq.

But especially Cal. Hillier Parry’s Experimental Inquiry into the Arterial
Pulse. Lond, 1816. 8yo.”


184 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


« And indeed, after all, it appears that the diastole of an
artery is owing to a lateral distension given by the impetus of the
bloed, so that the coats are expanded, and, by their elasticity,
the next moment reacquire their natural thickness. To the same
impulse may be ascribed the lateral motion of the axis, observ-
able in the larger arteries, if serpentine and lying in loose cellular
substance.

«« The genuine systole, produced by a contraction of their sub-
stance, scarcely occurs, probably, while the heart acts with vigour,
but may, when they are unusually influenced by local stimulants ;
whence the pulse during illness is very different in different arte-
ries of the same person at the same time; or when the action of
the heart itself fails,” &c.

Most physiologists grant to the capillaries irritability, tonicity,
or organic contractility; but some deny that arteries possess
muscular properties. Bichat’s objections are, the absence of con-
traction on the application of stimuli to them, the much greater
resistance of the middle coat to a distending force than of mus-
cular parts, and, lastly, the difference of the changes which it and
muscles undergo both spontaneously and by the action of other
substances Berzelius has multiplied the latter description of
proofs.* However this may be, I must remark, first, that the
capillaries have certainly vital powers of contraction as fully as
any parts of the body. This appears in their various degrees of
local dilatation and contraction, under inflammation, passions of
the mind, &c. When different stimuli are applied to them, they
are seen under the microscope locally to experience various de-
grees of contraction and dilatation, and this even after connection
with the heart has been cut off by absolute excision of this organ.y
Under similar circumstances, when no stimulus was applied, the
blood was seen by Dr. Hastings often to cease, indeed, to flow,
but still to oscillate. If the capillaries are allowed to possess
organic contractility, it is impossible to say in which point of the
arterial tract it begins.

The evidence of muscular fibres is not necessary to irritability.
The iris and uterus are strongly endowed with irritability, but
their muscularity is disputed by many. No muscularity is dis-


" Anatomie Générale, te ii. * Traité de Chimie, t. vii. p. 84. sq.

¥ See Dr. Wilson Philip, On Febrile Diseases; Dr.'Thomson, Lectures on In-
Jlammation ; Dr. Hastings, A Treatise on the Inflammation of the Mucous Mem-
brane of the Lungs. 1820,


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 185


cernible in the plant called dionzea muscipula, nor in the sensitive
plant, nor in those zoophytes which appear gelatinous masses ;
yet contractility dependent on life is very manifest in them.
Verschuir actually found the larger arteries contract on irritating
them with a scalpel, in fifteen out of twenty experiments. * Dr.k.
Bikker, and J.J. Vandembos assert the same of the aorta, and
Van Geuns of the carotid when influenced by electricity. Zim-
merman, Bichat, and Magendie, saw the arteries contract upon
the application of acids, but the two last considered it a chemical
change. Dr. Hastings, however, saw the same from the application
ofammonia. When a ligature was placed on the aorta of a frog by
Dr. M. Hall, the circulation was almost instantly arrested, first
in the capillaries, then in the veins, and the blood, during ten or
fifteen minutes, would move on in the arteries for some seconds,
and then all at once rapidly retrograde, and so alternately.»
J. Hunter found the posterior tibial artery of a dog contract so as
nearly to prevent any blood from passing through it on merely
being laid bare, and facts similar to this are mentioned by Drs.
Hastings, Fowler ¢, Jones“, and the Drs. Parry. Dr. Stevens de-
stroyed a rabbit’s brain with a bodkin, and opened the chest. The
lungs collapsed, and the heart lay motionless. On opening the
pericardium, a branch of the coronary arteries on the right ven-
tricle began to contract, and acted forcibly till it had driven all
its blood into the ventricle. It now was still, and the right auricle
began to contract, and continued acting for two hours and three
quarters, the ventricle being almost motionless. Dr. Marshall
Hall says, that the superficial muscles and heart of batrachian
teptiles become rigidly contracted by water of 120°; and that, if an
artery and vein be also plunged in it, the artery grows rigid like
muscles, and cylindrical, while the vein suffers no apparent
change. The fact of continued contraction, and of alternate
contraction and relaxation in arteries, being occasioned by stimuli,
is therefore certain; and, although some have not succeeded
in stimulating them, we must remember that others have


Z De Art. et Ven. vi Irrit.

2 See Hastings, 1. c. ‘The introduction to this work is a body of information
on the present subject.

b 4 Critical and Experimental Essay on the Circulation, &c. by Marshall Hali,
M.D. London, 1831. p. 78.

© Disputatio inauguralis de Inflammatione. " On Hemorrhage.

Sols) Canfie Dt F 1 cope 7ae


186 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


failed in the application of electricity to parts indisputably
muscular ;— Verschuir « in the case of the heart and urinary
bladder, and Zimmerman in other parts of known muscularity. "
Dr. Hastings caused coniraction in veins also by the application
of stimuli. !

Dr. Parry instituted a number of experiments upon this ques-
tion. After exactly ascertaining the circumference of arteries in
animals, he killed them, and again measured the circumference ;
and after a lapse of many hours, when life must have been per-
fectly extinguished, he measured the circumference a third time.
Immediately after death, the circumference was found greatly
diminished, and on the third examination it had increased again.
The first contraction arose from the absence of the blood, which
distended the vessels and antagonised its efforts to contract ; and
it was evidently muscular, or, to speak more correctly, organic,
contraction, because, when vitality had ceased, and this kind of
contraction could no longer exist, the vessel was, on the third
examination, always found enlarged. *

The forced state of distension in arteries was proved by the
contraction immediately occurring on making a puncture in a
portion of vessel included between two ligatures. An experiment
of Magendie’s is of equal weight, in which a ligature was fixed on
the whole of a dog’s leg except the crural artery and vein, and
the vein and artery were compressed, when, upon wounding the
vein, the artery completely emptied itself.! The capacities of
arteries are thus always accommodated to the quantity of blood,
and this circumstance gives the arterial canal such properties of
a rigid tube as enable an impulse at the mouth of the aorta to be
instantly communicated throughout the canal. This appears the
great office of the contractile powers of arteries, for,


E lic. expt.22, " De irritabilitate. é LL ce peseong

Dr. M. Hall thought he found an artery, which branches off from the vessels that
by their union form the aorta in the frog and toad, pulsate a considerable time after
the removal of the heart, becoming straight and pale; whereas the pulmonary artery
grows more tortuous and distended at the moment of the stroke of the heart.
This, however, is no more a proof that arteries in other animals have muscular
powers, than it is that other arteries in the same animal have muscular powers
and exhibit the same phenomenon: and Dr. Miiller (Ph, Tr. 1833) maintains
that the vessel is a vein which beats only from the impulse of lymph sent into it
through a lymphatic by a lymph-heart.

* See also J. Hunter, On the Blood, pp. 114. 116.

* Journal de Physiologie, t.i. p. 111.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 187


They do not incessantly dilate and contract to any amount, as
many imagine. They lengthen and become tortuous, so that John
Hunter says, “instead of the term diastole it should rather be
called the elongated state.” Dr. Parry, on the most careful
examination, enalel never discover the least dilatation in them
during the systole of the ventricle — when the pulse is felt. Dr.
Hastings declares he has seen it, as does Magendie in the case of
the aorta and carotid of the horse; but from the number and
accuracy of Dr. Parry’s experiments, I incline to believe it does
not occur in the ordinary undisturbed state of the circulation to
any extent. Sir David Barry plunged his arm into the thorax of a
horse, and found the aorta constantly full, nearly to bursting, not
perceptibly varying in distension for an instant, though he held it
during five minutes and examined it afterwards again; while at
every expiration the cava was so empty as to feel only like a
flaccid thin membrane.» The fact of a continued stream occur-
ring from a wounded artery, only augmented at each pulsation of
the heart, is thought by Magendie ° to prove that the arteries assist
in propelling the blood: but an opening takes off the resistance
to its course so considerably that the vessel cannot but contract
between the impulses of the heart.

Although the blood is constantly streaming onwards, the pulse
is felt only when arteries are more or less compressed; under
which circumstance, the motion of the blood onwards, by the
impulse of a fresh portion from the left ventricle, is impeded :
and this effort of the fluid against the obstructing cause gives the
sensation called the pulse ?, ae follows the stroke of the heart
successively later throughout the arterial system, though the
interval is in general too minute to be appreciated. Sir D. Barry
found no pulsation in the aorta of the horse unless he compressed
it violently.


m (Qn the Blood, p.175.

1 Dissertation sur le Passage du Sang a travers le Ceur. Paris, 1827. p. 78.

Also, Annales des Sciences Naturelles, Juin, 1827.

© Journal de Physiologie, t. i. ps 110.

P An Experimental Enquiry into the Nature, Causes, and Varieties of the Ar-
terial Pulse, &c., by Caleb Hillier Parry, M.D. F.R.S. 1816. Likewise a
second work, entitled, Additional Experiments on the Arteries of warm-blooded
Animals, &c., by Chas. Hen. Parry, M.D. F.R.S. 1819,—the latter displays as
much talent and learning as the former of originality. Dr. Young, in a Croonian
lecture, highly worth perusal, on the functions of the heart and blood-vessels,
reasons to prove that the muscular power of arteries has very little effect in pre-
pelling the blood. Phil. Trans. 1809.


188 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


The elastic coat both assists and antagonises the muscular:
assists it in preventing distension when the distending force is
very strong, and antagonises it — tends to prevent the canal from
becoming too narrow — when it attempts to contract the vessel
excessively. 4

Still, independently of the whole quantity of blood, and of the
heart’s action, particular arteries may be in various degrees of
distension, according to the various states of their individual
contraction. For example, when a finger has a whitlow, the
digital branches are found larger than usual at the very roots of
the fingers ; in many affections the pulse of the two wrists differ
for a time. In fact, their condition may vary like that of the
capillaries, and probably does vary every time that altered cir-
culation occurs in a part, although Dr. Parry’s opinion holds true
during the tranquil and ordinary condition of circulation. Iam
thus inclined to agree with and differ from both Dr. Parry and
Dr. Hastings; believing the former to be right as to the ordinary
state, the latter in irregularity. In some diseases the action of
the heart is strong and the pulse weak, and vice versa ; so that it is
frequently right to examine both.

The elastic power is said to be greater in the arteries, and the
muscular in the capillaries; and as the muscular power is proved
by Dr. Parry’s experiments to be able to overcome the elastic in
the arteries, it must be very considerable in the capillaries.

Dr. Curry, a late lecturer on the practice of medicine at Guy’s
Hospital, concluded, without doubt hypothetically, from some
microscopic experiments which he had made on inflammation in
the presence, once of Sir Charles Bell and once of Mr. Travers,
that the circulation is indispensably facilitated by a sort of electric
repulsion between the vessels and their contents, and that in in-
flammatory accumulation, the tone of the vessels being impaired,
this repulsion is diminished, and the blood passes onwards with
difficulty in consequence. *

“ Since Whytt s, especially, and other illustrious physiologists


4 On the operation of the elastic and muscular coats, see J. Hunter, l. c.
p- 118. sqq.

* See the Syllabus of his lectures for 1810.

* « Consult his Physiological Essays, containing an inquiry into the causes which
promote the circulation of the fluids in the very small vessels of animals. Second
edition, Edinb. 1761. 12mo.


H. v. d. Bosch, iiber das Muskelvermiigen der Haargefiissgen. Munster, 1786.
8yo.”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 189


have been convinced that the influence of the heart could not
reach the extreme arteries and the origins of the veins, they have
ascribed the progression of the blood in those vessels to a kind
of oscillation.”

These oscillations are quite imaginary, and now disallowed.
Although variations of dilatation must affect the course of the
blood through vessels, it is difficult to conceive how any regular
action of them can assist it, while the blood is propelled by and
drawn to the heart; and the influence of the heart was seen by
Dr. Hastings, in some microscopical experiments in which partial
obstruction was produced, to extend to arteries, capillaries, and
veins, as the blood in them all received a sensible impulse at
each contraction of the ventricles. Indeed, we have ocular proof
that the capillaries do not contract on the blood in the ordinary
state of things ; for the blood in them, as well as in the arteries
and veins, may be seen for an hour together in the frog’s foot,
under the microscope, to move in a stream unvarying — neither
becoming finer alternately nor experiencing impulses. t

In foetuses without hearts ¥, it is not proved that the vascular
system carries on the circulation by its own power, because a
twin without a heart has never been seen, unless accompanied by
a perfect foetus, whose heart might circulate the blood of both;
for placentz often communicate, so that one child has died
of hemorrhage from the chord of the other: and in the only
case where the matter was ascertained *, the akerious foetus was
actually injected by the navel-string of the perfect foetus.¥
When, however, the blood is not moved by the heart, the capilla-
ries do impel it. Dr. Wilson Philip once saw it moving freely in
some mesenteric capillaries of a rabbit for an hour and a quarter
after the excision of the heart”; and Haller and Bichat made
similar observations.

Mr. Burns4, anxious to prove that the arteries are of more
importance than the heart, that they themselves circulate the


t Dr. Hastings, l. c. p. 46. sq. Dr. Magendie, Jowrnal de Physiol. t. i.
p- 107. sq. says that the blood streams in the arteries and veins of cold-blooded
animals, as if the vessels were motionless.

« Hewson, Exp. Enquiry, vy. ii. p. 15. Sir B. Brodie, Phil. Trans. 1806.

* Phil. Trans. 1798. p. 155.

Y Dr. Young, Introduction to Med. Literature. 1823. 2d edit. p. 631. sq:

” An Experimental Enquiry into the Laws of the Vital Functions. 3d ed. expt. 67.

* Observations on some of the most frequent and important Diseases of the Heart,
&c. By Allan Burns. 1809. p. 117. sqq-

oO


190 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


blood which they receive», and that the auricles are of more
importance than the ventricles, mentions, among other examples
of diseased heart, one in which both ventricles were as completely
ossified as the cranium, except about a cubic inch at the apex,
and in which there had been no palpitation or pain in the heart.
As bony ventricles could not contract, nor easily be moved, pal-
pitation could not readily have occurred, and pain rarely attends
the ossification of any part. That the circulation was deranged
is proved by the woman having experienced great dyspneea,
expectoration, and dropsy. The auricles were healthy, and
thicker than usual, and had evidently performed the duty of the
ventricles, through which, as an unchanging reservoir between
the auricles and the pulmonary artery and aorta, the auricles
drove the blood. The invariable languor of circulation in cases
where the action of the heart is languid, proves the power of the
heart in the circulation.

On the other hand, the large arteries of the extremities are con-
tinually found ossified, though not obstructed, without any apparent
deficiency of circulation. I have seen long tracts of vessels in the
lower extremities ossified, where no such circumstance had been
suspected. Mr. Burns himself mentions an instance “ of the arte-
ries of the head, pelvis, legs, and arms, being almost entirely Ossi-
fied°,” the heart and aorta being healthy; and yet the man clearly
died of diseased liver induced by hard drinking, hot climate, &c.

The ventricles are certainly of more importance than the
auricles, because these are absent in many animals, and are only
reservoirs to supply the ventricles, when the extremities of the
great veins at the heart are not of very ample dimensions. ¢

“It remains for us now to examine the aid given to the re-
turning blood by the veins, their radicles not being taken into
the account. We should conclude at first sight that they have far
less active power ¢ than the rest of the sanguiferous system, and


B ie, py 120. ¢ 1. c. p. 124. sq. d J. Hunter, 1. c. p. 138.

¢ « What is commonly, but improperly, called the venous pulse, observable on
opening living animals, and in some morbid affections, and also under a violent
effort, does not correspond with the action of the heart, but with respiration ;
since, if an expiration is unusually deep and lengthened, and the reflux of the
blood to the lungs thus impeded, the jugular vein swells as far as the brain, the
subclavian as far as the basilic, and the inferior cava as far as the crural.” But
there is also in some diseases of the heart a pulse of the lower portion of the
external jugulars, synchronous with the systole of the ventricles, and dependent, as
already explained, on the interrupted progress of the blood to the ventricles during
their contraction. A vein may pulsate from its proximity to an artery.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 191


that the return of their purple blood to the heart is chiefly
ascribable to the impetus a tergo of the arterial blood, and to
their valvular structure, which prevents any reflux. The efficacy
of the valves in this point of view, is shown by the distensions
and infarctions of the veins in the lower part of the abdomen,
which are found destitute of valves. f

** The existence of vital powers in the venous trunks is pro-
bable*, from the example of the liver and placenta, and from
experiments instituted on living animals. We formerly men-
tioned the muscular layer in the extreme veins near the heart.”

In a young lady, whom I attended, before the days of ausculta-
tion, for chronic bronchitis accompanied by violent cough, and
who ultimately recovered, all the veins of the back of the hands
and fore-arms distinctly pulsated synchronously with the arteries.
Hunauld and Laennec each saw a similar case. An universal
pulsation of the veins synchronous with that of the arteries,
occurred for some days twice in a young man who died of ce-
rebral disease, with constriction of the mouth of the aortai; once
in a middle-aged man with affections of the head and abdo-
men, who recovered !; once in a middle-aged man who died with
dropsy and palpitation “, and in a girl who died with symp-
toms of hydrocephalus.' In a case of epidemic fever, the same
was observed by Weitbrecht for twenty-four hours™; and he had
previously seen a similar case, but doubted his senses. Haller’s
remark upon it is, “ Ego quidem non intelligo.”’*

In venesection at the bend of the arm, I have frequently seen
the jet regularly stronger at each pulsation of the heart; and
J. Hunter mentions the same thing, and states it to be more
observable at the head or foot, saying, “ The fact is, however,
that there is a pulsation in the veins.°

Yet ordinarily there is, speaking of the veins in general, no
venous pulsation, and the stream in the veins, though caused

f « G, E. Stahl, De vena porte porta malorum. Hale, 1698. 4to.”

& « Lister, De humoribus, p. 25.”

h Laennee, |. c. p. iii. s. ii. ch. ii.

i Journal Complimentaire, t.21. June, 1825.

i Journal der Praktischen Heilkund. Sept. 1815.

* Archiv. fiir Medinische Erfahrung. July and August, 1829.

! Dublin Hospital Reports, vol. iv.

™ 1736. Haller’s Disputationes, t. v. p- 407.

n El. Phys. t. ii. p. 356. ol. ce. p. 186. ‘sq.

0 2


192 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


mainly by the left ventricle, —as may be seen by tying all the
vessels of an extremity but the artery, and wounding the vein,
when the jet from the vein may be regulated by pressing the
artery, —is perfectly uniform. By the infinite subdivisions and
great increase of capacity of the arterial system, the blood,
which is moved in jerks in the larger arteries, giving a pulse,
and, if the vessel is wounded, flowing more forcibly at the
heart’s pulsation, gives no pulse in the small vessels, and, if they
are wounded, flows regularly ; and in the capillaries, through the
augmentation of space, experiences no increased momentum at
the heart’s pulsation. When the capillaries unite into veins,
and the capacity of the whole vascular channel diminishes, the
blood moves more quickly again through the diminished space ? ;
but, though the smaller space augments its flow again, the im-
pulses of the heart lost in the capillaries cannot be felt in the
veins, and the current in them is smooth. Neither, generally
speaking, is it by any means so rapid as in the arteries, because
much of the heart’s force is expended, and the veins are gene-
rally so much more numerous than the arteries, and the space,
therefore, however less than in the capillaries, still much greater
than in the arteries. Nor ought the momentum to be strong
when the veins have all united into the cave, because it has only
to reach the heart, where there is no resistance, but, on the con-
trary, more than one source of vacuum prepared; whereas in
the aorta it ought to possess a force sufficient to carry it a great
distance, and surmount great obstacles.

When the veins have pulsated, the action of the heart must
have been very violent, or some obstruction occurred, which, in
Dr. Hastings’s experiments, was seen to cause the heart’s action
to be sensible in the capillaries and veins. 4

There is always a pulsation in the large veins near the heart:
but that arises from obstruction, as I have already mentioned.

‘* These are the chief powers which move the blood, and de-
pend upon the structure and vitality of the sanguiferous system.
We say nothing of the effect of gravity, attraction, and other
properties, common to all matter. The more remote assistance
derived after birth from particular functions, v.e. respiration and
muscular motion, will appear in our account of those functions.”


P Dr. Hastings, when observing the circulation in the frog’s foot under the
microscope, saw that the blood moved “ faster in the arteries than in the veins,
and in the veins than in the capillaries.” 1. c. p. 47.

9 Lc. p. 47. sqq.


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 193


The heart of mammalia and birds has no peculiarity necessary to be mentioned
here. In most amphibious animals, the arteries of the system as well as of the
lungs spring from the right ventricle, with which the left, that sends off no vessel,
communicates: hence their circulation continues under water. In amphibious
mammalia and diving birds, some vessels, especially one vena cava, are dilated, to
form a receptacle during the suspension of respiration. The heart of fish is ex-
tremely small, and has but one auricle and ventricle, the latter propelling the
blood to the gills, from which it streams to the system through a large artery.
Neither blood-vessels nor absorbents have been discovered in insects, yet a large
tube pulsates in their back ; and Professor Carus has lately discovered a circu-
lation in them through a granular substance, the streams running to the posterior
end of this vessel, and issuing again from its anterior end. With respect to the
mollusca, the cuttle-fish has three detached hearts, consisting of a ventricle only,
two for the gills and one for the aorta; the rest havea simple heart, the blood
of the cava passing through the gills before it reaches the heart. The same
is the case with the crustacea, and their heart has no auricle. Worms have
circulating vessels distinctly contracting and dilating, but no heart, and their
veins communicate with the general cavity of the body, and probably absorb.
Zoophytes have no heart, nor circulating system, properly so called. In the
echinus, indeed, there are two vessels that run along the intestines, and are
thought to be an aorta and vena cava. But currents may occur, and not be
perceptible if the fluid is colourless, or has no globules ; and currents have been
lately discovered by Mr. Lister in some zoophytes exactly similar to the currents
long observed under the microscope in the tubes of stone-wort; the streams run-
ning first in one direction, on the internal surface of a tube, and then returning
in another on the same surface. Such streams on surfaces or through cells are
very wonderful.

According to Dr. M. Hall, when the office of a part in brutes is simple, the
distribution of blood-vessels is simple, as in the fin or tail of a fish, and the arteries
chiefly become veins: but when its office is complicated, as in the toes of the
frog, or the blood has to be thoroughly exposed to air, as in the lungs, the
arteries give off a number of branches, which do not diminish in diameter or
give off others, and are peculiarly called by Dr. Hall capillaries, as large as, or
larger than, their parent branch, freely anastomosing, not diminishing in size,
nor giving origin to or running into the sides of veins. In the lungs, the
large vessels presently split into capillaries; in the systemic arteries, the vessels
diminish and subdivide considerably beforehand.

Vegetables have no central organ of circulation. The sap rises ordinarily
through the cells, or, according to Decandolle, the intercellular spaces of the
wood. Some plants are altogether cellular. The vessels in the wood of those
which are vascular are found to contain air only, and the sap sometimes takes
so circuitous a route, is so diffused, and so subsides to the lowest parts, that it
cannot, in all cases at least, be confined to vessels. The sap rises chiefly in the
newest layer of wood, called alburnum. But when the buds are preparing for
developement, and the leaves are not yet complete, the sap is termed nursling sap,
and ascends through the oldest and innermost layer of wood, and passes through
unknown channels to the buds, combining probably with nutriment formerly


o 3


194 THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD.


deposited. ‘This nursling sap has been compared to the milk elaborated for
the young of animals. The returning or descending sap passes through either
vessels or intercellular spaces, chiefly along the innermost layer of bark, and
some along the outermost layer of wood, where it must mix more or less
with the ascending sap. In cellular plants, of course, the passage cannot be
through vessels, and perhaps it passes through cellular tissue in all. The
motion of the sap both in cellular tissues and vessels is explained, according to
M. Raspail, by the fact of the inner surfaces of the cells and vessels of vege-
tables, &c. absorbing and exhaling rapidly, by which motion is given to the fluid
and a current is established. (I. c. p. 317. sqq.) ‘The power propelling the
sap is such, that, if a piece of the stem is cut out, it entirely empties itself; and
the sap has been found to flow from the extremity of a branch with a force suffi-
cient to overcome a column of water 43 feet 31 inches in height. (Hales,
Statical Essays, vol. i. p. 101. )


It would not be right to terminate this section without a note upon the discovery
of the circulation of the blood ;—a truth of which the ancients are thought to have re-
mained ignorant, from finding the arteries empty after death, But they knew that
these contained blood during life, as Galen (De Anat. Admin. vii. 15.) relates some
amusing anecdotes of his pupils and some persons who promised to prove the arte-
ries empty. The discovery was made by our countryman, Dr. Harvey, Physician
to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, and promulgated by him at the age of forty-one,
in an anatomical and surgical course of lectures at the College of Physicians, in
1619. He is entitled to the glory of having made it, says Hume (History of
England, ch. 62.), “ by reasoning alone, without any mixture of accident.”” He
informed Boyle, that he was led to it by reflecting on the arrangement of the
yalves of the heart and veins, as exhibited by his master Fabricius. Nothing, he
knew, was planned in vain, and they clearly allowed a fluid to pass but one way.
By this argument, and the fact of a ligature upon an artery causing the blood to
accumulate in it on the side nearest the heart, and, upon a vein, beyond the liga-
ture ; and that animals bleed to death by wounds in arteries or veins, he chiefly
established his doctrine. After his time it was demonstrated with the microscope
in cold-blooded animals. His immediate reward was general ridicule and abuse,
and a great diminution of his practice "; and no physician in Europe, who at the
time had reached forty years of age, ever, to the end of life, adopted his doctrine
of the circulation of the blood. (Hume, l.c.) When the truth could be denied
no longer, he was pronounced a plagiarist ; the circulation was declared to have
been known to Plato; nay, more, to king Solomon. (See Haller, El. Physio2.
t. i. p. 243.) The circulation through the lungs had certainly been taught about


* This he laments in a letter to a friend, as may be seen ina MS. of the
Royal Society, referred to in the Life prefixed to the College edition of his
works : —‘ Quod multo rarius solito ad wgros invisendos accersitus esset, post-
quam librum de motu cordis ediderit.”


THE MOTION OF THE BLOOD. 195


seventy years previously by Servetus*, a Spanish physician of great anatomical
knowledge, and original and active mind‘, who was slowly burnt to death»
Oct. 27. 1553, the fire being made to last two hours by means of wood small in
quantity and green, through Calvin, for not happening to be in all his writings of
the same opinion as himself upon a point in divinity, Calvin was honourable
enough to produce private letters in evidence of the difference of the opinions
of Servetus from his own, and fancied himself to be a Christian,


* His words are,—“ sanguine, quem dexter ventriculus cordis sinistro commu-
nicat. Fit autem communicatio hec, non per parietem cordis medium, ut vulgo
creditur, sed magno artificio, a dextro cordis ventriculo, longo per pulmones
ductu, agitatur sanguis subtilis; et a vena arteriosa, in arteriam venosam trans-
funditur. Deinde, in ipsa arteria yenosa inspirato aeri miscetur, erpiralione a
fuligine repurgatur. Atque ita tandem a sinistro cordis ventriculo totwm mixtum
per diastolem attrahitur, apta suppellex, ut fiat spiritus vitalis. Quod ita per
pulmones fiat communicatio et preparatio, docet conjunctio vario, et communica-
tio ven arteriose cum arteria venosa in pulmonibus. Confirmat hac magnitudo
insignis vene arterios@, qu nec talis, nec tanta facta esset, nec tantam a corde
ipso vim purissimi sanguinis in pulmones emitteret ob solum eorum nutri-
mentum, &c. Item, a pulmonibus ad cor non simplex aer, sed mixtus san~
guine mittitur per arteriam venosam: ergo, in pulmonibus, fit mixtio, &c.
Illa itaque spiritus vitalis, a sinistro cordis ventriculo, in arterias totius corporis
deinde transfunditur, &c. Sicut, in transfusione a venis in arterias, est in pul-
mone noyum genus vasorum, ex vena et arteria, &c.” If we could be satisfied
that by spiritus vitalis Servetus meant blood, we should say that he had also
described the general circulation, because he mentions the course of the vital spirit
from the left ventricle into the arteries throughout the body, and the course of the
blood from the right side of the heart implies the course of it from the body or
some part to the right side of the heart. The expressions per diastolem attra-
hitur might almost persuade us that he was acquainted with the influence of the
vacuum from the expansion of the ventricles: and his account of the office of respir-
ation to liberate the blood from its soot, expiratione a fuligine repurgatur, completely
agrees with the discovery of the separation of carbon ; while the doctrine that a
pulmonibus ad cor, aer, mivtus sanguine, mittitur per arteriam vencsam, accords
with the present doctrine of the absorption of a portion of the air.

I am indebted for this most interesting quotation to the Medical Dissertations
of Dr. Sigmond (ed. 2. 1828), who possesses a copy of Servetus bequeathed to
him by Dr.Sims, for many years President of the London Medical Society, and
supposed by Dr. Sims to be the only copy not burnt by the furious Calvin ; to
have been secreted and saved by Dr. Colladon, one of the judges; to have
passed to the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, and then to Dr. Mead, who had
nearly completed a quarto edition of it, when, at the instance of Gibson, Bishop
of London, the edition was seized, May 27. 1723, and burnt, with the exception
of a very few copies. The Duc de Valliére gave nearly 400 guineas for the book,
and at his sale it brought 3810 livres. Dr. Sigmond, however, does not believe
it to be the original copy.

* In the words of an Harveyan oration by Sir George Baker, “ Vis illa animi
tam vivida, tam libera et erecta, impatiens magistri.”’

O 4


196


CHAP. XII.


RESPIRATION, AND ITS PRINCIPAL USE.


“Tre lungs, closely connected with the heart both by prox-
imity and by relation of function, are two viscera,” of the shape
and size of the thorax, which they fill; with a very large base, like
a horse’s hoof; the right divided into three lobes, the left into two ;
“so light as to swim in water, and composed of a spongy, but
pretty tenacious and elastic», parenchyma.’’¢

Like other cavities, the chest is lined by a serous membrane,
by which is meant a close sac, translucent ¢ during life and health,
and coherent by cellular membrane externally with every thing in
contact,—with parietes and viscera; internally smooth, unattached,
in contact only with the opposite portions of itself, and moist-
ened by serum.® A serous membrane thus affords an external coat
to viscera, insulates them, and facilitates their movements.

Each lung has a serous membrane, called Pleura, so that the
pleuree are two closed sacs, one of which lies over each lung,


* « Soemmerring and Reisseisen, iiber die Structur, die Verrichtung und den
Gebrauch der Lungen. Zwey Preischriften. Berlin, 1808. 8vo.”

> « J, Carson, On the Elasticity of the Lungs, in the Phil. Trans. 1820. p. 29.

Consult also, Const. Ern. de Welzien, De Pulmonwm autenergia, &c. Dorpat,
1819. 8vo.”

* « Respecting all the organs concerned in respiration, consult Corn. J. Van
Den Bosch, Anatomia Systematis Respirationi inservientis Pathologica. Harlem,
1801. 4to. pp. 1—44.”

“ M.Richerand tells us, that, on removing a portion of the thorax when cutting
away a cancer, he saw the heart through the pericardium. Jowrnal de Médecine,
1818.

* Dr. Marshal, from many experiments, believed that this is not the case, but
that, whenever fluid is discovered, we must regard it as the effect of either disease
or the struggle of dying. His experiments were made on the ventricles of the
brain, the theca vertebralis, the pleura, and the pericardium (The Morbid Ana-
tomy of the Brain in Mania, Hydrophobia, &c.); yet, when Dr. Magendie has
opened the membranes of the brain or spinal marrow, I have myself seen a
colourless clear fluid instantly escape.


RESPIRATION. 197


one portion of the sac adhering closely to it, and one lying over
this again; the internal surfaces of both portions are always in
contact, because, if the parietes of the thorax expand and draw
with them the external portion, the lung at the same time expands
with air and forces forwards the internal in the same degree.

The union of the two pleura, from the sternum to the spine, is
called the septum or mediastinura. The heart lies between the two.
Before the two unite at the posterior part, they leave a cavity,
called the cavity of the posterior mediastinum, containing the
aorta, cesophagus, thoracic duct, vena azygos, large bronchi, lym-
phatic ganglia, and cellular membrane. In front, they leave an-
other space, called the cavity of the anterior medastinum, which
contains cellular membrane, and in the foetus the thymus gland.

« The lungs hang, in a manner, from the wind-pipe, usually
called aspera arteria or trachea,” ‘ which is composed of an in-
ternal mucous membrane continuous with that of the fauces, of
an external fibrous membrane, and of from fifteen to twenty fibro-
cartilaginous falciform arches, imperfect at the posterior part,
where transverse muscular fibres connect the two extremities of
each cartilage. Within this muscular coat, and throughout the
trachea and bronchiz, a coat of longitudinal fibres is seen.

“ The aspera arteria, having entered the thorax, is bifurcated ”
(the right branch the shorter and wider) “ opposite the third
dorsal vertebra,” “into the trunks of the bronchiz, and these, the
more deeply they penetrate into the lobes and lobules of the lungs,
are the more and more ramified;” the fibro-cartilaginous rings are
each divided into pieces, more and more numerous and smaller,
till they are mere grains, and at length are lost, together with the
external fibrous coat; and the extreme divisions, consisting of
the mucous membrane, and probably of the circular longitudinal
fibres immediately external to it, terminate in those cel/s which
form the chief part of the substance of the lungs and alternately
receive and emit the air we breathe.

‘«« The shape and magnitude f of the air-cells are various. The
former is generally polyedrical. The latter, in regard to surface,
is scarcely to be defined’: though, indeed, the capacity of the
lungs of an adult, during a strong inspiration, is about 120 cubic


f « Keil, indulging his luxuriant iatro-mathematical genius, assigned more


than 1,744,000,000 cells to each lung.”
&® « Lieberkiihn, with equal exaggeration, made the surface of the cells equal


?


to 1500 square feet.’


1S8 RESPIRATION.


inches. The immense size to which the lungs may be inflated,
when the chest has been opened, has no relation to our present
subject.

“ The cells are invested and connected by the common but deli-
cate cellular membrane — the general vinculum of the body —and
must be carefully distinguished from it. In healthy and very re-
cent lungs, I have found the cells so unconnected that they were
distended in one insulated spot by air cautiously inflated into a
fine branch of the bronchiz, while neither the neighbouring cells
nor the cellular membrane, which lies between the cells, admitted
the smallest portion. If air is forcibly thrown in, the air-cells
are ruptured and confounded with the cellular membrane, and
both parts distended.

“ The cellular membrane surrounding the air-cells of the lungs
is supplied with innumerable blood-vessels — divisions of the pul-
monary artery and four pulmonary veins, the branches of which
accompany the ramifications of the bronchiz», and, after repeated
division, form at length animmense collection of most delicate and
reticulated anastomoses. This extraordinary network, penetrating
the mucous web on every side, closely surrounds the air-cells, so
that the prodigious quantity of blood existing in the pulmonary
vessels is separated from the contact of the air by very fine mem-
branes only, which Hales estimated as scarcely +;'55 of an inch in
thickness.

** As each ramification of the bronchiz possesses its own
bunch or lobule of air-cells, so again each of these possesses a
peculiar system of blood-vessels, the twigs of which anastomose
in the wonderful network with one another, but scarcely at all
with the blood-vessels of the other lobules, as is proved by micro-
scopic observations on living frogs and serpents, by minute in-
jections, and by the phenomena of vomice and other local
diseases of the lungs.”

The best treatise with which I am acquainted upon the lungs,
is the prize commentary of Reisseisen, published by the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Berlin in 1808, and printed in 1822,
with six beautiful coloured engravings, and a Latin version, under
the care of Professor Rudolphi.i


» « Eustachius, tab. xxvii. fig. 13.” .

' Francis Daniel Reisseisen, M.D. of Strasburgh, iiber den bau der Lungen,
eine von der Kiniglichen Academie der Wissenshaften xu Berlin gekriinte Preiss
chrift. Berlin, 1822,


RESPIRATION. 199


He asserts, Ist, That the subdivisions of the
bronchi occur more and more thickly, the
twigs propcrtionally decreasing in diameter
and length, and that each ultimate twig ends
ina close bulbous extremity, or cell, com-
municating with other bulbous extremities
only in an indirect manner, — by means of
the twigs which end in them. Malpighi had
described them as round, and mere dilata-
tions in the course as well as at the ends of the bronchial twigs.‘
2d, That, as Malpighi proved, and contrary to the subsequent
opinion of Helvetius and others, these ramifications and cells
have no connection with the surrounding common cellular mem-
brane. 3d, That they consist of, — 1. mucous membrane, behind
which lies, —2. a coat of elastic white fibres, their existence being
visible as far as the canals can be traced, and the regular discharge
of any fluid injected into the bronchie after death proving the
existence of elasticity in the bronchial ramifications ;— 3. a coat
of muscular fibres, transverse relatively to the course of the canals,
and visible by the aid of a magnifier as far as the size of the canals
will allow them to be traced. He conceives the muscularity of
the twigs and cells to be shown also from the necessity for its ex-
istence in them no less than in the large trunks and trachea,
where it is visible; from their evident contraction in the experi-
ments of Varnier, who irritated them by the injection of stimulating
liquids and gases, and by mechanically stimulating the surface of
the lungs!; and from the circumstance of the lungs shrinking much
more if an opening is made in the thorax of a living than of a dead
animal, in the latter of which it can shrink from elasticity only.
4th, That the ramifications of the bronchial and pulmonary arteries
freely anastomose both in the air-passages and on the surface of
the lungs, and that the bronchial arteries run chiefly direct to the
pulmonary veins. 5th, That the air-passages and blood-vessels of
the lungs are most abundantly supplied with nerves from the par
vagum, whose conjunctions with the sympathetic take place ex-
ternally to the lungs.™

«“ The common membrane investing the lungs is the chief seat
of a remarkable network of lymphatic vessels ® which run to nu-


« Epist. de Pulmon. 1. p. 133.

1 Mémoires de la Société Royale de Médecine. 1779. p. 394. sqq.

m™ Some other conclusions are drawn, but unimportant or unsatisfactory.
n « Mascagni, Histor. vasor. lymphaticor. tab. xx.”


200 RESPIRATION.


merous lymphatic or conglobate glands®, carefully to be distin-
guished from a neighbouring order of glands, called bronchial,
that are supplied with an excretory duct opening into the mucous
membrane of the bronchia, and are of the conglomerate kind.p

“ The thorax, which contains the lungs, has an osseous and car-
tilaginous framework,” narrow above and broad below, “ somewhat
resembling a bee-hive, throughout very firm and stable, but in
every part more or less movable for the purpose of respiration.”4

The framework is the twelve dorsal vertebra, forming a column
convex externally, concave in front; the twenty-four ribs, also
convex externally and concave within; and the sternum: all the ribs
are united at one extremity by a joint with the dorsal vertebre ;
the seven highest ribs are connected at their other extremity
with the sternum by means of a cartilage, larger and longer in
each lower rib, just as each of the seven ribs is longer than the
rib above it (true or sternal ribs), and the three next are each
united by cartilage with the cartilage of the rib above (false
or asternal ribs), and the two lowest have their anterior ex-
tremity unattached (floating false or asternal ribs). When the


a, vertebre of spinal column.
é, sternum.
c; ensiform cartilage.


Nas
~ ** Abid. tabatatie?”
> « Consult Portal, Mém. de l Acad. des Scienc. de Paris. 1780.”

1 “J. G. Amstein (Pres. Oetinger), De usu et actione musculor. tntercostal.
Tubing. 1769. 4to. Theod. Fr. Trendelenburg, Jun. De sterni costarumque in
respiratione vera genuinaque motis ratione. Gotting. 1779. 4to.

Bordenave and Sabatier, Mém., del’ Acad, des Scienc. de Paris. 1778.”


RESPIRATION. 201


ribs are raised, their vertebral extremity rotates, remaining in its
place; the rest of the rib rises, each part of course the more, the
more distant it is from the vertebra, and the lower margin is drawn
rather outwards; and with the ribs the sternum rises. ‘The
chest thus becomes both droader and deeper from front to back, *

“ Between the edges of the ribs lie two strata of intercostal
muscles, differing in the direction of their fibres, but conspiring”
to elevate the ribs or depress them, just as the higher or
lower rib happens to be the more fixed. The one is external,
placed between the vertebra and the cartilages, and its fibres
run forwards and downwards: the other internal, placed be-
tween the sternum and the angle or curve of the rib near the
spine, and its fibres run downwards and backwards. Ordi-
narily, they act as muscles of inspiration, and raise the ribs,
because the lower rib is more movable than the one above it.


Between the higher and
middle rib, except near the
sternum, is seen the internal
intercostal: between the
lower and middle, the ex-
ternal.


r Although each lower rib among the first eight must execute a greater extent
of motion, from being longer than the one above, yet the first is asserted by Dr.
Magendie to be absolutely more movable than the second, the second than the
third, &c.; and this because the first has but one articular surface, is articulated
with but one vertebra, and possesses neither internal nor costo-transyerse ligament,
and has the posterior ligament horizontal, and because slight shades of difference
exist in the disposition of the ligaments of the six other ribs. Précis Elémen-
taire, t. il, p. 317.


202 RESPIRATION.


“ At the base of the thorax, the diaphragm * is subtended
in the form of an arch.” The central part is tendinous, and has
an irregularly quadrilateral opening rather to the right, for the
transmission of the vena cava, which adheres to its margin
and is thus kept open. From this tendinous centre, muscular
fibres proceed in all directions, and the anterior and lateral are
inserted into the ensiform cartilage and six lowest ribs and
their cartilages, while the posterior fibres converge into two
great bands, called pillars of the diaphragm, which run down-
wards and are inserted by means of two tendons into the three
first lumbar vertebre. At their origin they leave an oval
opening between them for the passage of the cesophagus and
pneumo-gastric nerves, each bunch sending a bundle across to
the other in order to complete the opening behind. More pos-
teriorly, near their termination in tendon, they leave a para-
bolic opening for the aorta, vena azygos, and thoracic duct.


a, central tendon.
b, surrounding muscle,
c, crura,
d, tendons of crura.
e, opening for vena cava.
f; opening for esophagus.
g, space for aorta.
h, ossa ilii.


‘a nN


When the fibres contract, the diaphragm descends, chiefly at
its sides, and ceases to be vaulted, and the cavity of the chest
lengthens. It is the lateral portions only which in ordinary in-
spiration sensibly descend.


* « Haller, Icon. Anat. fascic. 1. tab. i.

B.S. Albinus, Tab. musculor. tab. xiv. fig. 5, 6, 7.

J. G, Roderer, De arcubus tendineis muscul. progr. 1. Gotting. 1760. 4to.
Santorini, Tab. Posth. x. fig. 1.’


RESPIRATION. 203


‘* It is a considerable muscle, and, in the words of Haller, next
in importance to the heart. Its utility in the mechanical part of
respiration was long since shown, by the excellent experiments
of Galen t upon living animals, to depend chiefly on the phrenic
nerve.u

“Its antagonists are the abdominal muscles, especially the two
sets of oblique and the transverse.

‘* The thorax, thus constituted, is, after birth, dilated by in-
spiration, and subsequently reduced to a smaller capacity by ex-
piration.

“During the former act, the thorax is enlarged laterally and in-
feriorly, so that the bodies of the six ribs mentioned above are
elevated and their inferior margin drawn somewhat outwards ; the
arch of the diaphragm is at the same time rather depressed and
flattened.”

The lungs in ordinary respiration do not descend lower than
the sixth rib, and the lateral portions of the diaphragm, ascend-
ing into the empty space, lie in contact on both sides with the
lower ribs, each covered by its costal pleura.

Dr. Carson gives the following account of the mechanical part
of respiration.

The ‘substance of the lungs is highly elastic, and constantly
kept in a forced state of distension after birth by the pressure of
the atmosphere.“ ‘This is evident also from the lungs collapsing
upon our puncturing the walls of the thorax, —a circumstance
arising from the atmospheric pressure on the one hand becoming
counterbalanced on the other, so that their elasticity, experiencing
no opposition, becomes effective.y During inspiration, the inter-
costal muscles raise and draw out the ribs, and the diaphragm
descends: the enlargement of the thoracic cavity is instantly fol-
lowed of necessity by the greater distension of the substance of
the lungs from the diminished resistance to the atmosphere gra-


* « De Anatomicis Administrationibus, 1. viii. cap. 8. The whole book is very
rich in experiments on respiration.”

u « Ephr. Kruger, De nervo phrenico. Lips. 1759. ; reprinted in Sandifort’s
Thesaurus, tom. til.

Walter, Tab. nervor. thorac. et abdominis, tab. i. fig. 1. n. 1.”

* See Haller, El. Phys. lib. viii. s. iv. pp. 259. 275.

y Dr. Carson found the elasticity of the lungs of calves, sheep, and large dogs
balanced by a column of water of from a foot to a foot and a half in height, and
of rabbits and cats by a column of from six to ten inches. Phil. Trans. 1820.
Pantels


204 RESPIRATION.


vitating in the bronchia. The diaphragm and intercostal muscles
ceasing to act, the substance of the lungs exerts its elasticity
with effect, recovers its former dimensions, and drives out the
additional volume of air just admitted, and the passive diaphragm
follows the shrinking substance of the lungs, offering, from its
relaxation, no resistance to the atmosphere pressing on the
surface of the abdomen. Thus expiration is produced. The
muscular power of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles is
far greater than the elastic power of the lungs, and therefore,
when exerted overcomes it, producing inspiration: but, ceasing
to be exerted, the elastic power gains efficiency, and produces
expiration.

To the elastic, Reisseisen adds the muscular, contraction of the
bronchial ramifications and cells. ‘* Thorace ampliato, aér vacuum
in pulmone spatium occupat, victisque jfibris, fistulam spiritalem
quaquaversum extendit, ultra modum, quo quiescit, explicari
coactam, unde fibre elastice resilire, circulares sese contrahere
nituntur, quo fit ut desidente thorace omnes simul ad expellendum
spiritum vires intenduntur. Sunt autem, thoracis undique desi-
dentis pressio, tum fibrarum fistulam spiritalem in brevius contra-
hentium vis elastica, denique muscularium illam constringentium
arritabilitas.

‘The contractile power of the diaphragm (and intercostal
muscles), in conformity with the laws of muscular motion,” says
Dr. Carson 7, “ is irregular, remitting, and sometimes altogether
quiescent. The elasticity of the lungs, on the other hand, is
equal and constant. The superior energy of the former is
balanced by the permanency of the latter. By the advantage
which the inferior power, from the uniformity of its operations, is
enabled to take of the remissions of its more powerful antagonist,
the ground which had been lost is recovered, and the contest
prolonged; that contest in which victory declaring on one side or
the other is the instant death of the fabric.”

In the common account of respiration, the elasticity and mus-
cularity of the lungs are unnoticed, and expiration is ascribed to
the elasticity of the cartilages of the ribs, and to the contractions
of the abdominal muscles emptying the lungs by pressure. Now,
according to Dr. Carson, in the first place, the elasticity (and
muscularity) of the lungs is of itself sufficient for the purpose ; in


* 1. C.pe 223:


RESPIRATION. 205


the second, there is no proof of the agency of the abdominal
muscles in expiration ; it proceeds equally well in cases of ina-
nition, when their contraction would rather enlarge than diminish
the abdominal cavity, and in experiments when they are entirely
removed from animals, — a child was born without them, and had
lived eighteen months at the time of the publication of its case,
and was very well#: and I may add, thirdly, that, although the
elasticity of the cartilages of the ribs must conspire with that of
the lungs, numerous cases are recorded of immobility of the ribs,
by ossification of their connections, where respiration was not
materially impeded.” ‘These cases are adduced to show that the
diaphragm is the chief instrument of respiration; but, as_ its
elasticity cannot produce expiration, they show that this was
accomplished entirely, or in a great measure, by the lungs them-
selves. Even where there is no ossification, the motion of the ribs
has very little share in respiration; and Dr. Bostock considers the
chief use of the intercostals to be that of giving a fixed point for
the action of the diaphragm, and the operation of the abdominal
muscles in expiration to be nearly passive.c It is commonly
known, however, that, if the pleura is wounded, air rushes into
the chest during inspiration only, and is in some measure ex-
pelled again during expiration. Galen showed this, notwithstand-
ing his object was different, by wounding the chest and fixing
a bladder upon the wound. ‘The bladder shrunk at inspiration,
and became distended at expiration.4 Were the ascent of the
diaphragm and descent of the ribs in expiration the effect of
solely the contraction of the lungs — of a tendency to vacuum
occasioned by their shrinking, — air and fluids should stream to
the chest as much during expiration as inspiration — should rush
to fill up the vacuum as much as the diaphragm should ascend and
the ribs descend for that purpose: nor should air be expelled
from the wounded pleura; for we may regard the thoracic cavity


@ Gazette de Santé, Dec. 5. 1826. A child of seven years is said in Lieutaud
to have had no diaphragm.

b Dr. Bostock, dn Elementary System of Physivlogy, vol. ii. p.15.

@ lice Voli. pps 15.

4 Administ. Anat. lib. viii. c. ult.

If, instead of a bladder, a tube immersed in a coloured fluid is employed, this
will of course rise in inspiration, and remain stationary or fall in expiration. See
Experimental Researches on the Influence exercised by Atmospheric Pressure upon
the Progression of the Blood in the Veins, &c. By Edward Barry, M.D. Lon-


don, i826,
P


206 RESPIRATION.


as bounded above by the surface of the lungs, and always in the
sound state possessing the same dimensions, — the expansion of
the lungs being commensurate with the descent of the diaphragm
and ascent of the ribs, and the descent of the diaphragm and
ascent of the ribs commensurate with the shrinking of the lungs.
The fact that air does not stream into the wounded pleura in
expiration, but even streams from it, while the ribs are moveable
and the abdominal muscles active, proves, I think, that the descent


of the ribs and ascent of the diaphragm, one or both, in ordinary


expiration, do partly occasion, by compression *®, the diminution of
the lungs, or, at least, are not its passive effect, but coincide with
it by independent powers,—which are, the elasticity of the elevated
ribs (and displaced abdominal organs ?), if not the contraction of
the extended abdominal muscles. We shall presently see another
reason for believing that the organs of the chest are really
compressed during expiration. Haller refers expiration to the
pressure of the lungs by the elastic ribs and the abdominal and
other muscles, and to the elastic and muscular contraction of the
lungs themselves, which he considers more forcible than the
compression. It appears to me that he is right ; but that, never-
theless, either the lungs alone, or the walls of the chest alone, are
able, when unassisted by the other, to produce expiration. The
change in the situation of the ribs is, moreover, trifling compared
to that of the diaphragm, and respiration often proceeds very
well by the diaphragm alone. Animals which are remarkable for
swiftness and perseverance in the race scarcely employ the inter-
costal muscles, using the diaphragm almost solely.f

The beautiful contrivance in the shape of the thorax deserves
attention. By its being conical, every degree of motion in the
diaphragm produces a greater effect on the capacity of the chest
than could occur were it of any other shape.

The passage of the air into and from the cells may be distinctly
heard on applying the ear to the corresponding part of the chest,
and is called by Laennec the respiratory murmur. It is much
louder in children, and in them the cells are far more numerous
and small. Whence an equal portion of lung from an infant a few
days old weighs fourteen times more than from a man of seventy.
When the air tubes are constricted or supplied with too copious

° 1. @. lib. viii. sect. iv. p. 275. sq.

f Dr. Carson. 1. c. p. 226. In disease I have seen the diaphragm regularly
relax when the intercostals contracted, and contract when they relaxed, Any one
may readily make them act oppositely.

& Dr. Magendie, Journal de Physiologie, t. i. p. 81.


t<


o-.


‘


RESPIRATION. 207


or with diseased secretion, the respiration is heard with various
sounds, rough and snoring (sonorous rattle), shrill, squeaking,
chirping, hissing (sibilant rattle), gurgling (mucous rattle); and, if
too much fluid exists in their extremities or the air-cells, we hear
a crackling sound (crepitant rattle). If the tubes are quite ob-
structed, or the lung compressed by air or fluid in the pleura, or
by a solid, or if they are solidified, we hear no respiratory murmur.
In the three latter cases, the walls of the chest, when struck at the
spot affected, do not give out the hollow sound which the presence
of air in the lungs naturally gives, but are as dead as if any solid
muscular part was struck. hese and many similar facts, dis-
covered by Avenbrugger " and Laennec, are of the highest utility
in detecting diseases of the chest, exist by physical necessity,
and, being facts, are just as important to the medical philo-
sopher as any other symptoms ; and though some, who have
contrived to acquire aname among the ignorant, may affect to
despise them, the rising generation feel justified in ascribing their
contempt to indolence, conceit, andi 1gnorance —an ignorance so
disgusting, that it must eventually reduce them to their proper
level.

The elasticity and muscularity of the lungs are not sufficiently
great to expel the whole of their air in expiration. Thus they
remain constantly in a certain degree of distension. i


I now recur to the subject of the circulation of the blood, as
promised in the last chapter.

The vacuum constantly threatening in the new, according to
Dr. Carson, either from the shying of the lungs or the con-
traction of the inspiratory muscles, and, I may add, from the ex-
pulsion of blood from the ventricles of the heart, will evidently be
prevented, not only by the falling of the ribs and the ascent
of the diaphragm in the former case, and ingress of additional air
into the bronchiz in the latter, but also by the flow of venous
blood into the auricles: for the venous blood, being subject to
the full atmospheric pressure without the chest, will necessarily
be driven into the chest to prevent a vacuum *; the blood of the


h Inventum novum ex percussione thoracis humant, abstrusos interni pectoris
morbos deiegendi. 1761.
i Reisseisen, 1. c. p. 23.
k See Dr. Huxham. Oéservationes de dére et Morbis Epidemicis. Londini, 1751.
Prolegomena, p. 7. sqq- “ Facto nempe in ductibus pulmonum sanguineis mo-
peg


a


208 RESPIRATION.


pulmonary artery and aorta is under the same circumstances, but


the propelling force of the ventricles at one moment, and the ac-
tion of their valves during their relaxation, prevent its retrogres-
sion. The atmospheric pressure on the blood-vessels creates a
necessity for greater strength in the ventricles, as it impedes the
progress of blood from the heart; but it also facilitates the
return. Thus the smaller pressure on the heart acts, by the in-
tervention of the blood, as an antagonist to its contracting fibres,
assisting to dilate them when they become relaxed.

That the blood is drawn towards the heart during inspiration
has been long acknowledged. “ In my experiments,” says Haller,
“if you open the chest, abdomen, neck, or fore-extremities of an
animal, and lay bare the great veins, the superior and inferior
cava, the jugular, subclavian, brachial, or mammary, you will see
the blood return to the heart whenever the animal inspires, and
these veins recede some lines from it, become empty and pale,
flat and bloodless: ” — depleri, palescere, explanari, exsangues
fieri.”! In the words of Dr. Magendie, sixty years afterwards ™,
«when the chest dilates, it inspires the blood of the cave, and
successively that of the veins ending in them, much in the
same way as it does the air into the trachea.” Were Dr.
Carson’s account of expiration correct, as a vacuum would be


mentaneo quasi vacuo, continud in cor dextrum impellit sanguinis quantum
facile capit pondus atmosphere.” Quoted by Dr. M. Hall.

1 J. c, lib. vi. sect. iv. p. 833.. 1760.

™ Journal de Physiologie, t. i. p. 136. 1821. For the same reason, if a tube
is placed in the jugular vein, the air rushes into it during respiration with a noise,
and the ill effects of air in the heart occur. (Magendie, l. c. p. 195.) And ifa
large vein is opened in surgical operations, and any thing prevents the sides from
collapsing, the air may rush in and destroy life, as happened a few years ago at
Paris. (1. c. p. 192. sqq.) ‘This may be shown also, by inserting a tube, immersed
in a coloured fluid, into a large vein, when the liquid will rise during inspiration,
and stop or descend during expiration, (See Sir D. Barry, |. ¢. who conceives
another source of vacuum to the pulmonary veins and venous sinuses, by the
distraction of their parietes during inspiration, p. 29. 1826. And Dissertation,
&c. p. 13. sq.) Still more recently, Sir D. Barry has applied the barometer to the
chest of a pigeon, a viper, a common snake, and a frog, and found the mercury
descend during inspiration, When connected with the exterior of the pericardium
of an eel, the mercury became concave each time that the heart retired from the
pericardium, so that its pulsations could ‘be counted, and also at every effort of
the animal to open its gill covers. Sur Application du Barométre, &c. Annales
des Sciences Naturelles. Avril, 1827.


<
*


RESPIRATION. 209


threatening in the chest equally during expiration and inspiration,
the shrinking of the lungs should occasion the blood to stream
towards the heart as much during the one as the other, to fill up
the vacuum. But this is not the fact, any more than, as we saw,
that air rushes into the wounded pleura during expiration. The
coincidence of the effect of inspiration on the venous blood, and,
when the pleura is wounded, on the air, prevents us from sup-
posing that inspiration affects the circulation merely by giving a
free passage of blood through the lungs. “ The great venous
trunks of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, fore-extremities,”
says Haller, “swell during expiration, from the blood either being
obstructed or retrograding, and at inspiration are emptied of
it from its flowing freely to the heart.’" Or, in the words of
Magendie, “‘ when the chest contracts, the blood is driven back
into the cave by the pressure experienced by all the organs of
the chest.” That the blood does really retrograde during ex-
piration, appears by an experiment of Magendie’s, in which a hol-
low bougie was passed into the great veins as far as the cava, or
auricle itself, and the blood flowed from its extremity during ex-
piration.° This fact seems to show compression of the thoracic
organs during expiration, and therefore is an additional argument
that ordinary expiration is not the effect solely of the elastic and
muscular shrinking of the lungs. Such, indeed, is the pressure
of expiration, that the heart during it propels the blood more vio-
Jently into the arteries, and even into the veins; and, on the other
hand, less forcibly during inspiration. P A continuance in refrain-


aS. Gp Ibid. ° Journal de Physiologie, t. i. p. 186. Paris, 1820.

P Bordeu, Du Pouls, p. 324. quoted by Haller; and Bichat, Recherches Physiol.
p- 223. See Magendie for the veins, Journal de Physiol. t.i. p. 138., and Tul-
pius, Obs. Med. ii. 3. p. 106. In violent efforts the chest is still more com-
pressed, whence the blood accumulates without the heart in the veins, and is
driven more forcibly from the heart to all parts. These may be made after ex-
piration or inspiration ; but for a very violent effort we usually inspire first, to
afford a better fixed point, and to continue the effort longer than would be pos-
sible after expiration. Respiration is generally suspended and the glottis closed ;
but if the effort is made after an inspiration, the glottis need not be closed, pro-
vided the air is allowed to leave the chest very slowly.

In myself, a deep inspiration, not followed in due time by an expiration, causes
the pulse in a few seconds to become suddenly slow for a few seconds, falling as
much as five and twenty beats per minute, and even double this, if it has just be-
come rapid by a deep and prolonged expiration: but, as the breath continues to

_ be held, which may be done much longer than inspiration can be refrained from


POS


¢


- 210 RESPIRATION.


ing to inspire after a violent expiration, of course almost suspends
the circulation, by depriving the heart of blood 4, which is no
longer drawn to the heart by inspiration, and has been squeezed
out by expiration: a continuance in refraining to expire after a
deep inspiration has the same effect, but more slowly. In both
cases the blood is no longer drawn to the heart by inspiration,
and does not experience those chemical changes in the lungs
which are indispensable to its free passage through them; though,
they being, in the former, filled with air, and empty in the latter,
it can continue to pass through them much longer in the former.

And this leads me to observe, that the mere suspension of re-
spiration impedes the circulation through the heart, by causing
obstruction in the lungs; and that, consequently, inspiration, by
giving free passage to the blood through those organs, will acce-
lerate its course through the veins, independently of a vacuum ;
although the influence of the vacuum is shown by the effect of
inspiration upon the contents of tubes inserted, not into the veins,
but merely into the cavity of the pleura or pericardium. Whether
respiration is suspended after an expiration or an inspiration, the
effect is the same:—the blood accumulates in the lungs and
right side of the heart, if the windpipe is tied, whether the lungs
be empty or full at the time of the ligature; and therefore it is
not merely the mechanical condition of the lungs that produces
the obstruction in this case, as was once supposed, but the want
of chemical changes."

But for this consideration, the effects of the thoracic vacuum
on the circulation might be overrated ; and, indeed, that too high
an estimate has been formed of it is very certain: for,


after expiration, as there is a supply of air in the lungs in the former case, and
not in the latter —(in the latter I can refrain for a quarter of a minute, and in
the former for rather above a minute)— the pulse gradually resumes its former
quickness; and, when the breath can be held no longer, evidently grows more
and more rapid and weak. ‘The effects of refraining from expiration are the
same in me as of refraining from inspiration. Rapid respiration quickens the
pulse, by drawing the blood more frequently to the heart; and, in my ease, if
very deep as well as rapid, the circulation through the head becomes so violent
that vertigo occurs, and, between this and the rapidity of the pulse, I at length
cannot count the latter.

‘ My own pulse, if a deep expiration is made, and inspiration refrained from,


becomes rapid and excessively feeble, and more and more so till I can hold out
no longer,


r See Haller, 1. c. lib, vii. sect. iv. p. 25:


* fOr


9)


+
‘ :
RESPIRATION. Bll Bg


1. In the foetus, and in animals which do not respire at all, or
not by a thoracic vacuum, the vacua arising from the dilatation of
the heart’s cavities, and from its diminished bulk under contrac-
tion, only can occur. §

2. If we suspend respiration and prevent the influence of both
sources of vacuum, the circulation continues till the want of
chemical changes arrests it; and, if the vena cava, or any great
vein, is obstructed so as to cut off connection with the heart, it
becomes distended with bloodt coming up towards the heart ; and,
if wounded between the ligature and the extremities, the blood
flows, whatever the position of the animal, till death ensues." In
these cases no vacuum assists. Ifthe pericardium is laid bare, so
that no vacuum can occur, except that from the dilatation of the
heart’s cavities, and the trachea tied, the right ventricle swells
enormously with the arriving bloody,— a fact not to be explained
by vacuum, not even by the heart’s own vacuum. ‘The influence
of the left ventricle upon the course of the blood in the veins
was also shown by Magendie, who firmly tied every part of a
dog’s leg, except the great artery and vein, and then tied the
latter and wounded it below the ligature, when the blood was pro-
jected to some distance, and continued to be so, except when the
artery was compressed ; and, as long as the circulation continued,
the stream from the vein was regulated at pleasure by compress-
ing or liberating the artery.* Ifa turgid vein in the hand is com-
pressed, it will not become empty above, as it should if suction
from one or all of the three sources mentioned were considerable ;
and the jet of blood from an artery was found by Hales to be
greater during a deep inspirationy, (probably from the more
abundant supply to the left side through the lungs), showing the
action of the ventricle to be proportionably greater than the
power of the thoracic vacuum at the moment of inspiration to
oppose the discharge of blood from it. Still the effects of the
vacuum are such as we have seen.


Ss On connecting the barometer with the interior of the pericardium of an eel,
Sir D. Barry found the mercury move.

t Hunter, On the Blood, p. 75. sq: Haller had previously ascertained the
same thing, and, while allowing the influence of a vacuum, urged it as a proof,
that the vacuum was not efficient, but only auxiliary. El. Physiol. t. il. p. 325,

u Mr. Spry, Lancet. Jan. 1827.

y Dr. David Williams, Edinb. Med. and Surgical Journal, 1823, p. 528.

x Journal de Physiol. t.i. p. 111.


Y Statical Essays, vol. ii. p. 6.
p 4


212 RESPIRATION.


The empty condition of the arteries after death has been
ascribed by Dr. Carson to the thoracic vacuum. He states that,
if an animal is destroyed by admitting air into each pleura, the
arteries are found as turgid as the veins”; but the same results
have not been obtained by others*; and.J presume that the ob-
struction in the lungs from the want of chemical changes, gradually
lessening the supply to the arteries, and producing accumulation
in the veins, together with the superior contractile powers of the
arteries, are, jointly, quite sufficient to explain the circumstance.
The effect of the obstruction in the lungs, while the left ventricle
continued to propel blood, was strikingly shown by Bichat, who
produced enormous congestion of the lungs, liver, spleen, &c.
by strangling animals slowly, and found much less if respiration
was completely arrested at once, so that the left ventricle ceased
to propel blood very soon after the obstruction in the lungs took
place.” The greater the space into which the former blood can
flow from the arteries, the less blood will they contain. Hence, if
a ligature is passed round the cava, some quantity of blood is
found in the arteries ; if around the pulmonary artery, less ; and,
when the lungs have been kept distended after death by artificial
- inflation after opening the chest, so that all their vessels might
be unfolded, the arteries have been found quite empty, though
there was no thoracic vacuum®¢, and though the effect of the left
ventricle of the heart was destroyed by a ligature on the aorta.

Therefore, if Dr. Carson’s experiments on this point are accu-
rate, I should ascribe the turgidity of the arteries when the pleura
were filled with air, and the lungs compressed, to the diminution ;
and when this was not done, the emptiness of the arteries, to the
largeness, of the pulmonary space into which the blood could pass.

The influence of suction has been thought by Dr. Carson to
assist in explaining absorption.‘

Dr. Carson ascribes the effects experienced in elevated situ-
ations to the rarity of the atmosphere, by which it cannot compress
the blood sufficiently to aid the return of this fluid towards the
heart. Saussure ¢ says, that when he was on the summit of the
Alps he experienced extreme fatigue and loss of muscular power,


* Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xi.

* Dr. Fennel, The Philadelphia Journal, Noy. 1822.

> Recherches Physiologiques, p. 225. sq.

“ Mr. Robert Hunter, Edinburgh Journal, Oct. 1824,

oT. cp. 167. “ Voyage dans les Alpes.


RESPIRATION. 213


and irresistible, rapid, and violent palpitation, and difficulty of
breathing, all which soon ceased on his assuming the horizontal
posture, in which, of course, the blood circulates more easily.
His guide, a slim old man, was unaffected, and climbed with
ease like a goat, and many unaccustomed to such elevations
have been equally unaffected ; for habit or a strong heart will
render the influence of pressure but little necessary.

Gravity has been thought by Dr. Carson, as well as by older
writers, materially to aid the circulation : — “ By the stroke of the
heart, a quantity of fluid is withdrawn from one end of the
column, and by the synchronous vibration of the arteries an
equal quantity is added to the other.” “A perpetually repeated
generation of motion must be produced through the different
parts of the venous system by gravity, and this motion must be
from the ends of the veins to the trunks.” “ The simplest
weight of a column of blood in any descending artery is sufficient
to raise the blood through open capillaries to an equal height in
the corresponding vein, according to the hydrostatical law, that
fluids attain the same level in all communicating vessels.”¢ Yet,
in the horizontal posture, there can be no assistance from gravity,
but the circulation proceeds perfectly well: and, indeed, gravity,
on the whole, seems to impede the circulation; for, if the arms
hang down for a length of time, or the legs are not rested
horizontally, they ultimately swell. Nothing assists the heart
more than a horizontal posture, as seen in syncope, in which the
restoring agency is perfectly explicable by its mechanieal aid to
the heart, without reference to the brain.” The effects of pos-
ture are necessarily greater in tall persons. In the horizontal
posture, the heart, having less to do, beats more slowly, and in
very tall persons the pulse has been found 12 or 20 beats quicker
in the upright posture.

The operation of exercise is very material. If an extremity is
not exercised, its circulation always becomes languid, it resists ex-
ternal temperature with difficulty, and wastes; and, if gravity also
co-operates by a vertical position, it swells ; and exercise will pre-
vent the congestive agency of a continued vertical position. Violent
exercise causes proportionate violence of circulation. The action
of muscles evidently operates by compression, and chiefly of the
veins, as the coats of the arteries are so much stronger. The


‘|. ¢.,.p. 188., sq.
® Elements of Physics. By N. Arnott, M.D. Lond. 1827. p. 500.
h See Bichat, |. c. p. 198. sqq.


.~


214 RESPIRATION.
i? =

blood can go but one way. The stream behind, and the valves
in the veins of the extremities, determine the effects of the
pressure to be in the course of the circulation. The compressed
vessels are at once nearly emptied, and the instant that the pres-
sure is alternately removed are again filled; and the momentary
impediment during the compression is immaterial, on account of
the innumerable venous anastomoses. The progress of the blood
cannot but be accelerated. The dyspnoea that is felt arises from
the force with which the blood drives through the lungs, and
which renders frequent respiration necessary.

In the foetus the case is analogous, although Dr. Carson has
imagined it different, and thought it necessary to frame a little
hypothesis to reconcile circumstances. The fcetal lungs, expe-
riencing no atmospheric pressure, are contracted to the utmost,
and the diaphragm, suffering no stimulus from the will on account
of uneasy sensation arising from want of breath, is completely
relaxed, and forced upwards to remove the vacuum; and the
venous blood without the thorax must be drawn forcibly into the
right auricle, preventing the vacuum which the discharges of blood °
from the left ventricle tend to produce. In the foetus, moreover,
the blood is propelled into the aorta by doth ventricles, as Mr.
John Bell remarks, and, therefore, the circulation less requires
other assistance. The vacuum from the dilatation of the cavities
of the heart occurs in the foetus and all animals which have a
heart : but, in those which have no such respiration as the human,
there can be no assistance to the circulation by thoracic vacuum.

The ordinary cause of the first inspiration appears to be the
novel impression of cool air upon the surface; for, if at any time
we are suddenly exposed to a cold wind, or plunge into cold
water, the diaphragm and intercostal muscles instantly contract,
and a sudden inspiration takes place. The blood rushes into the
expanded lungs, and, being afterwards obstructed when the in-
spiratory muscles cease to act, and the elastic lungs shrink, gives
rise to an uneasy sensation, which is instinctively removed by an-
other inspiration, and thus respiration afterwards continues through
life. The fact of respiration commencing before the chord is
tied, shows that neither congestion in the aorta, nor deficiency of
chemical changes, is the cause of the first inspiration. If an ani-
mal is born under warm water, its respiration begins at the mo-
ment you choose to bring it up into the air. Buffon proved this
by causing a bitch’s delivery to. take place in a tub of warm
water, and allowing the pups to remain there for half an hour.


RESPIRATION. 215


The power of excitement of the surface to cause inspiration has
been shown by Beclard and others, who, on mechanically irri-
tating foetal kittens still enclosed in the membranes, found in-
spiratory efforts take place at each irritation.

“ The alternate motion of the chest continues, during health
and freedom from restraint, from the moment of birth till death.
Its object is, that the lungs may be expanded to admit the air,
and contracted to expel it, in perpetual alternation. This alter-
nation occurs, in an adult at rest, about 14 times in a minute, —
once to about five pulsations of the heart.”

“ For man, in common with all warm-blooded animals, cannot
Jong retain the inspired air, but is compelled to discharge it and
take ina fresh supply of this pabulum of life, as it always has
been denominated. Common observation teaches, that, how-
ever pure may be the air entering the lungs, it instantly under-
goes remarkable changes, by which it is contaminated and
rendered unfit for another inspiration, unless it is renewed. !

The common quantity of air taken in at each inspiration is
about 16:5 cubic inches; and the quantity remaining after death
in the lungs of a stout adult man, about 100 cubic inches, accord-
ing to Allen and Pepys. Dr. Bostock, agreeing with Dr. Menzies
and many others, believes 40 cubic inches to be the average inspir-


! But this varies in different individuals, and in disease. When there is dis-
ease of the heart, with excitement, the proportion of the heart’s action is greater
than natural; and where of the lungs or pleura, the proportion is on the side
of respiration. But the action of both the heart and respiratory organs is increased
in the affections of either. I have at this moment a young female patient, in
whom, through a nervous affection, I always find the respirations 98 and the
palse 104, My clinical clerk says he has found the respiration 106 and the
pulse 104. The inspirations are shallow. She isin nodanger. The quickest
pulse I have ever felt has been 208, counted easily at the heart, though not at the
wrist. In the two middle-aged men in whom I observed this, there was merely
morbid irritability of the heart, and they walked about and ate like other people,
though indisposed. One is now very well.

k « The antiquity of the notion that air is the pabulum vite is seen in the book
de Flatibus, usually ascribed to Hippocrates. The author regards the aliment as
threefold, — victuals, drink, and air; but the latter he calls vital, because we
cannot, fora moment, dispense with a supply of it without danger to life.”

'«¢ Consult Harvey’s Dispute upon the necessary renovation of the aérial succus
alibilis, with the celebrated Astronomical Prefessor, J. Greaves, in the latter’s
Description of the Pyramids in Egypt, p- 101. sq. Lond. 1646. 8yo.

Also the popular Edm. Halley’s immortal Discourse concerning the Means of
furnishing Air at the Bottom of the Sea in any ordinary Depths. — Phil. Trans.
vol, xxix. No. 349. p. 492. sq.”


Pm,


“Sig @ RESPIRATION.


ation, and thinks that 160 or 170 remain in the lungs after ordinary
expiration m ; for these organs are never emptied by expiration.

“It may be asked, what are the changes which the air
experiences during inspiration, and which consist not in the
loss of elasticity, as was formerly imagined, but in the decom-
position of its elements." For the atmospheric air which we
breathe, is a peculiar mixture of constituents, differing very much
in their nature from each other; and, not to mention hetero-
geneous matters, such as odorous eflluvia, various other besides
aqueous exhalations, and innumerable other substances, which are
generally present, is always impregnated with aqueous vapour,
electric and magnetic matter, and generally with carbonic acid
gas; and is. itself composed of unequal parts of two aériform
fluids, viz. 79 of azotic gas, and 21 of oxygen gas in 100.

“In the first place, we know for certain, that, at every inspir-
ation (the fulness of which varies infinitely in different persons
of the same age, breathing placidly °), besides the quantity of
azotic gas being somewhat diminished?, the oxygen gas is in a
great measure converted into carbonic acid gas or fixed air; so
that the air of expiration, if collected, instantly eri pei
flame and live coals, precipitates lime from lime-water, and i
specifically heavier than atmospheric air, and rendered unfit ive
inspiration? ; it also contains much aqueous vapour, which is
condensed in a visible form by a temperature not exceeding 60°
of Fahr.”* ‘The ordinary quantity of aqueous vapour emitted by


™ An Elementary System of Physiology, vol. ii. p. 24. sq. Dr. Thomson thinks
the estimate of Menzies most correct. System of Chemistry, vol. iv.

n « Fr, Stromeyer, Grundriss der theoretischen Chemie, P. ii. p. 619.

° “Consult, v. c. Abildgaard, Nordischen Archiv. Siir Naturkunde, &c. t. i.
PY. 4. and i.”

P « Consult, besides, Priestley and others, especially C. H. Peaff, ib. t. iv. P. ii.”

1 * To discover how frequently an animal could breathe the same portion of the
different kinds of air that we have mentioned, I took three dogs equal in size and
strength, and to the trachea of the first, by means of a tube, I tied a bladder,
containing about 20 cubic inches of oxygen gas. He died in 40 minutes.

For the second, the bladder was filled with atmospheric air. We died in six
minutes.

For the third, I employed the carbonised air last expired by the second dog.
He died in four minutes.

The air of the bladder, upon subsequent examination, gave the common signs
of carbonic acid gas,

The instruments which I ad ved are described and illustrated by a plate in
the Medic. Biblioth. vol. +. p. 174. sq. tab. 1.”

r «J. A. De Luc, Takes sur la Météorologie, tom. li. pp. 67. 229,”


RESPIRATION, 217


the lungs, trachea, throat, and mouth, may be about 20 oz. in 24
hours.* It is probably derived from the chyle, and by the sepa-
ration of so much water, the weak and delicate albumen of the
chyle is converted into the strong and perfect albumen of the
blood. t

‘“« There is, consequently, no doubt that the carbonic acid of the
expired air is derived from the venous blood carried to the lungs
from the right side of the heart.« But it has been of late dis-
puted, whether the inspired oxygen goes wholly to form carbonic
acid in the bronchial cells ’, or whether it is in part united with
the arterial blood and distributed through the arterial system. *
Many weighty arguments seem to favour the latter opinion, as well
as the phenomena of both kinds of blood in the living body y,
compared with the changes which this fluid experiences when ex-
posed to these two kinds of air.”

After much uncertainty, it was thought ascertained by the ex-
periments of Messrs. Allen and Pepys that no oxygen is ab-
sorbed in ordinary respiration, but that what disappears goes
entirely to unite with the carbon of the blood and produce car-
bonic acid, the latter being exactly equal in bulk to the oxygen
which disappears,— about 274 cubic inches per. minute, or
39,534 in twenty-four hours, according to the experiments of
these gentlemen, —a quantity containing about 11 oz. trey of
solid carbon, more than equal to the carbon contained in 6 Ibs.
of beef, and, perhaps, about double the average result of most
other experiments.


8 See Hales. See also chapter on Perspiration.

te Drs Prout, lich pa525.

u « Rob. Menzies, De Respiratione. Edinb. 1790. 8vo.

H. G. Rouppe, on the same subject. Lugd. Batav. 1791. 4to.

J. Bostock, Versuch iiber das Athemhalen. tibers. von A. F, Nolde. Erf.1809. Svo.”

v « W. Allen and W. H. Pepys, Phil. Trans. 1808, p. 249. and 1809, p. 404.
But how various the quantity of carbonic acid gas expired is, at different times
of the day, and under different circumstances, is shown by the experiments of
W. Prout, in Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy, vol. ii. p. 328.”

x 6 Nasse, in J. F. Meckel’s Archiv. fiir die Physiol. vol. ii. p. 200.

And G. Wedmeyer, Physiologische Untersuchungen tiber das Nervensystem und
die Respiration. Hanoy. 1817. 8yo. p. 175.”

y « J, Andr. Scherer, Beweis, dass J. Mayow vor 100 Jahren den Grund zur
antiphlogistischen Chemie und Physiologie gelegt hat, p.104.

Edm. Goodwyn, Connexion of Life with Respiration. Lond. 1788. 8vo,

J. Hunter, On the Blood, p. 68.

J. A. Albers, Beytriigen xur Anat. und Physiol. der Thiere, P. 1. p. 108.”

4. DE, Prout, l..cy ps 526.


218 RESPIRATION.


But Dr. Edwards has since shown that, however correct were
these results, it was erroneous to generalise from them; that more
oxygen is continually consumed by brutes than goes to the form-
ation of carbonic acid ; and that this excess varies from above 4 of
the volume of the latter to almost nothing. ‘The variation de-
pends not only upon the species, but upon the developement re-
lative to the age, and upon individual differences in adults.

He therefore finds that the bulk of the air is not unaffected by
respiration, but that generally a diminution takes place. Dr. Le
Gallois » and Dr. Delaroche ° also found that oxygen disappeared
in greater quantity than carbonic acid was formed.

Allen and Pepys observed that, if the same air was breathed
repeatedly,some oxygen was absorbed and some azote discharged,
and that, if nearly pure oxygen was employed in the case of
guinea-pigs, carbonic acid was produced and a portion of the oxy-
gen replaced by azote, this portion decreasing, however, as the
experiment proceeded.

Dr. Edwards ascertained that respiration causes sometimes an
increase of azote, sometimes a diminution, and sometimes no im-
portant difference in its quantity. He thinks that it is always being
absorbed and discharged, and that the proportion of these pro-
cesses differs under different circumstances. Its discharge exceeds
at all times in very young animals, as seen in guinea-pigs; and in
spring and summer; while its absorption exceeds in autumn and
winter, as far as his experiments upon adult sparrows and yellow-
hammers go; though occasional exceptions occurred from unappre-
ciated circumstances, powerful enough to overbalance the effect
of season.4 The difference in the proportion of the inspired and
expired azote never equalled the greatest differences observed
between the oxygen which disappeared and the carbonic acid
formed. Cold-blooded quadrupeds were shown by Spallanzani ¢
to absorb azote, and fish by Humboldt and Provencal.‘ Sir
Humphry Davy had already ascertained the absorption of azote
in his own person.

Dr. Edwards's reasons for believing azote to be constantly both
absorbed and discharged are :—


* De VInfluence des Agens Physiques sur la Vie. Paris, 1824, p. 410, sqq.
> Annales de Chimie et Physique, t. iv. p. 115, sq.

© Journal de Physique, t. 77.

l. c. p. 420. sqq. 461. sqq.

Mémoires sur la Respiration, pp. 184. 258.

f Mémoires d’ Arcueil, t. ii.


e


a
RESPIRATION. 219


]. That if an animal is made to breathe oxygen mixed with 4'5
of azote, azote is discharged in abundance, as was found by Allen
and Pepys, so that, when there is little or no azote to be absorbed,
its exhalation at once shows itself; and we may conclude that in
common respiration its exhalation may be as great, but not ob-
servable, because nearly an equal quantity is absorbed :

2. When a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen was employed by
those chemists, and pure hydrogen by Dr. Edwards, not only was
a large quantity (much exceeding the bulk of the animal) given
out, but a considerable quantity of hydrogen was absorbed, in
Dr. Edwards’s experiment equal to the azote given out, proving
that exhalation and absorption can proceed together : and he asks
why, if hydrogen is absorbed, not much more so azote, which is
more fit for respiration and the support of life? and concludes
that its absorption may be as great in common respiration, but
not observable because a nearly equal quantity is discharged. »

Carbonic acid itself is shown by Spallanzani and Dr. Edwards i
to be exhaled from the lungs independently of the operation of
oxygen ; when snails, frogs, fish, or very young kittens, are im-
mersed in hydrogen.

It is satisfactory that Messrs. Allen and Pepys were induced,
without any knowledge of Dr. Edwards’s researches, to repeat
their enquiries, and their results no longer disagree with those
of Dr. Edwards. On making birds breathe in atmospheric air,
they still found the loss of oxygen equal to the addition of
carbonic acid, and the nitrogen unchanged; if in air with an
excess of oxygen, a quantity was absorbed beyond what was
replaced by carbonic acid, and in its room appeared an equal
quantity of nitrogen; if in a mixture of oxygen, hydrogen, and
nitrogen, the oxygen being in the same proportion as in atmo-
spheric air, there was no loss of oxygen, but of hydrogen, which
was exactly replaced by nitrogen. *

Mr. Ellis! contends that the carbon is excreted by_the pulmo-
nary vessels, and unites with the oxygen externally, and Dr. Prout
thought this opinion corroborated by the factm, —that, when
phosphorus dissolved in oil is injected into the blood-vessels,


& ]. c p. 462. hl. c. 429. sqq-

i], c. p. 437. sqq- k Phil. Trans. 1829.

! An Enquiry into the Changes induced in Atmospheric Air. 1807. Further
Enquiries, &c. 1816

m Dr, Orfila, Tovicologie Générale, t-i. p. 581. sq. Dr. Magendie had pre-
viously found the same result in injecting the solution into the pleura, — Mémoire


sur la Transpiration, p. 19.


220 RESPIRATION.


vapours of phosphorous acid stream from the mouth and nostrils,
— what would hardly have occurred if the acid had been formed
in the vessels, as it would probably have remained in solution in
the blood, not being volatile. The phosphorus was probably
excreted from the vessels in minute subdivision, and united with
the oxygen of the atmosphere upon coming in contact with it,
producing phosphorous acid; and the same may be imagined re-
specting the carbonic." There can be no reason to adopt this
hypothesis on account of the supposed difficulty of the air and
blood acting upon each other through the vessels, because we
saw in p. 149. that they do so, through moistened bladder, out
of the body.

The well-known secretion and absorption of air in membranes,
shown by the existence of air in the air-bladder of fish, the sudden
formation of air in the alimentary canal in disease, the absorp-
tion of air in emphysema, and the occurrence of emphysema
without injury of the lungs ©; the separation of azote and carbonic
acid from the lungs when hydrogen is breathed, and the abserp-
tion of azote and of oxygen, in the experiments of Dr. Edwards,
prove the possibility of the oxygen being absorbed, and the car-
bonic acid secreted.

Lavoisier at one time, and La Grange and Hassenfratz long
ago, contended that the carbonic acid is generated in the cir-
culation, and given off in the lungs, and the oxygen absorbed.

Dr. Edwards also argues that, since so much carbonic acid is
given out from the blood in the respiration of pure hydrogen,
and that, since the quantity given out in hydrogen is as great as
is observed in common air, there can be no reason to doubt that,
in common air, the carbonic acid preceeds from the same source
as in hydrogen, vwz.— passes from the blood; more especially as
carbonic acid exists largely in the blood: and that the oxygen,
therefore, must pass into the blood. These arguments are, in my
mind, irresistible. But whether mere carbon leaves the blood
and forms carbonic acid with the oxygen externally to the vessels,
as in the former theory, or the oxygen unites with, and the car-
bonic acid separates from, the blood, as in the latter, much of the
affair would appear chemical, — neither all the carbon nor all the
carbonic acid gas to be secreted ; because it has long been known,


" Dr. Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy. 1819.
o See a case related by Dr. Baillie, in the Transactions of a Society Sor the
Improvement of Medical and Chemical Knowledge, vol. i.


°F


RESPIRATION. 221


that, when venous blood is exposed to exygen out of the body,
even although covered by a moistened membrane, it becomes
florid, and oxygen disappears and is replaced by carbonic acid.
Since the publication of Dr. Edwards’s work, numerous facts
have been ascertained, which cause his opinions on these points
to be generally received, by proving the possibility of the transfer
of oxygen to the blood, and of carbonic acid to the air, even
on chemical principles. My friend Dr. Stevens discovered that
oxygen and carbonic acid attract each other; so that, if car-
bonic acid is placed at the lower part of a tube, and oxygen
above, the acid, though heavier, will ascend and the oxygen
descend. Nay, if a vessel filled with carbonic acid be com-
pletely closed with bladder, the acid will escape and the bladder
be forced in; while, if it be filled with air and placed in car-
bonic acid, the latter will pass through and distend the bladder
till it nearly bursts. The tendency to diffusion is universally as
the square root of the specific gravity. The subject has been
prosecuted by Drs. Mitchel and Faust ?; and they have ascer-
tained that both living and dead membranes, and even caoutchouc,


P American Journ. of the Medical Sciences, No. xiii. 1830. They do not men-
tion Dr. Stevens’s name, but he had made his observations in the West Indies
in 1827 and committed them to paper, and shewn them in England in 1828, in
France in 1829, and in America in the summer of 1830, when he mentioned
them to the very editor of the Journal of Medieal Sciences, who took part in Dr,
Mitchel’s experiments, which were soon afterwards begun and published before
the end of the year. In 1833, also, M. Saigay published (in the Annales des Sc.
d’ Observat. t. iii. p.452.) an explanation of the interchange of gases through fluids
and porous substances; that each gas maintains an equilibrium outside and
inside; so that, when there is less without, it passes forth ; and, when more with-
out, it passesin. In this way M. Raspail conceives that the appearance and dis-
appearance of all the various gases in respiration, under different circumstances,
may be accounted for. (1. c. p. 258.) There must be, however, a relation be-
tween different gases, or nitrogen would be exchanged, as well as oxygen, for
carbonic acid, in ordinary respiration.

M. Dutrochet stated that, if a dense fluid is enclosed in an animal membrane,
it attracts a thin fluid placed around the exterior. The passage of the external
fluid he called endosmose. If the dense fluid is placed externally, and the thin
inside, then the thin fluid passes outwards. This passage he termed exosmose,
M. Raspail soon adduced exceptions to this, and showed that the phenomena
were merely those of ordinary imbibition : that, if the fluid on one side was of a
kind to pass through membrane, and the fluid on the other was not, and the two
were of a kind to unite, then the one fluid of course soaked into the membrane
and, having soaked into it, united with the other fluid, as soon as the other side of
the membrane was reached ; and more followed in its place. (1. ¢ .p. 80* sqq-)


Q


222 RESPIRATION.


as well as water and other liquids, are freely permeable to the
different gases. They have also discovered that gases pass
through with different rapidity: carbonic acid, for instance,
very quickly ; nitrogen, very slowly : whence the different state
of the bladder just mentioned, accordingly as carbonic acid is
introduced into the vessel in common air, or common air intro-
duced into the vessel in carbonic acid. The appearance of car-
bonic acid outside a bladder tied over a vessel of venous blood
or water impregnated with carbonic acid, and the disappearance
at the same time of a portion of the oxygen outside the bladder
tied over venous blood, is no less than what occurs to the
blood of the lungs in respiration, and the blood in both cases
becomes florid.

The lungs thus seem to serve the purpose, in this respect, of
merely exposing an immense surface of blood to the air. Blood
could not be so near the air on the exterior of the body without
constant injury of the innumerable delicate vessels, nor could
the vascular surface be preserved in a moist state, which is neces-
sary to the permeability of those vessels. Besides which, suc-
cession of air to each point could not be secured. The Creator
has therefore wonderfully provided an immense surface within, of
the very finest texture, secure from external injury and supplied
with constant moisture, and continually exposed not only to the
external air, but to successive draughts of it.

The changes of the blood in respiration are therefore purely
chemical, and just the same as occur to venous blood out of the
body, in contact with air or separated from it by merely a
moistened bladder, and are detailed at page 149. Oxygen unites
with the blood; carbonic acid proportionately escapes. The
blood, thus liberated from the cause of its blackness, re-acquires
the florid hue occasioned by its salts, but which are not naturally
in sufficient quantity to brighten it when much carbonic acid is
present.

Dr. Crawford observed that less carbonic acid was evolved in
proportion to the height of the temperature 4; Dr. Jurine, that
more was evolved when the circulation was quickened, — during
the hot stage of fever, digestion, or exercise, and less in the
cold stage"; and his results were confirmed by Lavoisier and


>
4 On Animal Heat, p. 387.
t Encyclopédie Méthodique, t. i. p. 494. Dr. Prout also observed this effect of
exercise before fatigue occurred.


RESPIRATION. 223


Seguin.s Dr. Edwards has found Jess evolved in summer than in
winter.t

Dr. Prout and Dr. Fyfe" have found the quantity of carbonic
acid gas diminished by mercury, nitric acid, vegetable diet, tea,
substances containing alcohol, depressing passions, long fasting,
and fatigue, and probably by sleep. Dr. Prout found that it
undergoes in himself an increase from daybreak till noon, and a
decrease from noon till sunset, remaining at the minimum till
daybreak. In the experiments of Allen and Pepys, the formation
of carbonic acid gas slackened when the guinea-pigs fell asleep.
Dr. Prout also observed that an increase or decrease from the
maximum or minimum was followed by a proportional decrease or
increase during a diurnal period. It would appear, also, that less
is formed in infancy, and more as the adult age is approached, in
brutes.’

When the air is not changed, death in general occurs long be-
fore all the oxygen is consumed, through the carbonic acid which
is formed; but bees, some worms and mollusca, completely deoxi-
dize it.x Snails will live in air in which a bird has died.

Lavoisier removed the carbonic acid by potash as quickly as it
was produced, and found that a guinea-pig could live in air con-
taining but 6°66 per cent. of oxygen, and with still less became
only drowsy.”


S Mémoires de ’ Académie des Sciences. 1789. p. 575.

t J]. ¢. p- 200. sqq.

«|. c. Dissert. Inaugur. &c. Edin. 1814. The smallest quantity yet observed
was in a diabetic patient of mine, taking very large doses of opium and nux
vomica. Numerous Cases, illustrative of the Efficacy of the Hydrocyanic or Prussic
Acid in Affections of the Stomach, with a Report upon its Powers in Pectoral and
other Diseases, in which it has been already recommended, and some Facts respecting
the Necessity of varying the Doses of Medicines according to circumstances, and the
Use of Opium in Diabetes. By John Elliotson, M.D. &c. p. 99,

, Boyle, Works, vol. iii. p. 360. Edwards, l. c. p. 189. sqq.

* Vauquelin, Annales de Chimie, tom. xii. p. 278. Spallanzani, Mém. sur la
Respiration, p. 63.

y Some assert that the respiration of pure oxygen excites violently, others gently,
others not at all; some, that more oxygen is consumed than in common, some no
more. Mr. Broughton, in a paper read a few years ago in the Royal Society, but
not published, found, as Allen and Pepys had previously, that oxygen, when
respired pure, excites and causes all the visible blood to be florid; but the animal
gradually becomes exhausted, falls in temperature, and at length dies, while the
oxygen is still pure enough to produce the same effects on a second and third ani-
mal. The blood quickly coagulates after the respiration of pure oxygen. Pure


Q2


294 RESPIRATION.


Dr. Edwards advances, contrary to Morozzo’, that every warm-
blooded animal perishes instantly * when placed in the air in
which another has died through want of renovation, and that all
of the same class among them deoxidize it equally, though in dif-
ferent times. This time will occasionally differ 4, notwithstanding
the size of the body and the movements of the chest be equal in
them, and the carbonic acid removed as quickly as formed. The
young deoxidize it more slowly than adults; and the young, if
quite deprived of air, die later than adults.? Indeed, Buffon found,
and Dr. Le Gallois and Dr. Edwards have confirmed his discovery,
that new-born animals of many species, as dogs and rabbits, will
live a long time without air, even after they have been allowed to
respire. This period lessens as the animal’s temperature rises
with age; and in those whose temperature is at birth high, as
guinea-pigs, it is very short.c They live longer than adults also
in a limited quantity of air.< Amphibious animals likewise live
long without air.¢

Persons have been said to be able, by habit, to live without air
a considerable time. Death generally occurs at the latest in one
or two minutes, when respiration is suspended; but by habit
some few divers of the swimming school at Paris can remain under
water three minutes.‘ If the system is in an extraordinary nerv-


SS __0—€—_—


hydrogen and azote appear to destroy by the mere exclusion of oxygen ; carbonic
acid by poisoning, but, if not diluted with rather more than double its bulk of
common air, it will not pass the glottis. Sulphuretted hydrogen instantly
poisons: carbonic oxide is fatal less quickly, and the venous blood accumulates
within, and the animals are very hot. Nitrous oxide intoxicates quickly, briefly,
and without consequent exhaustion, and appears to be absorbed by the blood
(see Sir Humphry Davy’s Researches, &c.); but it destroys at length, and sooner
than pure oxygen, according to Mr. Broughton: the blood is thin, and con-
tinues fluid. Drowning destroys life only by the exclusion of air; and, as the
glottis closes, little or no water — nothing often but frothy mucus —is found in
the air-passages. Yet Professor Meyer asserts, that he has seen the fluid in
which the animal was drowned, generally, in the lungs, in his experiments.

= Journal de Physique, t. xxv. p. 102. sqq. One reason that an animal will
live in air in which another has died, is, that it comes fresh and strong into it,
and therefore resists the poison better than its enfeebled predecessor.

* Mémoires de l Académie des Sciences. 1789. p- 573.
l. c. p. 184. sqq.
Edwards, l. c. p. 191, sqq-
l. c. p. 513. sq.
¢ Sir Anth. Carlisle, Phil. Trans. 1805.
Edwards, 1. c. p. 269. Mr. Brydone (Tour through Sicily and Malta) fre.


b
c


d


RESPIRATION. 995


ous state of insensibility, the absence of air, like the absence of
food or the administration of strong agents, may be borne for a
very long time. Even fainting renders submersion less dan-
gerous.

Venous blood is not calculated for life. When it was injected
into the carotids, Bichat found that the brain became af-
fected, as if poisoned, and death gradually ensued ; and, when
it circulated through the coronary arteries of the heart,—the
action of which organ will continue though its left cavities
are supplied with venous blood,—the heart’s motion ceased, and
the functions of each organ were impeded, and at length ceased,
when venous blood circulated through its arteries.s When death
occurs by impediment to the functions of the lungs, the heart
loses its irritability by its substance becoming penetrated with
venous blood, and ceases to propel the blood of its cavities ; and
the brain, becoming powerless from the same cause, ceases both
to perceive uneasiness in the lungs from the want of fresh air, and
to be able to will inspiration. If the death of the body arise


quently saw divers remain, in the Bay of Naples, under water for three minutes,
In Percival’s History of Ceylon, they are said sometimes to remain five minutes
under water.

Some very grand instances of exaggeration on this subject will be found
in an amusing and useful book, entitled The Uncertainty of the Signs of Death.
M. D’Egly, Member of the Royal Society of Inscriptions, declares that he was
engaged to a dinner for which the fish was to be provided by a Swiss diver, who
got his living by plunging into the water and pulling the fish out of their holes.

. The dinner hour arrived, but no fish. Drags were employed, and the diver’s body
found. The curate wished to bury it immediately, as it had been nine hours under
water, but M. D’Egly determined on attempting resuscitation, and succeeded in
three quarters of an hour. The Rev. Mr. Derham, in his Physico- Theology, is
more credulous than the Curé; he quotes Pechlin for the case of a man pensioned
by the queen for having joined his fellow-creatures again, after remaining up-
right under water, his feet sticking in the muddy bottom, for sixteen hours, at
Tronningholm. Yet this is nothing; for Mr. Tilesius, the keeper of the royal
library, has written an account of a woman whom he saw alive and well, after
being three days under water. And this is nothing; for Mr. Burmann declares he
heard a funeral sermon at Boness in Lithovia, upon an old man of seventy, who,
the preacher protested, had fallen into the water when sixteen years old, and re-
mained under it for seven weeks. Mr. Brydone was told that one diver, called
Calas, but nicknamed Pesce, could live several days in the sea; and Kircher
asserts, that this aquatic person could walk under water from Sicily to Italy.


& Bichat, Recherches Physiologiques, }). li. art. 6, 7, 8.
2
Q 9


226 RESPIRATION.


from the brain, it is by the brain being unable to continue respir-
ation.

Still the circulation of venous blood excites in some degree
for a time, and is better than no circulation; for Dr. Edwards
placed some frogs, toads, and salamanders with their hearts en-
tire, and others deprived of their hearts, in water deprived of air.
Those with hearts survived the longest, occasionally twenty hours
longer than the others.” It is worth remembering, as Dr. Stevens
has pointed out, that blood may be black from the presence of
carbonic acid, &c. or from the absence of saline matter.

Venous blood both abounds in carbonic acid and is deficient in
oxygen. The state of combination of the oxygen abounding in
arterial blood, and of the carbonic acid abounding in the venous,
are unknown. As the blood is florid until it reaches the minutest
vessels, we presume that in them the oxygen disappears, and the
carbonic acid is produced. The oxygen is thought to meet with
carbon there, and with it form the carbonic acid. Dr. Prout con-
ceives that the carbon is derived from the albumen, when albumin-
ous matters are converted into gelatine. This substance, which is
not found in the blood nor in any glandular secretion, enters into
the structure of every part, and especially of the skin, which is
little else. Now this contains three or four per cent. less carbon
than albumen. In nutrition, therefore, albuminous substances
very extensively support a reducing process, lose their carbon
to become gelatinous, and as this process must occur in the
minutest vessels, their blood is charged with carbon, which, how-
ever, instantly finds oxygen (probably in solution in the water of
the blood), and unites with it into carbonic acid.i It is thus that
respiration assists assimilation, and not by discharging carbon
from the chyle, as many have imagined. ‘They forget that more
carbonic acid is not found after every meal, nor less during fast-
ing, till this proceeds to the length of debility : and that many
animals sleep after feeding, yet in sleep less is produced.

Some suppose that respiration is very instrumental in prevent-
ing the putrefaction of the living body ; and this by carrying off
its carbon, —the substance which, in the spontaneous decomposi-
tion of animals, is the first rejected, and unites with the oxygen
of the atmosphere ; and, indeed, Spallanzani found, that the dead


hil. cB, 1st ts BeCh, &
i Bridgewater Treatise, pp. 519. 524. sq. 535, sq.


RESPIRATION. 227


bodies of animals deoxidated the air after death, and often as
much as during life, before decomposition was perceptible.k He
says also, that torpid animals, whose respiration had entirely
ceased, also carbonated it. As the latter fact cannot be ascribed
to the separation of carbon in the lungs, nor to the mere chemical
changes of decomposition, it probably arises from the functions of
the skin.

The delicate surface of the lungs, and, indeed, of the whole air-
passages, is a great source of absorption from without, as well as of
impressions from gaseous and imponderable substances. Many poi-
sons affect the system by its means. It is also a great organ of elimi-
nation. Camphor, phosphorus, ether, diluted alcohol, gases, and va-
rious odorous substances, when introduced into the system, escape
in a great measure by the lungs: whence they are perceived in the
breath, and, perhaps for some time, long after they have left
the stomach. Dr. G. Breschet and Dr. Milne Edwards, conceiv-
ing that in the dilatation of the lungs by inspiration, the enlarged
space would cause not only the air to rush in, but the exhalation
from the surface of the air-cells and pleura to increase and ex-
ceed that from other parts, have made several experiments which
prove this to be the case. On injecting a small quantity of oil of
turpentine into the crural vein, the breath instantly smelt strongly
of it, and the pleura on being cut open did the same; while no
odour of it arose on exposing the peritoneum. Ifa larger quan-
tity was employed, it impregnated every part. If, instead of na-
tural respiration, artificial was instituted, in which the air does
not enter the lungs by the formation of a vacuum on the expan-
sion of the chest, but is forced into them and itself expands the
chest, no more exhalation of odorous substances took place from
the lungs than from other parts; and, indeed, if a cupping-glass
was applied over another denuded part, the odorous substance
was given out there, while the lungs afforded no sign of it.!

“ The perpetual change of elements occurring in respiration
after birth, we shall show to be very differently accomplished in
the foetus, viz. by means of the connection of the gravid uterus
with the placenta.

“ But, when the child is born and capable of volition, the
congestion of blood that takes place in the aorta, from the ob-
struction in the umbilical arteries; the danger of suffocation from


k Mém. sur la Respiration. See Dr. Bostock, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 184. sqq.
‘ Recherches Expérimentales sur 0 Evhalation Pulmonaire. Paris, 1826.
Q 4


228 RESPIRATION.


the cessation of those changes of the blood, in regard to oxygen and
carbon, hitherto produced in the uterine placenta; the novel im-
pression of that element into which the child, hitherto an aquatic
being, is conveyed; the cooler temperature to which it is now
exposed ; and the many new stimuli which are now applied, seem
to induce new motions in the body, especially the dilatation of the
chest and the first inspiration.

«“ The lungs, being for the first time dilated by inspiration,
open a new channel to the blood, so that, being obstructed in the
umbilical arteries, it is derived to the chest.

«« Since the inspired air becomes hurtful and unpleasant to the
lungs by the decomposition which it experiences, I should ascribe
to the most simple corrective powers of nature, the subsequent
motion by which the poisonous mephitis, as it may be called, is
expelled and exchanged for a fresh supply.

«The consideration of all these circumstances, especially if
the importance of respiration to circulation, demonstrated by the
well-known experiment of Hooke ", be remembered, will, in my
opinion, explain the celebrated problem of Harvey, better ° than

most other attempts of physiologists.?


m « Tt has the epithet Hookian, because it was most varied by Rob. Hooke,
See Th. Sprat, History of the Royal Society. Lond. 1667. 4to. p.232. But
it was before instituted by Vesalius, and very much praised for its beauty. De
c. h. Fabrica, p. 284.”

The experiment consisted in laying the lungs completely bare, and reviving
the animal by artificial respiration. Hooke varied it by pricking the surface of
the lungs, and forcing a continued stream of air through them.

n « Wm. Harvey, De circulat. sanguin. ad J. Riolan. p. 258. Glasgov. 1751.
12mo.”

These are the words of Harvey; — * It would appear that the use of expir-
ation is to purify and ventilate the blood, by separating from it these noxious and
fuliginous vapours.” We must not, however, forget the words of Seryetus,
seventy years before, and already quoted at p. 195. — expiratione fuligine expur-.
gatur.

«“ And especially his Exerc. de gener. Animalium. p. 263. Lond. 1651. 4to.”’

° « See Theod. C. Aug. Roose, iiber das Ersticken neugeborner Kinder, in his
Physiologisch. Untersuchungen. Brunsw. 1796. 8vo.

J. D. Herholdt, De vita, imprimis fetus humani, ejusque morte sub partu.
Havn. 1802. 8vo.”

P « Consult, for example, Petr. J. Daoustenc, De Respiratione. Lugd, 1743.
Ato. p. 54. sqq.

Rob. Whytt, On the Vital and other Involuntary Motions of Animals, p. 222.
Edinb. 1751. 8yo.”


RESPIRATION. 229


Fish and crustacea purify their blood by the air contained in the water which
they draw over their gills. They perish if the water is deprived of air; and in this
case, as well as when the water is aérated but limited in quantity, and whether it
is exposed to the air or in close vessels, they perish sooner as the temperature is
higher. (Dr, Edwards, |. c. P. ii. ch. 2.) And the younger and smaller they
are, when there is too little air in the water, the more they come to breathe at the
surface, and the sooner die if prevented. (p. 118.) Fish die in the air by drying
and wasting. (p. 126.) The syren lacertina and proteus anguina have both gills and
lungs. Jnsects have no lungs, but openings on the surface of the body leading to
air-vessels which are distributed in the interior. Dr. M. Hall has shown that,
in the lungs of at least the toad, frog, and salamander, the blood-vessels sub-
divide into capillaries suddenly, so as to subdivide as much blood as possible,
and cause it to present the largest possible surface. (Lc. p. 36. sqq.) All
the experiments of naturalists made it appear that no animal could live without
oxygen, but M. Biot has asserted that what are called blaps and tenebrions remain
in as good a vacuum as can be formed for any length of time without apparent
inconvenience. Animals found in many parts of the bodies of others can hardly
be thought to have access to gaseous oxygen. In regard to the frequency of
respiration in cold-blooded animals, Dr. Stevens incidentally mentions that he
observed it no more than three or four times in a minute in an alligator, which
he once held in his hand, and in which it was probably quick from the animal
being young and agitated. (I. c. p. 35.)

In the light, vegetables produce changes in the air opposite to those produced
by animals. They decompose carbonic acid, retain the carbon, and leave the
oxygen. It is the green substance of the living leaf which effects the decom-
position. In the dark, the leaves absorb oxygen ; a tendency which, indeed, the
flowers, roots, and other parts, always have. This oxygen unites with the carbon
of the sap; and, although some of the carbonic acid formed is said to be exhaled,
the greater portion combines with the fluids of the sap, and parts with its oxygen
again in the leaves when daylight comes. Carbon obtained in the state in which
it exists at the moment of its separation from carbonic acid appears the object.
While animals, therefore, increase the carbonic acid of the atmosphere and lessen
its oxygen, vegetables increase its oxygen and lessen its carbonic acid, at least
during the light; and the functions of vegetables are the most active at that
period of the year when the days are much longer than the nights,


—t


230


CHAP. XIII.


ANIMAL HEAT. |


‘Man, other mammalia, and birds, are distinguished from the
rest of animals by the natural temperature®* of their bodies
greatly exceeding that of the medium in which they are accus-
tomed to exist. Man is again distinguished from these classes
of animals by possessing a much lower temperature than they ;
so that in this climate it is about 96° of Fahr., while in them, and
especially in birds, it is considerably higher.” >

But all animals, as far as can be ascertained, and even vege-
tables, have a tendency to preserve a temperature more or less
distinct from that of the surrounding medium ; yet the difference
among them in this respect is so great, that they have been di-
vided into warm and cold-blooded. To the former belong the
more complicated, those whose pulmonary apparatus is most ela-
borate, — man and mammiferous quadrupeds and birds: to the
second, oviparous quadrupeds, fish, and most of the invertebrate.
Birds have the highest temperature, 107° to 110°; mammiferous
quadrupeds, 100° to 101°; man, 96° to 981°. There is some va-
riety, not only in individuals, but according to age, season, and
climate. It is less in the young, according to Dr. Edwards and
Despretz°: the former states the human temperature in infancy
to be 944°; the latter asserts, that, while in birds it is 105° in
winter, it is nearly 111° in summer, gradually increasing in spring
and decreasing in autumn. In the high temperature to which we


a « W. B. Johnson, History of Animal Chemistry, vol. iii. p. 79.”

b « The torpid state of some animals, during winter, is of course an exception
to this. During it most of the functions cease or languish considerably, and the
animal heat is reduced nearly to coolness. This well-known circumstance pre-
vents me from acceding to the opinion of the very acute J. Hunter, — that the
animals which we call warm-blooded should rather be called animals of a per-
manent heat under all temperatures. On the Blood, p. 15.”

© De UV Influence des Agens Physiques. Edinburgh Journal of Science, vol. iv.
p- 185. J. Hunter states that the temperature of the ass is one degree higher in
the evening than the morning. - On the Blood, ps 298.


ANIMAL HEAT. 231


shall see Dr. Fordyce and his friends were exposed, the temper-
ature of the body rose two or three degrees, and Dr. Delaroche,
in a vapour-bath at near 120°, found the heat under his tongue
increased about five degrees at the end of seventeen minutes. 4
In sparrows and yellow-hammers, Dr. Edwards found it five or six
degrees higher in summer than in winter; and Dr. Davy one or
two degrees higher in Ceylon than in England.¢ In disease it will
fall, and on the other hand rise; in fever it has been noted at 107°,
in tetanus at 110° 4, and probably, on some occasions, it rises still
higher, at least locally. Ihave myself found it 107° under the
tongue, in even acute rheumatism, and seen inflamed parts show
this temperature, when the bulb of the thermometer was placed
upon them and covered up. When a function is going on vigor-
ously, the temperature of the individual part rises: as we observe
in the genitals during sexual excitement. Certain parts of
some animals are naturally of a lower temperature than the
rest, v.c. the dog’s nose. Disease will have the same effect.
In affections of the stomach, its temperature will fall: so that the
patient will not only complain of its coldness, but discharge fluid
from it into the mouth that strikes cold immediately. In cancer of
the bladder, I once saw a man complain greatly of the constant
coldness of his glans penis. In old age it is not so high as in the
age of full vigour; nor in remote parts as in those nearer the
heart. John Hunter made observations on the heat of cold-
blooded animals." The thermometer in the stomach and under
the skin of the abdomen of the frog and toad stood at 40°, when
the atmosphere was 36°; in the lungs of snails at 35°, 36°, 37°,
38°, when the atmosphere was 28°, 30°, 30°, and 34°; the heat
of earth-worms was 585°, when the atmosphere was 56°. Fish
are not above two degrees warmer than the water.i Cold-
blooded animals placed in an elevated temperature are much more
influenced by surrounding media than the warm-blooded. Yet
frogs are but at 80° or 82° ina medium of 110° or 115°.k The
heat of insects when congregated is considerable: J. Hunter
found the thermometer rise to 93° or 98° ina hive of bees in


4 Exp. sur les effets qu'une forte chaleur produit sur Véconomie. Paris, 1805.
¢ Edwards, 1. c. p. 489.

f Dr. Prevost. See Dr. Edwards, 1. c. p. 490.

& Dr. Davy, Phil. Transact., 1814. n I. ec. 298, sqq:

' Edinburgh Journal of Science, vol. iv.

* Dr. De la Roche, Jowrnal de la Physique, t. lxiii,


232 ANIMAL HEAT.


spring ; to 104° in summer ; to be at 82° when the air was at 40° ;
and at 73° in winter.

The same tendency in vegetables is shown by the greater dif-
ficulty with which the juices in their stems and branches are
frozen than lifeless fluids ; by ice thawing when roots shoot into
it!; and by snow upon the leaves or stems of plants thawing
sooner than that which Jies on surrounding inanimate bodies.
J. Hunter observed a branch of growing fir and a bean leaf thaw
the part of the surface of a freezing mixture on which it was
placed, and the fir subsequently another to which it was removed. ™
When the sheath of the arum maculatum and cordifolium is burst-
ing, and the cylindrical body just peeping forth, it is said, by
Sennebier, to be so hot for some hours as to seem burning "; and
twelve of them placed round the bulb of a thermometer to have
raised the mercury from 79° to 143°.

Even eggs are cooled and frozen with more difficulty than equal
masses of inanimate matter; although, when once frozen and
their life destroyed, they freeze readily. °

“This natural temperature in man is so constant, equable p,
and perpetual, that, excepting slight differences from variety of
constitution, it varies but a few degrees i in the coldest climate and
under the torrid zone. For the opinion of Boerhaave, — that man
cannot live in a temperature exceeding his own, has been refuted,
since the admirable observations? of H. Ellis, the celebrated
traveller, and formerly the governor of Georgia, by the remarkable
experiments" of many excellent physiologists.”* Dr. Fordyce,


1 American Medical and Philosophical Register, vol. iii. p. 19. 1814.

m™ Phil. Trans., 1775.

" An Introduction to Physiological and Systematic Botany. By Sir J. E. Smith,
M.D. p. 92.

° J. Hunter, 1. c. p. 79%

P « J; B. Van Mons, Journal de Physique, t. \xviii. 1809, p. 121.”

9-& Philos. Trans. vol. i. p. ii, 1758.

Arn. Duntze had previously made the observation in regard to brutes. Exper.
calorem animalem spectantia. Lugd. Bat. 1754, 4to.

Consult also Benj. Franklin, Experiments and Observations on Electricity.
Lond. 1769, 4to. p. 365.”

* “ Duhamel and Tillet, Mém. de Acad. des Scienc. de Paris, 1704.

Blagden and Dobson, Philos. Trans. 1775.”

* “ The heat of the weather, even in Europe, occasionally exceeds our natural
temperature. This was the case on the 3d of August, 1783, at noon, when I
was on the Lucerne Alps, in company with the excellent Schnyder of Wartensee.


ANIMAL HEAT. 233


one ofthe most eminent of my predecessors at St. Thomas’s Hos-
pital, went successively into rooms heated to 90°, 110°, and 120°.
In the first temperature he staid five minutes, and sweated gently.
In the second, he sweated more profusely, and remained ten
minutes. In the third, after remaining twenty minutes, the ther-
mometer under the tongue and exposed to the urine was at 100°,
the pulse was 145; the veins of the surface were enlarged, and the
skin red. He afterwards entered a room heated to 130°, and
staid 15 minutes: the thermometer under the tongue, in the hand,
and exposed to the urine, was at 100°.

Sir Joseph Banks, Sir Charles Blagden, and Dr. Solander, went
subsequently into rooms heated to between 196° and 211°,— about
the temperature of boiling water,— and remained several minutes.
If they breathed on the thermometer, it sunk several degrees, and
every expiration felt cold to the scorched nostrils: the thermo-
meter under the tongue was 98°, and the body felt cold to the
touch, though at 98°. Sir C. Blagden remained eight minutes in
an apartment heated to 260°. The air felt hot, and for seven
minutes the breathing was natural, but anxiety and oppression
then came on; the sensible heat of the body varied but little.
Dr. Dobson went into a room heated to 224°, and felt no op-
pressive heat, though every metal about him speedily became
hot. A bitch of moderate size was subjected to a heat of 220°.
In ten minutes the only sign of distress was that of holding out
the tongue, and when taken out at the end of half an hour, the
temperature being at 236°, the bottom of the basket was found
wetted with saliva. The thermometer applied to her flank was
only 110°, z. e. 9° above the natural standard.

In these rooms, eggs on a tin plate were roasted hard in twenty
minutes ; beef-steaks cooked in thirty-three minutes ; and, if the
air was impelled upon them in a stream, they were cooked dry in
about thirteen minutes.

Tillet and Duhamel relate that the young female servant of a
baker at Rochefoucault went habitually into ovens heated to 276°,
and remained without great inconvenience for twelve minutes,
taking care not to touch the oven. These gentlemen themselves
bore a heat of 290° for nearly five minutes. Dr. Delaroche and


Se


The thermometer in the shade stood above 190° Fahr., and, when applied to the


moO»


body, invariably sunk to near 97”.


234 ANIMAL HEAT.


Dr. Berger found various warm and cold-blooded animals support
from 108° to 113° for an hour and a half in heated dry air; but
an elevation of about 30° beyond this killed them all, except a
frog, in from half an hour to two hours. They themselves expe-
rienced a sense of scalding in a vapour-bath of 122°, and could not
bear it more than about ten minutes; while M. Lemonnier could
not bear a water-bath of 113° above eight minutes.t Hence, at
the very same high temperature of the surrounding medium,
there is more secretion by the skin in a vapour-bath than in dry
air, and more in a water-bath than in a vapour-bath.

“The striking prerogative of man, in respect of bearing a variety
of temperatures, is evinced by his being restricted to no climate,
but inhabiting every part of the earth, from Hudson’s Bay, where
mercury freezes, and from Nova Zembla, to the scorching shores
of Senegal.”

At Sierra Leone, the mean temperature is 84°, and Watt and
Winterbottom frequently saw it 100° and even 103° in the
shade. At Senegal, it has been 1084°, and even 1173$°. During
the sirocco, it is 112° in Sicily; Humboldt saw it 110° and 115°
near Oronoco, in South America. On the other hand, at Nova
Zembla the cold is so intense that, when the sun sinks below the
horizon, the polar bear is no longer seen, the white fox only en-
during the cold. Yet the Dutch, who wintered there under
Hemskerk (76° N. L.), withstood the cold, if moving about and
previously in good health. When some of our countrymen were
on Churchill River, in Hudson’s Bay, lakes ten or twelve feet
deep were frozen to the bottom, and brandy froze in their
rooms, though provided with fires. They suspended in their
rooms red-hot twenty-four pounders, and kept an immense fire:
but, if these went down, the walls and beds were covered with
ice three inches thick." Yet in Hudson’s Bay the Canadians and
Esquimaux live and hunt in the coldest weather. Gmelin, sen.
witnessed at Jeniseisk, in 1735, a cold of —20°, that froze mer-
cury and killed all the sparrows and jays.“ Captain Parry once
observed a temperature of 52° below zero. When the air was at
—49°, the party used to walk on the shore. It was usually at —32°.
The temperature of eleven out of sixteen foxes was from 100°
to 106°, of four about 100°, and of one only 98°, although the


* Dr. Edwards, 1. c. p. 374., and indeed, see p. 4. ch. xiv.
“ Philosophical Transactions, abridged, vol. iii. p. 470,
* Flora Sibirica. Preface.


ANIMAL HEAT. 235


air was from —3° to —32°. No relation was observable be-
tween the temperature of the body and of the atmosphere ¥; it
thus appearing that the temperature is more steady under cold
than heat. I may here remark that,if an animal is drowned in
hot water, a puppy or kitten, for example, in water at 90° or
120°, the action of its heart irrecoverably ceases sooner than
if it is drowned in cold water.” Under the want of respiration
the heat is too exhausting for the powers of the system. When
animals recover, they regain their warmth slowly, even more
slowly, Mr. Nunnelly says, than after immersion in cold water.
Oxygen also excites so much, that it exhausts and lowers the
temperature.

Another wonderful circumstance is the impunity with which
great changes of temperature are borne by persons in good
health, and under neither mental nor corporeal accidental de-
pression at the moment. The Russian, while in a vapour-bath of
perhaps 167°, has several large vessels of cold water poured upon
him; and the Finnish peasant passes reeking from it, and rolls in the
snow, with exquisite delight. Sir Joseph Banks and the rest of the
party passed from the high temperature mentioned into the cold
air, and even staid some minutes before they dressed, without the
least injury. During an unnaturally high temperature, the sudden
application of cold is very agreeable.

No phenomenon in living bodies is more remarkable than their
peculiar temperature, and no one was of more difficult explan-
ation before the modern progress of chemistry. Dr. Mayow had
indeed advanced, that it depended on respiration, and that this
was a process similar to combustion, and, so far from cooling the
blood, as others believed, supplied it with heat.

If two different bodies are placed in a temperature higher or
lower than their own for a certain length of time, they will,
at the end of the period, be found, not of the same, but of differ-
ent temperatures. That which has the higher temperature is
said to have a smaller capacity for caloric; that which has the
lower, a greater capacity. ‘To raise the former to a given tem-
perature, therefore, requires less caloric than to raise the latter
to the same degree.


Y Journal of a Second Voyage, p. 157.

2 Experiments by Sir Astley Cooper, in 1790, published from his MS.; by
Dr. Hodgkin, in the translation of Dr. Edwards’s work, p. 472. sqq. Similar
results are there related by Mr. Nunnelly.


236 ANIMAL HEAT,


The temperature of solids is more easily affected by a given
quantity of caloric, than that of fluids, and the temperature of
fluids than that of aériform bodies; or, in other words, solids have
a smaller capacity for caloric than fluids; and fluids than aériform
bodies. If, therefore, a solid becomes fluid, or a fluid aériform, it
absorbs a great quantity of caloric, notwithstanding its temperature
remain precisely the same. And the converse holds equally good :
—if an aériform substance becomes liquid, or a liquid solid, the
caloric which it before contained is now, from its diminished capa-
city, much more than sufficient for the temperature which before
existed, and the temperature of the body accordingly rises.

In respiration, the dark blood of the pulmonary artery parts
with a portion of its carbon, and acquires a florid hue. Oxygen
disappears, and carbonic acid is expired with the other consti-
tuent of the atmosphere — nitrogen or azote, which seems
usually to have experienced little or no change from inspiration.

The celebrated Dr. Crawford of St. Thomas’s Hospital appeared
to prove, by his experiments, that the arterial blood has a larger
capacity for caloric than the venous, and common air than car-
bonic acid gas. He therefore argued thus :—when the carbonic
acid appears in the lungs, the smaller capacity of this than of
common air for caloric, must cause an increase of temperature ;
but the blood, having changed from venous to arterial, has
acquired a greater capacity than before, and absorbs the heat
given out by the carbonic acid. The blood, of course, does not
become warmer, because the caloric is not more than sufficient
to render its temperature equal to what it was previously; and,
indeed, according to some, it is not quite sufficient for this, since
the temperature of the florid blood of the pulmonary veins has
appeared two degrees lower than that of the pulmonary artery to
some experimenters, although the greater number have found
it a degree or two higher than the dark blood.

The body in this way acquires a fund of caloric, and yet the
lungs, in which it is acquired, do not experience any elevation of
temperature ; or, if they do, this is very inconsiderable.

The arterial blood, charged with much caloric, which, as it
circulates through the small vessels, is not sensible, becomes
venous, — acquires a dark hue, and its capacity for caloric is
diminished ; consequently its temperature rises, — the caloric
which was previously latent is, from the decrease of capacity,
sufficient to raise its temperature, and is evolved. In this mode,


ANIMAL HEAT. 237


the loss of caloric which occurs from the inferior temperature of
the medium in which we live, is compensated. ‘The fresh supply
is taken in at the lungs, and brought into use in the minute vessels.

Dr. Crawford’s theory afterwards fell into some discredit.

All experiments upon the capacities of bodies for heat are
very delicate and liable to error; and the conclusions of Dr.
Crawford on this point have been denied by Drs. Delaroche and
Berard, with respect to gases, and by Dr. Davy, with respect
to arterial and venous blood. #

The experiments of these chemists have led them to believe
the difference of capacity less than Crawford supposed, and in-_
sufficient to account for animal temperature. With respect to
the gases, Dr. Bostock > justly remarks, that the objection does
not apply more to the doctrine of animal heat, than to the theory
of combustion in general. Whenever carbon unites with oxy-
gen, and carbonic acid is produced, caloric is liberated, whether
in fermentation, or combustion, &c. With respect to the blood,
he declares, and Dr. Bostock’s reputation for accuracy and
soundness in chemical matters is not little, that, “after attentively
perusing the experiments of Crawford, and comparing them with
those that have been performed with a contrary result, he con-
fesses that the balance of evidence appears to him to be greatly in
favour of the former, though he acknowledges that they are of
so delicate a nature as not to be entitled to implicit confidence,
and that it would be extremely desirable to have them carefully
repeated.”

If, however, it were true that Dr. Crawford’s statement of the
relative capacities is incorrect, still the fact of heat being
necessarily evolved on the disappearance of oxygen in the lungs,
and the appearance of carbonic acid, provided they unite there,
would stand unaffected, and we should only be obliged to adopt
the doctrine of Mayow, that the lungs are the fucus of the heat
of the body. This was relinquished, on the objection that the
Jungs should then be hotter than other parts. But, when we con-
sider that the blood is incessantly streaming to the lungs from all
parts and again leaving them, we may, I think, presume that the
blood will always convey away their heat, and prevent their tem.
perature from rising above that of other parts. The heat of all
parts is, ceteris paribus, commensurate with the quantity of blood
circulating through them, and this is equally explicable on the


* Philos. Trans. 1814. > Lc. vol ii. p. 263.


238 ANIMAL HEAT.


supposition that the carbonic acid is formed in the lungs, or in
the extreme vessels of all parts. If their heat is derived from
the heat of the blood conveyed to them, the more blood streams
through them, the hotter will they be; if from chemical changes
in the blood while in them, the more blood streams through the
extreme vessels the greater will be the amount of chemical change,
and the greater the extrication of caloric. The quantity of blood,
unless constantly renewed, is inefficient, on either supposition. On
the first, fresh blood must come incessantly from the lungs with
its high temperature ; on the second, if not renewed, its chemical
changes will cease, having already occurred.

As it is now generally believed that the oxygen which enters
into the blood combines with the carbon, not in the lungs, but in
all the extreme vessels, and in them forms carbonic acid, the
evolution of heat throughout the body is thus at once explained,
— it is a mere instance of combustion in the extreme vessels,
the union of carbon and oxygen being always attended by an
increase of temperature®; and we may equally abstain from
troubling ourselves about relative capacities for caloric. The
fact of local heats above the temperature of the general mass
of blood, proves that heat is evolved by local processes. If
arterial blood is made venous, or, more properly, blackened, by gal-
vanism, heat is evolved, as I shall presently mention. Those who
believe that venous blood has a larger capacity for caloric than
the arterial, say that the heat evolved in the minute vessels, by the
formation of carbonic acid, does not produce so high a temper-
ature as it would, were the capacity of the blood for caloric not
lessened by the changed character of the fluid: but, that, when
rendered florid again in the lungs, its capacity is again reduced ;
and, not only is there sufficient caloric to raise the cold air to 98°,
but the florid blood becomes one or two degrees higher than it
was when venous in the right side of the heart. It is evident that,
if the chemical changes which occur in the lungs are independent
of life, and even take place cut of the body, and the evolution
of heat is a purely chemical phenomenon, it also will occur in


© If the combustion thus takes place in the universal extreme vessels, the opinion
of Tiedemann and Gmelin, that the use of the liver is to liberate the blood of
much carbon without its union with oxygen, will not be the less probable than if
the union occurred ordinarily in the lungs. If carbon is copiously removed with-
out uniting to oxygen and forming carbonic acid in the blood, we understand why
the blood in high temperatures is less dark, is even florid.


ANIMAL HEAT. 239


the blood out of the body. Accordingly Sir C. Scudamore,
exposing two portions of the same blood, under the same circum-
stances, the one to atmospheric air, the other to oxygen, found
the temperature of the portion exposed to oxygen eight degrees
higher at the end of eight minutes than that of the other.

It is possible that other chemical changes, which incessantly
go on throughout the frame, also occasion heat to be evolved.

A host of circumstances show that our temperature depends
upon respiration, and therefore upon chemical changes.

In high temperatures we have less necessity for the evolution
of heat; in low temperatures, more. Accordingly, in the former,
the arterial blood remains arterial, —is nearly as florid in the
veins as in the arteries¢, and the inspired air is less vitiated; in
low temperatures, the venous blood is extremely dark, and the
inspired air more vitiated.e Some have imagined that the body
remains at its standard high temperature by the refrigeration of
the evaporating sweat. But, though this must contribute, it is not
the sole ‘cause f; for frogs lose as much proportionally to their
size by evaporation as any other animal, yet they follow pretty
closely the surrounding temperature. Whenever, on the other
hand, the body itself heightens its temperature, as in fever, more
oxygen is consumed by the lungss; (in the cold stage of fevers
we saw that less was consumed.) The temperature of the va-
rious classes of animals, and their vitiation of the air, are always
proportional; and inverse to the length of time they can live
without air.


“ Dr. Crawford, 1. c. p. 387. sq. Dr. De la Roche, 1. ¢.

* Dr. Crawford, ib. ‘* C. Ferd. Becker, De Effectibus caloris et Srigoris ex-
ternt in c. h. Gott. 1802. 4to.; and Wm. Fr. Bauer, On the same subject.
IB EOD, (BOTH HONOURED WITH THE ROYAL PRIZE. )

Mich. Skjelderup, Dissert. sistens vim Srigoris incitantem. Hafn. 1803. 8vo.”

Yet, in the account of Sir Astley Cooper’s experiments, quoted at p. 235., it
is mentioned that a puppy and a kitten, some weeks old, were placed nearly to
the mouth in iced water, till they died; and that the blood of the lips, nose,
toes, mesentery, and left side of the heart, was of a fine vermilion hue. The
colour of the venous blood is not mentioned. I should presume it was very dark,
but that the oxygen, from the great coldness of the air inspired, was so effective
in withdrawing the carbonic acid, that the arterial blood was, on this account,
unusually florid.


* Dr. Edwards, |. c. p, 488.
® See supra, p. 229,


240 ANIMAL HEAT.


The temperature of young animals is lower than of adults, or
rather they maintain a peculiar temperature much less, are more
easily cooled and heated, and they vitiate the air less, and re-
quire respiration Jess, proportionally, than adults." As they
proceed to vitiate it more, and require respiration more, their ca-
lorific power increases. While their calorific powers are weak,
they breathe, if they are exposed to cold, more quickly, so as to
keep up their temperature as much as possible.i The same we
shall find is true of adult warm-blooded animals, not of the hyber-
nating family, when exposed to cold.

Dr. Edwards found that habit has great influence on the calo-
rific powers of animals ;— that a given low artificial temperature
in winter will reduce the animal heat much Jess than in summer*:
and that, with the habit of evolving more heat in winter, is ac-
quired the habit of consuming and requiring more oxygen, so
that animals supplied with a given quantity of air, and placed in
a given warm temperature in winter, die much sooner than in
summer.! Yet the momentary application of heat or cold has a
different effect: the former heating less if the body has been sub-
jected to a low, and the latter cooling less if the body has been
subjected to a high, temperature. We all feel the cold less
quickly on leaving the house in winter if well warmed first, than
if we leave it already chilly.

When animals hybernate, their temperature falls, and respira-
tion is nearly or entirely suspended.™ Their consumption of air
lessens as the temperature falls, whence they consume less in
November than in August." If hybernating animals, while torpid
and still placed in the same temperature, are stimulated mecha-
nically to breathe, their temperature rises with the progress of
respiration. °®

If the cold to which they are exposed is so intense that it
threatens death, it actually no longer depresses respiration, but,
for a time, excites it, and their temperature rises proportion-


h Dr. Edwards, 1. c. p. 165. sqq. i}, c. pp. 299. 310.

E l..c. ps 162. sqq. 252. sqq. 1 ]..c, p. 200, sqg.

™ Spallanzani, Mémoires sur la Respiration, p. 77. De Saissy could not by
cold produce torpor in a marmot, till he had deprived it of fresh air. Edwards,
lc. p. 154.

» M. de Saissy. See Edwards, 1. c. p. 286.

° M. de Saissy. See Edwards, |. c. p. 305.


ANIMAL HEAT. 241


ally.P Man and other non-hybernating animals breathe more
quickly when exposed to cold (no doubt for the purpose of sup-
plying heat) till the powers become exhausted.4

The higher the temperature of the animal, the more extensive
is the aggregate surface of the air-cells, the more blood passes
through its lungs, and the more necessary to its existence is
respiration. — The lungs of cold-blooded animals are not sub-
divided into minute cells, but formed into vesicles ; and birds,
which have the highest temperature among animals, are drowned
the soonest." Respiration is much slower in the cold-blooded.
Dr. Stevens found an alligator breathe but three or four times
in a minute, though young, and agitated at being held.s

The changes of the air by the blood are seen to be effected
entirely by the red particles. Prevost and Dumas found that the
number of red particles is proportionate to the temperature.

If the blood circulates without being first properly changed in
the lungs, the temperature is below the natural standard. ‘Phose
who have the blue disease (cceruleanst), some of whose. blood
reaches the left side of the heart without passing through the
lungs, are cold: and coldness is a symptom of hydrothorax, and
of the repletion of the air-cells with mucus in chronic bronchitis ;
in the former of which affections the lungs cannot fully. expand ;
and in the latter the air is prevented from coming fully-in- contact
with the air-cells, and mucus Priestley found to be-a barrier to
the influence of oxygen on the blood. (p. 149.)

In cold climates, and in temperate ones in cold weather, animal
food is desired and taken in abundance; in hot climates, and
during the summer in temperate regions, light vegetable food is
preferred, and the appetite is less. We may conceive the former
diet more calculated to support a process similar to combustion,
and under the former circumstances we have seen that the
changes of the air in the lungs are actually more considerable.


P Dr. Edwards, 1. c. p. 306. sq. © Joey 30D,

" Boyle’s Works, vol. iii. p. 368. © lie pda,

* « Sometimes the septa of the heart are imperfect, sometimes the aorta arises
with the pulmonary artery from the right ventricle, as in the tortoise. In such
instances, the chemical changes can take place in the lungs but imperfectly,

Consult a host of cases in J. C. Hein’s Diss. de istis Cordis deformationibus que
sanguinem venosum cum arterioso miscere permittunt. Gotting. 1816, 4to,”

Mr. Allan Burns, Essay on Diseases of the Heart, and Dr. Farre, Treatise on
Malformation of the Heart, give accounts of these cases. See also Andral.

R 3


242 ANIMAL HEAT.


Warm-blooded animals are continually eating; birds, whose tem-
perature is the highest, incessantly, if they can obtain food; where-
as the cold-blooded eat little and seldom. Some make a meal only
once in three or more months; Dr. Stevens saw a large rattle-
snake, plump, active, and venomous, which was said not to have
tasted food for nine months.»

The temperature of parts falls if not maintained by a constant
stream of blood from the lungs through the aorta and its rami-
fications, and is, ceteris paribus, in exact proportion to this
supply. When parts shrink, and are pale, they are cold from
want of blood: when they do not shrink, or they are even full,
turgid, and purple, they are cold from the want of changed blood.
Still for a time respiration may not be quick and yet the tempera-
ture high, as in the yellow fever of the West Indies’: combustion
may go on rapidly in the extreme vessels of apart or the whole of
the body, for a limited period, disproportionately to the removal
of the product,—the carbonic acid, —in the lungs, and the supply
of oxygen for the combustion. On the other hand, general or loeal
temperature may be low though respiration be rapid, for it may
carry off carbonic acid and supply oxygen to little purpose, if the
circulation in the extreme vessels languishes.

Whether the theory be correct or not, the production of
animal heat must be as evidently a chemical process, as changes
of temperature among inanimate bodies; yet some ascribe it to
nervous energy. I cannot imagine nervous energy to cause heat
any more than to cause chemical affinity. As it may bring sub-
stances into proximity which have an affinity for each other, and
thus produce their union, so it may effect those changes which are,
according to physical laws, accompanied by changes of tempera-
ture; but caloric in the body must, I apprehend, like affinity,
follow the same laws, and no others, as out of the body. This,
however, does not prevent animal temperature from deserving
the epithet vital, because it is regulated by the vital powers of
the system, although through the instrumentality of chemical
changes. If the high temperature of an inflamed part is
owing to the increased momentum, —the increased sum of the
quantity and velocity of its blood,— yet this increased momentum
is produced by the vital powers.

Sir B. Brodie removed the brain of animals, and continued


eid, 0. De SB, * Dr. Stevens, ]. ¢. p. 33.


ANIMAL HEAT, 243


respiration artificially, The usual chemical changes of the blood
continued in the lungs; yet the temperature of the animals
diminished, and even more rapidly than if the respiration had not
been continued, owing, it is said, to the succession of cool air
sent into the lungs. He therefore concludes that animal heat
depends much more upon the nervous energy than upon the
chemical changes of the blood.x But this experiment proves
nothing ; because Dr. Le Gallois asserts that, under artificial re-
spiration the temperature may fall, and the animal actually be
killed by cold, even though every part remain uninjured.y In
artificial respiration the air does not rush into the pulmonary
cells, because these are in a vacuum; but is propelled into, and
forcibly, and therefore injuriously, dilates them: the consequence
is, the formation of a large quantity of frothy mucus. Whether
the fall of temperature be owing to the evaporation of this
copious secretion and its prevention of contact between the air
and air-cells, or to the injurious nature of artificial respiration, still
the fact ascertained by Le Gallois destroys the conclusion which
appeared deducible from Sir B. Brodie’s experiment. Indeed,
Le Gallois found that less oxygen was consumed than in natural
breathing, and that the temperature fell exactly in proportion to
the smallness of the quantity of oxygen consumed. Dr. Crawford
himself stated that the chemical process of respiration may, in
certain cases, be the means of cooling the body. Ifthe pulmonary
exhalation, he said, is in very great abundance, it will carry off so
much of the heat, given out during the change of the oxygen into
carbonic acid, that there may not be sufficient to saturate the
increased capacity of the arterial blood: this, therefore, will ab-
sorb caloric from the system, as it passes along, till its tem-
perature equals that of all parts. I may here remark, that the


* Phil. Trans. 1812. ' Expériences sur le Principe de la Vie.

* On Animal Heat, p. 388. Instances are recorded by Morgagni (iv. xlix. 26.),
and De Haen (Ratio Medendi, vol. iii. p. 36.), in the German Ephemerides
(Dee. ii. Ann. iv.), and by Mr. Thackrah, of the blood which streamed down the
extremity in venesection feeling cold to the patient and the practitioner. One
woman compared it to ice; and the sensation given to Mr. Thackrah was the
same as that of water at 68°. (Thackrah, On the Blood, p. 87.) In the Ephe-
merides the same is recorded of blood from the nose. The stomach of a cod was
found by Dr. Mosely to be not only colder than the water from which it was
taken, and the rest of the fish, but painfully to benumb the hand. (Diseases of
Tropical Climates.) Similar observations were made at Newfoundland, and are

™ quoted by Professor Rudolphi. (Grundriss der Physiologie, 182.)


R 4


244: ANIMAL HEAT.


temperature is kept down in a heated atmosphere by the dimi-
nution of chemical changes in the lungs, and by free secretion
and evaporation from the bronchiz and skin. How much each
contributes is not ascertained ; but the importance of evaporation
was shown in some experiments of Dr. De la Roche, who raised
the temperature of animals considerably by placing them in a
heated atmosphere loaded with moisture; thus preventing evapor-
ation. Ina cold atmosphere, the chemical changes in the lungs
are great, and the skin is dry : the aqueous matter which leaves
the body then, does so chiefly by the kidneys, in a fluid form; and
its amount is much less; because our thirst, and the amount of
our drink, are much less.

Dr. Philip has made experiments equally conclusive with those
of Dr. Le Gallois against the inferences drawn by Sir B. Brodie.
As very little air is taken into the lungs in natural inspiration,
and a regard to the bulk and frequency of each inspiration not
always attended to in experiments, it is very probable that this
gentleman had thrown too much air into the lungs; so that the
unnatural quantity of cold air, and the augmented secretion of
bronchial fluid, made the temperature fall. By impelling little,
-and that not frequently, Dr. Philip found that artificial respir-
ation, after the destruction of the brain, actually retarded the
cooling of the animal, while stronger respiration did actually
cool the body.

Of two rabbits killed in this way, their temperature being 104°,
one was subjected to 6 artificial inspirations, and the other to
from 26 to 30, in a minute; the temperature of the former was
100° at the end.of an hour, and the latter 98°. Of two, with the
temperature of 102°-5, one was undisturbed, and one subjected to
about 30 inspirations in a minute: the temperature of the former
at the end of half an hour was 98°75; of the latter, only 98°°5.
But, the lungs of the latter being now inflated only about twelve
times in a minute, the temperature of the former at the end of
another half hour was 95°-25, and of the latter, 96°. In one expe-
riment in which the jungs were inflated but a few times in a
minute, the temperature actually rose nearly a degree by arti-
ficial respiration.2 Dr. Hastings, at the same time, made similar
comparative experiments, and with similar results. In one, the


* An Experimental Inquiry into the Laws of the Vital Functions, 3d edit.
p. 180. sqq.


ANIMAL HEAT. 245


rabbit in which artificial breathing was performed cooled only
4°; while that which was left undisturbed cooled Tob:

Dr. Philip afterwards took pairs of rabbits, killed them in the
same way, and then in one experiment destroyed the brain and
spinal marrow of one with a wire, while he left the other untouched:
in another experiment, precisely similar, he inflated the lungs of
both. Yet, in each experiment, they both cooled equally. Ina
third, the brain and spinal marrow of one only was destroyed,
and the lungs of both inflated. These, too, cooled equally.

The temperature of foetuses born without brain is maintained
during the few days they may live.

Professor Rudolphi remarks that the temperature of animals
bears no proportion to their nervous system: that, if it did, man
should be warmer than any brute; the mammalia much more so
than birds; fish much more so than insects; and birds and am-
phibia nearly upon a par ;— all which would be the reverse of
fact. b

Vegetables have a tendency to preserve a peculiar temper-
ature, yet they have no nervous system.

But that the nervous system affects the temperature is certain. ¢
A passion of the mind will make the stomach or the feet cold, or
the whole body hot. Paralysed parts are often colder than
others, or, more properly, are more influenced than others by all
external changes of temperature.¢ But every function is affected
by the mind, though not dependent upon the brain for its regular
performance: and in varieties of temperature, both by the state
of the mind and by paralysis, there is, as far as we can judge, a
commensurate affection of the local circulation. Parts heated by
any passion are also red, and vice versd ; and paralytic parts must
have imperfect vascular functions, in some measure, at least,
from the want of the compression of the vessels by muscular
action, and of the general excitement by volition; they waste,
and sometimes inflame and ulcerate, or slough, on the slightest


> Grundriss der Physiologie, 150.

* ‘IT have formerly treated at some length of the influence of the neryous
system upon animal heat, in my Specimen Physiologie Comparate inter animantia
calici et frigidi sanguinis. 1786. p. 23.

See the same confirmed by many arguments in Magn. Strém, Theoria inflam-
mationis doctrine de calore animali superstructa. ayn. 1795. 8yo. p- 30. sq.
and by the much-lamented Roose, Journal der Exfindungen, &c. t.y. p. 17.

Consult also Dupuytren, Analyse des Travaux de ? Institut, 1807, p, 16.”

* Dr. Abercrombie, Edin. Med. and Surg. Journal.


246 ANIMAL HEAT. —


injury. Again, parts perfectly paralysed still maintain a temper-
ature above that of the surrounding medium, as well as circu-
lation, secretion, &c.°, and sometimes the same as in health.

Dr, Philip considers galvanism an important agent in the
nervous system, and found that it raised the heat of fresh arterial
blood 3° or 4°, and, at the same time, made the blood dark ;
a circumstance proving that the action is purely chemical, — an
alteration of some constituents of the blood to that state in which
their capacity for caloric is less. f

There is certainly no more reason to believe animal heat de-
pendent on the nervous system, than secretion and every organic
function. That, like these, it is influenced by the state of the
nervous system, is certain; but never, I imagine, except through
the instrumentality of chemical changes.

The purpose of animal heat is no doubt the performance of
the processes of the animated system, chemical, electrical, and
vital, which cannot continue unless at a certain temperature, nor
unless a certain degree of fluidity is preserved in some constitu-
ents of the system, and of solidity in others.


* Dr. Philip, we have seen, found rabbits just killed coo! in exactly the same
time, whether the brain and spinal marrow were destroyed or not, although when
these were destroyed a step was put to the secretion of gastric juice. Yet when
the same was done to a living rabbit, with the same effect on the stomach, the
animal’s temperature fell. This, however, would result from the shock given to
the nervous system as merely a part of the body, for the same happens every day
in cases of severe injuries even of the extremities,

* Experimental Inquiry, p. 230. sqq-


Vegetables and animals are prepared for almost all climates, and for temper-
atures higher than the heat of any country. Dr. Reeve found larve in a spring at
208° ; Lord Bute, conferve and beetles in the boiling springs of Albano, that
died when plunged into cold water. A species of chara will flower and produce
seed in the hot springs of Iceland, which boil an egg in four minutes, (Drs. Hodg-
kin and Fisher's translation of Dr. Edwards’s work, p. 467., where will be found
many curious facts of this nature, though less striking.) One plant, wredo nivalis,
which is a mere microscopic globule, is said to grow and flower under the snow.

Some cold-blooded animals bear heat very badly. Dr. Edwards says that
frogs die in a few seconds in water at 107°. (1. c. p. 40.) Yet a species of tenia
has been found alive in a boiled carp ; but then the carp which it inhabits will


live in water as hot as human blood. (Sennebier, Notes to his Translation of
Spallanzani. )


ANIMAL HEAT, 247


The germs of many insects, &c. are unaffected by a great range of tempera-
ture. I know a gentleman who boiled some honey-comb two years old, and,
after extracting all the sweet matter, threw the remains into a stable, which was
seon filled with bees. Body lice have appeared on clothes which had been im-
mersed in boiling water. Spallanzani found long ebullition in the open air
favourable to the appearance of the animalcules of vegetable infusions ; and the
application of great heat in close vessels, although it prevented the appearance
of a larger kind of animalcule, did not that of a smaller. The eggs of silk-
worms and butterflies hatch after exposure to a cold of 24° below zero. On the
other hand, insects may be frozen repeatedly, and recover as soon as thawed, as
we shall see when speaking of torpidity.


Besides the power of generating heat, some animals are luminous, and some
display great electric phenomena.

The glow-worm is known to all; and many insects of the beetle tribe, as well
as others, emit light. Many can extinguish or conceal their light, or render it
more vivid, at pleasure. In some it has been found to proceed from masses not
dissimilar, except in their yellow colour, from the interstitial substance of the rest
of the body, lying under the transparent integuments, and absorbed when the
season of luminousness is passed. (Consult Kirby and Spence, da Introduction
to Entomology, vol. ii. p. 409. sqq.) The ocean is frequently luminous at night
from the presence of certain animalcules, to some sort of which, perhaps, is owing
the phosphorescence of dead herrings. Some fish, as the gymnotus electricus and
torpedo, give electric shocks, and possess a regular galvanic battery.

I have adopted the common language in speaking of animal heat, as though
the phenomena depended upon a specific substance. However, there may be
every reason to believe that neither caloric nor light are fluids, but peculiar
states only ; and electricity may prove to be so likewise; and, perhaps, all these
to be modifications of the same state,


245


CHAP. XIV.
NUTRITION.


“ BesipeEs the function of distributing oxygen through the system,
and removing carbon, the principal use of the blood is to afford
nourishment to the body in general, and to the secreting organs
the peculiar fluids which they possess the power of deriving from
it. Nutrition shall be first examined.

‘* Nutrition is the grandest gift of nature, and the common and
highest prerogative of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, by
which they, beyond measure, surpass, even at first sight, all
human machines and automatons. Upon these no artist can
bestow the faculty, not to say of increasing and coming to per-
fection, but even of existing independently, and repairing the
incessant losses incurred from friction.®

“‘ By the nutritive faculty of the body, its greatest and most
admirable functions are performed; by it we grow from our first
formation and arrive at manhood; and by it are remedied tlie
destruction and consumption which incessantly occur in our
system during life.»

* Respecting the nature of this consumption, there has been
much dispute whether it affects the solids*, or whether, accord-


« « ¢ Nutrition, in fact, appears to be a continued generation,’ according to
the old observation of the very ingenious Ent. See his work, already re-
commended,”

> « Th. Young, De corporis humani viribus conservatricibus. Gotting. 1796. Svo.

Fl. J. Van Maanen, De natura humana sui ipsius conservatrice ac medicatrice.
Hardery. 1801. 8vo.”

© “See the great J. Bernouilli’s Diss. de nutrit. Groning. 1669. 4to. He
estimates the continual, though insensible, loss and reparation of the solids so
high, that the whole body may be said to be destroyed and renewed every three
years,”


NUTRITION. 249


ing to some very acute writers“, these, when once formed and
perfected, remain invariably entire.

“There can be no doubt that some of the similar solids, v. c.
the epidermis and nails, are gradually destroyed and renewed ;
the same is proved by the frequently surprising attenuation of
the flat bones, especially of the skull, from defective nutrition,
in old age®; and” some imagine “ it is proved also by the well-
known experiment of dyeing them, in warm-blooded animals, with
madder root.”

But the redness imparted to the bones by feeding animals with
madder, does not prove that the matter of the bones is constantly
changing ; because the opinion that the madder unites with the
phosphate of lime in the blood, and thus reddens all the bony
matter subsequently deposited, is erroneous. Mr. Gibson proved,
by numerous experiments, that the serum has a stronger affinity
than the phosphate of lime, for madder. The serum being
charged with madder, the phosphate of lime of the bones, al-
ready formed, seizes the superabundant madder, and becomes
red. If the madder is no longer given to the animal, as it is con-
tinually passing off with the excretions, the stronger attraction of
the serum draws it from the bones, and they re-acquire their
whiteness. The attenuation of the flat bones shows, I imagine,
wasting only.

The constant renewal of the epidermis is demonstrated by
wearing black silk stockings next the skin. The microscope
exhibits that very minute fragments are incessantly thrown off
from the mucous membranes no less than from the skin.
That the hair and nails not only grow perpetually, but are even
reproduced, is certain from the great quantity of the former
which falls off the head whole if worn long, while a good head of
hair still continues; and from the renewal of the latter, after the
loss of a great part of a finger. I once attended a middle-aged
woman in St. Thomas’s Hospital, who had lost nearly the whole
of the first phalanx of a finger, and yet the stump was tipped by


a « See J. Chr. Kemme, Beurtheilung eines Beweises vor die Immaterialitat der
Seele aus der Medecin. Walle. 1776. 8vo.

And his Zweifel und Erinnerungen wider die Lehre der Aerzte von der Ernih-
rung der festen Theile. Ibid. 1778. 8vo.”

© « Respecting this mutability of the bones, I have spoken at some length in
my osteological work, ed. 2. p. 26. and elsewhere.”

" Manchesler Memoirs, vol. 1- ® Raspail, l. c. pp. 245. 505.


250 NUTRITION.


a nail, though certainly a clumsy one. An instance of a nail at
the end of the stump, after the complete removal of the first. pha-
lanx, may be seen in one of our London Journals." Tulpius de-
clares he has seen examples after the loss of both the first and
second phalanges —in secundo et tertio articulo.' The glans
penis (in truth a mere continuation of the corpus spongiosum
urethre) was entirely renewed in one case.‘ Nothing more can,
I apprehend, be said respecting the entire restoration of organs
in the human body. Portions of cutis, bone, membrane, blood-
vessels, absorbents, and nerves, are replaced. That portions of
large nerves, fully capable of all the functions of the destroyed
pieces, are reproduced, is now a matter of certainty.! Minute
blood-vessels and absorbents are of course allowed on all hands to
be produced in the cure of most solutions of continuity, whether
by wounds, ulceration, or whatever else™; but Dr. Parry, senior,
has shown, that, in the ram, at least, when a blood-vessel which
proceeds some way without giving off a branch is obstructed, new
branches sprout forth and establish a communication on each side


» London Medical and Physical Journal, 1817.

i Observationes Medica, iv. 56.

k Edinburgh Med. and Physical Essays, vol. v.

‘ The proofs of this are numerous; the latest are by Tiedemann. Zeitschrift
fiir Physiologie, 4ter band, Iter heft, S. 68.

m Mr. Bauer thinks he has observed vegetable tubes to be constructed by the
extrication of carbonic acid gas into a slimy matter prepared for nutrition. Some
such opinion was held by Borelli, Tabor, and Hales. He explains the form-
ation of blood-vessels in coagulated fibrin and pus in an analogous manner,
but his experiments did not proceed far enough for me to dwell upon them.
Phil. Trans. 1818 and 1819. Dr. Stevens has recently made observations upon
this subject. (I. c. p. 66.)

Not only divided parts re-unite, but even portions completely separated and
cold, and parts of different bodies. A soldier’s arm was struck off at the battle
of Arlon, with the exception of a piece of skin and the subjacent vessels and
nerves, and yet the muscles, bones, &c. completely re-united in about eight
months. (Dictionnaire des Sciences Médicales, t. xii.) Garengeot saw a nose unite
after being bitten off, trampled upon, and allowed to lie in the dirt till it was
cold. (Traité des Opérations de Chirurgerie, t. iii.) Dr. Balfour saw a similar
occurrence in the instance of a finger. (Edinburgh Med. and Surgical Journal.
1815.) One will be found (Rust’s Magazin, 14 b. Lh, p. 112. Berlin, 1823.)
by Dr. John, Wiederanheilung eines giinslich absgeschittenen fingers. Others
might be quoted. See Dr. Thomson’s Lectures on Inflammation, p. 243.

Transplantation, for instance, of the cock’s testes to the hen’s abdomen, as well
as of the spur to the head, is very common, and the latter was mentioned nearly
two centuries ago in Bartholin, Epist. Cent. i. p. 174.3 and by Duhamel, in the
Mém. de? Acad. Royale des Sciences, 1746, as very common in poultry-yards,


NUTRITION. 251


of the obstruction.» The continuance of circulation was previ-
ously attributed solely to the enlargement of the small anasto-
mosing vessels; and we know that whenever the aorta itself is
obstructed, branches will so enlarge as to carry on the circu-
lation very well.° Muscle is supplied by tendinous matter. The
substance formed in the situation of destroyed cellular mem-
brane is so little cellular, that it does not become distended in
emphysema or anasarca.P

“If I am not mistaken, those solid parts undergo successive
change, which possess the reproductive power, — an extraordinary
faculty, by which not only the natural loss of particles, but even
the accidental removal of considerable parts through external
injuries, is repaired and perfectly supplied, as the bones4 anda
few other parts sufficiently demonstrate.

‘“‘ In those parts whose vital powers are, as it were, of a higher
order, the parenchyma, constituting their base, appears perma-
nent, and is liable to this change only, — that the interstices of
the fibres and parenchyma, while nutrition is vigorous, are con-
stantly full of nutrient animal” soft substance; ‘ but, when nutri-
tion languishes, are deprived of this, collapse, and consequently
become thin.” The very convolutions of the brain will shrink in
extreme emaciation.

‘“« During the growth of the body, peculiar powers are exerted,
by which the fibrin deposited in the cellular membrane from the
blood-vessels is properly distributed and intimately assimilated to
the substance of each organ, &c.


" An Experimental Inquiry, §c. See also Dr. Charles Parry’s work, in which
similar experiments are related.

© See a case in the Dublin Hospital Reports, vol. ii. Med. Chir. Trans. vol. v.

P Dr. Thomson, Lectures on Inflammation, p. 417.

4 “* Consult, among others, G. L. Koeler, Experimenta circa regenerationem
ossium. Gotting. 1786. 8vo.

Alex. Herm. Macdonald, De necrosi ac callo. Edinb. 1799. 8vo ”

** That the corium is not really reproduced, is probable, not only from its per-
petual cicatrices (for some contend that the matter of these does not continue, but
their form only, which is preserved by a perpetual apposition of fresh particles in
the room of the decayed and absorbed), but much more by the lines and figures
which are made upon the skin by the singular art of pricking it with a needle
(a process denominated in the barbarous language of the Otaheiteans tatooing),
and imparting to the coriuma blue or red colour, as permanent as the cicatricule,
by means of charcoal powder, ashes, soot, the juices of plants, or ox- gall; while,
on the other hand, the red hue imparted to the bones, by means of aoa
quickly disappears, as these parts undergo a continual renovation.’


252 NUTRITION.


« This is referable both to the laws of affinity ” and repulsion,
“by the former of which we imagine particles attract and, as it
were, appropriate others which are similar and related to them-
selves,” while by the latter others are cast off; and tothe peculiar
powers of life which only can effect ‘ the proper application of
shapeless elementary matter, and its modification to particular
forms.” The blood contains either the principles themselves of
various solids, or principles readily converted into them by chemi-
cal change. For instance, we know how readily a portion of it
grows solid out of the body; and the albumen of the egg is at
first almost entirely fluid, but gradually a portion of it becomes
insoluble"; we see mucus expectorated sometimes of great con-
sistence, though it must have been poured forth fluid. Farther,
the fluids of the egg, after the influence of the fluid of the male,
solidify by themselves, and at length form an animal. A coagulum
of blood will of itself become vascular, and be converted into an
organized solid. Such are facts of formation, and we can have
less difficulty in conceiving that the fluids brought into proximity
with solids unite with them in the case of nutrition. We know also
that gelatine enters into the composition of every part, and that the
skin is little else, whereas the blood contains none: but then gela-
tine differs from albumen, in only containing three or four per cent.
less carbon, and carbon is thrown off from the body incessantly.

«“ The union of both these powers, we conceive, must be the
source of the nutrition of such similar parts as are not supplied
with blood itself, but are, nevertheless, at first generated by a
most powerful and infallible nisus, grow, are nourished throughout
life, and, if destroyed by accident, are very easily reproduced. §

‘“‘ As this appears to be the true account of nutrition in general,
so, on the other hand, this function evidently has great varieties of
degree and kind,” generally and locally, “‘ especially where, from
the more or less lax apposition of the nutritious matter, the struc-
ture of the similar parts is more or less dense, and the specific
weight of the whole body more or less considerable.t In this


" M. Raspail, 1. c. p. 194.

> “ Zwo Abhandlungen iiber die Nutritionskraft welche von der Acad. der Wiss.
in St. Petersburg den Preiss getheilt erhalten haben. Petersburg. 1789. 4to.

De Grimaud, Mémoire sur la nutrition qui a obtenu'l'accessit. Ib. same year. 4to.

Steph. J. P. Housset, on the same subject (in the same school) in his Mémoires
physiologiques et d’hist. naturelle. Auxerre. 1787. 8vo. t. i. p. 98.”

* J. Robertson, On the specific Gravity of living Men. Phil. Trans. vol, }.
PB. i. p- 80. sq.


NUTRITION. 9538


respect, not only individuals, but whole nations, differ from each
other. The Yakuts and Burats, who are remarkable for the
lightness of their bodies, are a sufficient example of this.”

A certain degree of excitement and use causes parts to be
better nourished, so that the exercise, for instance, of muscles,
is seen to render them larger, and disuse to cause them to waste.
Great excitement and excessive use exhaust and also occasion a
part to waste. Organs, or some one or more of their component
tissues, will, without very clear reasons, sometimes be over-
nourished, hypertrophied; or under-nourished, atrophied ; and
different tissues of the same organ are sometimes oppositely
affected. Nutrition is sometimes perverted, so that consistence,
or even texture, is changed. Occasionally the structure of a part
is changed to that of some other part —is transformed: and oc-
casionally structures are produced altogether foreign to the body.


“ Brutes far surpass man in both the ordinary renewal of the integuments and
appendages, and in the extraordinary restoration of destroyed organs. The horse
periodically sheds its hair, the bird its feathers “, the stag its horns, the serpent
its cuticle, the lobster its shell and the teeth which are in its stomach.* The
fall of the leaves of trees is an analogous circumstance. Insects not only change
their coats frequently, but undergo complete metamorphoses ; are first worms,
then grubs, and finally winged beings. The crystalline lens extracted from a
healthy eye is speedily reproduced in cats, dogs, and rabbits’, and probably in
other brutes. ‘The extraordinary reproductive power of some brutes is almost
incredible. A lobster can reproduce a claw; a water-newt an extremity : Blu-
menbach actually observed the reproduction of the whole head with its four
horns in a snail, and the complete eye — cornea, iris, crystalline lens, &c. —in a
water-newt.” Besides greater powers of reproduction than man, brutes gene-
rally possess greater also of reparation — will survive injuries which would prove
fatal to us, perhaps under any circumstances, or at least without great care.
I related Brunner’s numerous attempts upon the life of a dog, of which, violent


SS Se


u Feathers which are not cast off, have been discovered to receive an increase
of colour at the moulting season, Linnean Transactions. 1818.

x This corroborates the propriety of the view taken by Dr. Prout in an unpub-
lished paper written many years ago, in which he contends that the teeth are to
be arranged with the integuments. A similar opinion has been lately published
in France.

y MM. Cocteau and Le Roy d’Etiolle. Magendie’s Jowrnal de Physiologie.
Janvier, 1827.

% Gitltingen Literary Notices. 1787. pp. 28. 30,

S


254: | NUTRITION.


as they were, “ vim elusit, vegetusque evasit,” as an illustration of this. Less
violent injuries are recovered from with far less danger and inconvenience than
we experience. The lower we descend into the scale, the greater tolerance of
violence and the greater powers of reparation and renewal do we observe. When
a salamander’s head has been cut off, the wound has healed. (Dr. Edwards
ie. plas) Wolf thes head of a planaria from our ponds is divided longitudi-
nally a certain way, the wound heals: if completely, other new matter will be
deposited and join the two heads into one of great size, with one or two addi-
tional eyes; or each half will become a new head. If the whole body is divided,
except at the tail, Siamese twins are made, which pull discordantly and tear
asunder their bond of union, and become independent. Not only does a
planaria acquire a new head after decapitation, but, if the two heads which have
been produced by division are removed, others have sprung up three times in
succession, and, the animal being then divided throughout and its head cut off,
one head only was now produced. If the animal is divided across, the anterior
half swims off, and even sends forth a tail: the tail sinks, but after a few days
sends forth a head. If cut across into three, the anterior and posterior proceed
thus, and the middle part shoots forth both a head and tail. Nay a planaria has
been cut into ten pieces, and each has become a perfect animal. (Dr. Johnson,
London Medical Gaxette, Feb. 10. 1832.) Some mites live in alcohol, and flies
have come to London in a pipe of Madeira and revived. I have soaked a
caterpillar in Scheele’s prussic acid, and seen it recover in half an hour. If the
polype, which is a gelatinous tube, with one end closed and the other fringed
for the purpose of receiving food and conveying it, is divided, the two halves
change at one end, the one closing, the other acquiring fringes, so that both halves
become perfect animals; or, if a polype is inverted, the outer surface forms a
digesting cavity.

Vegetables endure extreme violence, A log of mulberry-tree has sent forth
shoots on being placed in the ground as a post, after many years of neglect; a
gooseberry-bush will grow if planted with its branches in the earth and its roots
in the air.


CHAP. XV.
SECRETION.


“ Brsipes ‘the products of nutrition, fluzds of extremely various
descriptions are, produced from the blood by means of secretion,
which Haller, no less than his predecessors, with truth and regret
declared to be among the most obscure parts of physiology.” *
While nutrition is the production of the component solids from the
blood, secretion is thus the production of fluids from it, by vital
processes. The nature of the process in both must be the same.
The solid products of nutrition are also said by many to be first
deposited in a fluid state.

“ The secreted fluids differ, on the one hand, so considerably
among themselves, and, on the other, have so many points of
resemblance, that their classification cannot but be extremely
arbitrary. If we arrange them according to the degree of differ-
ence between them and the blood from which they are formed,
they will stand in the following order : —

“‘ First, the milk, which may be in some degree considered as
chyle reproduced, and appears formed by the most simple process
from the blood newly supplied with chyle.

“ Next, the aqueous fluids, as they are commonly denominated
from their limpid tenuity, although the greater part differ im-
portantly from water in the nature of their constituents, and
especially in the proportion of albumen: such are the humours
of the eye, the tears, in all probability the vapour contained in
the cellular interstices and the cavities of the abdomen and
thorax ; nearly similar, also, is the fluid of the pericardium and
of the ventricles of the brain.” They contain mucus, soda,
hydrochlorates, and phosphates.


a « Fouquet on Secretion, in the Encyclopedical Dictionary of Paris, t. xiv.
Fr. L. Kreysig, De secretionibus. Sp. i. ii, Lips. 1794. sq. 4to.
Ignat. Dollinger, Was ist Absonderung, und wie Geschicht sie? Herbipol-
1819. 8vyo.”
s 2


at


256 SECRETION.


“ The liquor amnii of pregnancy, and the urine, remarkable
for the peculiar nature and mixture of its proper constituents,
are generally enumerated among these.

« The salivary fluids, concerned in mastication, digestion, and
chylification, appear more elaborated.

«“ Next the mucous, which line the cavities of most of the
organs performing the natural and genital function £,and likewise
the tract of the nostrils, larynx, and trachea.

‘¢ The mucus within the eye, and under the epidermis, is nearly
similar.

‘«‘ In the same class may be included the cerumen of the ears,
the unguent of the Meibomian glands and of the joints, and,
perhaps, the ambiguous and nameless fluid commonly poured
forth by the vagina during the venereal cstrum.” Mucus
contains an abundance of hydrochlorate of soda, and differs in
different parts. That of the nostrils and bronchiz at first coagu-
lates in nitric acid, and at last dissolves; that of the gall-bladder
coagulates by acids and alcohol ; that of the urine coagulates by
tannin, but not by acids, is very soluble in alkalies, and dries red.

“ The adipose are, besides the common fat, the medulla of the
bones and grease of the skin.

‘< Related to these are the secretion of the corona glandis under
the praeputium, and of the external female genitals.

“ The truly serous, or albuminous, are the fluid of the ovarian
vesicle of De Graaf, and the liquor of the prostate.

« The semen virile and the bile are each sui generis.” >


> Dr. Bostock arranges the productions of nutrition and secretion as the aqueous,
albuminous, mucous, gelatinous, fibrinous, oleaginous, resinous, and saline. (An
Elementary System of Physiology, vol. ii, p. 329. sq.)

The agueous are the perspiration and pulmonary halitus, in which the propor-
tion of water is so great as to give the chief character,

The albwminous, — all the membranous or white parts of animals, the fluids of
serous membranes and of the cellular membrane, the former differing from the
albumen of the blood chiefly in being freed from extraneous matter and coagu-
lated ; the latter from serum, chiefly in containing much less albumen.

The mucous are the mucus of all mucous membranes, the saliva, gastric juice,
tears, and semen. The animal matter which is their basis much resembles co-
agulated albumen, and their salts are neutral, while those of the albuminous
fluids are alkaline.

The gelatinous are named from containing jelly, — a substance not found in
the blood nor any of the fluids, but abundantly in membranes, and particularly
in the skin; and as albumen may be converted into it by digestion in dilute
nitric acid, it appears to be the albumen of the blood with an addition of oxygen


SECRETION. Q57


Berzelius adopts the old division of secretions and excretions,
and makes the following remarks : —

‘‘ There are two classes of secreted fluids, viz. the secretions
properly so called, or the fluids intended to fulful some ulterior
purpose in the animal economy, and the excretions, which are
directly discharged from the body. ‘The fluids of the former class
are all alkaline, and of the latter all acid. The excretions are
the urine, the perspired fluid, and the milk. All the other fluids
appear to belong to the former class.

«© The alkaline secreted fluids may be divided into two very
distinct species. The former of these contains the same quantity


and a diminished proportion of carbon. It abounds in the young, so that those
parts, which at the beginning of life are almost entirely jelly, consist chiefly of
albumen as age advances: since it is not found in the fluids, it must be supplied
with its carbon again, and is, probably, reduced to the state of albumen. Dr.
Prout considers gelatine the most imperfect form of albuminous matter— and the
counterpart of the saccharine principle of vegetables.

The fibrinows are the muscular fibres, abounding in azote, and thus more com-
pletely animalised, resembling the fibrin of the blood, — apparently their source.

The oleaginous are the fat, marrow, and secretions of sebaceous glands, and
perhaps the milk, as its properties depend so considerably upon oily matter.

The resinous are the bile, cerumen, and urea, very similar to the former, but
owing their specific characters to a kind of resin. Osmazome is referred to this
class; but what M. Raspail thinks of it was mentioned under the head of blood.

The saline are the acids, alkalies, and neutral and earthy salts of the various
solids and fluids; generally more copious in the fluids than in the solids, absent
in the simple oleaginous secretions, and abundant in the compound; and still
more so in the resinous secretions. Their quantity is greatest in the bones, which
are principally phosphate of lime; but, with this exception, the urine possesses
the greatest proportion, as well as the most variety. 1. In some secretions they
are absent; as the fat. 2. In some they exist in definite quantity, and this dif-
ferent from that in the blood; as the saliva. 3. In others, they are found in the
same quantity, and of the same nature, as in the blood; such is the fluid of
serous membranes. 4. In some, they are different from the salts of the blood,
and of variable quantity ; as the urea. These four divisions are —i. The solid
and albuminous, the gelatinous, and simple oleaginous. ii. The mucous, fibrinous,
compound oleaginous. iii. The liquid albuminous. iy, The aqueous and resinous.

This arrangement is certainly good; but, like every artificial arrangement of
natural objects, convenient for general views and memory, rather than correct.
For example, the semen is mucous, but unlike every other fluid: the gastric juice
and cerebral substance are equally sui generis. Vibrinous matter as well as mucus
exists in semen, and is probably, indeed, its specific part: albumen exists abund-
antly in milk, united into an emulsion with the oleaginous portion. The bile
and urine have few properties in common ; and urea is certainly not a resinous
substance,


s 8


258 SECRETION.


of water as the blood, so that the change induced by the nervous
influence seems to be confined to that of altering the chemical
form of the albuminous materials¢, without affecting their rela-
tive proportion to the water and other substances dissolved in the
blood. The bile, spermatic fluid, &c. are of this kind. The latter
species consists of fluids, in which the influence of the nervous
system has separated a large portion of the albuminous matter,
and left the remaining liquid proportionally watery. The saliva,
the humours of the eye, and the effused serum of membranes
are of this species ; and in these the quantity of salts, and in ge-
neral also of alkali, is the same as in the blood.

*“‘ The influence of the chemical agent of secretion is, there-
fore, chiefly spent upon the albuminous materials of the blood,
which seem to be the source of every substance that peculiarly
characterises each secretion, each of which is sud generis, and is
its principal constituent. All the other parts of the secretion
seem to be rather accidental, and to be found there only because
they were contained in the blood out of which the secretion was
formed. Therefore, in examining the secreted fluids, the chief
_ attention should be paid to the peculiar matter of the fluid, which
varies in all. This matter sometimes retains some of the pro-
perties of albumen; at other times, none; and hence an accurate
analysis, showing the quantity and nature of this peculiar matter,
is above all to be desired.

“If the several secretions be supposed to be deprived of their
peculiar matter, and the remainders analysed, the same residue
would be found from them all, which also would be identical
with the fluid separated from the serum after its coagulation.
Thus we should find, first, a portion soluble in alcohol, consisting
of the muriates of potash and soda, lactate of soda, and of an
extractive animal substance, precipitable by tannin; and, se-
condly, of a portion soluble only in water, containing soda (which
acquires carbonic acid by evaporation, and is separable by acetic
acid and alcohol) and another animal substance, not extract,
precipitable from its solution in cold water, both by tannin and
muriate of mercury. Sometimes a vestige of phosphate of soda
will also be detected.

** The excretions are of a more compound nature. They all
contain a free acid, which is termed lactic, and in the urine this


© This appellation Berzelius gives to the fibrin, albumen, and colouring matter
of the blood.


SECRETION. 259


is mixed with the uric acid. Urine seems to contain only a single
peculiar characteristic matter; but milk has as many as three,
viz. butter, curd, and sugar of milk, which, however, seem to be
produced by different organs that mingle their fluids in the same
receptacle. The perspired fluid appears to have no peculiar
matter, but to be a very watery liquid, with hardly a vestige of
the albumen of the blood, and, in short, is the same as the other
excretory fluids would be when deprived of their peculiar matter.
If we suppose this matter taken away from those excretions which
possess it, the remaining fluid will be found to have properties
very different from the fluid part of the secretions, when equally
freed from their peculiar matter. That of the excretions is acid,
contains earthy phosphates, and when evaporated, leaves a much
larger residue than the fluid of the secretions. This residue is
yellowish brown, of the consistence of syrup, with an unpleasant,
sharp, saline taste of the salt that it contains. It reddens litmus,
is most soluble in alcohol, and this spirituous solution contains the
muriates of the blood, together with free lactic acid, much lactate
of soda (the soda being the free alkali of the blood, neutralised
by this acid), and the extractive matter, which always accom-
panies this neutral salt. The part insoluble in alcohol contains a
distinguishable quantity of phosphate of soda, a little of a similar
animal matter to that found in the secretions, and also the earthy
phosphates which were held in solution by the lactic acid, and
were precipitated by the action of the alcohol. The urine pos-
sesses also a number of other substances, which will be specified
when describing this secretion in particular.” 4

The most simple mode of secretion is where the ordinary arteries
in the neighbourhood ramify on a surface, as on the skin, mucous
or serous membranes, and the fluid is poured forth wpon it. The
next mode is where the arteries ramify on the inner surface of
a cup, called a cell or crypt, znto which the fluid is poured, and
in which it remains a longer or shorter time and becomes
more consistent. The next is where this cup is so lengthened
that it becomes a pouch or follicle. If prolonged still more,
it is a canal, of various lengths. Next, what is termed a gland,
is but a conglomeration of numerous canals, beginning each
from a blind extremity and uniting together till they form one
tube only, which opens upon some surface under the name of


“ General Views of the Composition of Animal Fluids, by J. Berzclius, M.D.
Medico-Chirurgic. Trans. vol, iit. p. 234.


8 4


260 SECRETION.


excretory duct. Anatomists formerly supposed that the ducts of
glands were, like veins, merely prolonged arteries, except, of
course, where, as in the case of the liver, the secretion takes
place by a vein. But Dr. Mueller, of Bonn, in a most elaborate
work ¢, in which he demonstrates this to be the structure of all
glands in all animals, contends that the arteries ramify on the
inner surface of the canals as upon any membranes, and, after
forming a network, terminate in veins; so that the fluid secreted
passes into the secretory ducts, which are in truth all excreting,
just as we see it poured upon serous and synovial membranes.
The excretory ducts of glands, therefore, precisely resemble the
trachea, which divides and subdivides till it ends in blind twigs
of extreme minuteness. Indeed, the extremities of the twigs of
the ducts of the salivary glands of some animals are enlarged
into a globular form, so that the woodcut which illustrates the
air cells at the extremities of the bronchial twigs, might be
taken for a delineation of the extremities of the salivary ducts
of the sheep, for example, as may be seen in Dr. Mueller’s sixth
plate. Thus it would appear that all secretion is of that kind
to which old physiologists gave the name of diapedesis or
transudation, in which the fluid is supposed to be merely strained
through the sides or open mouths of the vessels, and upon which
Blumenbach remarks, that “ physiologists have lately given
different explanations of this mode of secretion. Some assert
that every fluid is formed by’ passing merely through inorganic
pores from the blood: others altogether deny the existence of
these pores. I think much of this is a verbal dispute. Because,
on the one hand, I cannot imagine how inorganic pores can be
supposed to exist in an organised body, for we are not speaking
here of the common interstices of matter, in physics denominated
pores; and I am persuaded that every opening in organised bodies
is of an organic nature, and possesses vital powers exactly corre-
spondent. On the other hand, these openings or pores, which
indisputably exist in the coats of vessels, I think but little differ-
ent, in function at least, from the cylindrical ducts through which
fluids are said to percolate in conglomerate glands and secreting
viscera: for this percolation depends less on the form of the
organ than on its vital powers.”£ But Dr. Mueller asserts that


© De glandularum secernentium structura penitiort earumgue prima forma~
tione in homine atque animalibus. Lipsia. 1830. folio.

f « Consult, among others, Schreger, Fragmenta, p. 37. sq. already recom-
mended.


SECRETION. 961


no openings exist ; that the capillary blood-vessels, which form a
network upon the inner surface of the secretory canals, do
not secrete, but continue perfect canals till they become veins ;
and that the membrane itself, imbibing the blood and changing
its fluid portions, pours this forth from its own substance
upon its surface, and the secretion is performed not only at the
extremities of the canal, but throughout it.

I agree, however, with those who believe that the new fluid
is not formed by the substance of the walls of the canals, but
passes formed from the minute twigs of the blood-vessels upon
its surface; and I think, with Blumenbach, that the infinitely
minute spaces, through which the fluid oozes into the secreting
canals, must be regarded as living, not inorganic, pores. For,
as I have already stated (p.133.), the imbibition observable
after death is not found to occur during life. In the next place,
a secretion is not only increased by supplying the blood with
more of the materials furnishing it, and vitiated by vitiating the
blood, but may be rapidly and greatly augmented or altered
without any augmentation or alteration of the materials in the
vessels, merely by the administration of particular stimuli in
minute quantity, or by emotions of the mind. Healthy secre-
tion must be a living process, performed by living solids, and
the minute spaces through which this secreted fluid moves, are
spaces bounded by living solids, are apertures in living solids,
and therefore not inorganic pores. Indeed, although it has been
proved that glands are ducts beginning by blind extremities,
and not prolonged from blood-vessels, and have their blood-
vessels ramifying on their inner surface, Iam not satisfied of the
existence of proof that these blood-vessels transmit their fluid
into the canal through apertures in their sides, and not by infi-
nitely minute twigs with open mouths. As absorption takes place
by the open mouths of vessels, secretion probably does the same.
But whether these are mere apertures, or from these apertures the
vessel is a little prolonged in the form of a minute twig, still the
openings are in living solids, and therefore must be subject, like
all the visible openings in the body, to the laws of life. If it is the


a SS ee


P. Lupi, Nova per poros inorganicos secretionum theoria refutata, &c. Roma,


1793. 2 vols. 8vo.
Kreysig, Specimen Secundum ; formerly recommended.
Also C. Le Gallois, Le sang est-il identique dans tous les vaisseaux qw il parcourt ?


Paris, 1802. 8yo.”


262 SECRETION.


substance of the sides of secreting canals that secretes, still it must
secrete from fluid poured into it from blood-vessels. The contents
of these vessels is blood. But it is not likely that blood oozes
through the sides of its vessels, nor that the substance of a secret-
ing canal has blood diffused init. It is more likely that minute twigs
arise from blood-vessels, and, being of a peculiar nature, admit
only certain parts of the blood, which they change and transmit
through open mouths into the secretory substance of the canal; or,
that diving openings exist in their sides that will permit the exit
of only these certain portions of the blood, and these portions are
poured forth into the substance of the sides of the secreting canal
to be farther elaborated. But, on either supposition, the opening of
the blood-vessel into its twig, or, if there be no twig, into the
substance of the sides of the secreting canal, must have a living
margin. Dr. Mueller, however, contends that the minutest streams
of blood are contained in solids scarcely more dense than the
blood itself, —in boundaries which are not vessels, but mere fur-
rows, and so slightly different from the fluid blood, that this freely
mingles with them and is changed into them or various new pro-
ducts. Unquestionably the minutest parts, and those which are
the fundamental portion of the rest, are, like the embryo frame,
of exquisite delicacy and softness. If we remark that the
smallest artery of fins and webs may, under the microscope, be
seen terminating in veins, and giving off minute vessels which run
to veins, not colliquescing into a pulpy substance; we receive
this reply, —that the minutest arteries must be pulpy enough
to allow the blood to mingle with their substance. Yet the
effect of emotions and certain articles is more explicable on
the idea of organic openings and canals.

If Dr. Mueller is correct in supposing that the substance of
the tubes secretes from dlood poured into them, still I would
contend that the blood passes into them through organic open-
ings in the blood-vessels ; and the fluid produced cannot pass from
the substance through inorganic pores, because, being mixed with
blood, or what is left of the blood, inorganic pores would transmit
both. Again, what is left of the blood, after the separation of the
new fluid from it, must be taken back, and we cannot suppose it to
pass again through inorganic pores into the blood-vessels. Open-
ings in them must have a power of selection, or the secreted fluid
would equally pass back; and, if absorbents take up what is left,
not mere organic openings but vessels are brought into play in the


SECRETION. 263


business ; and vessels may as well be presumed to have also
carried the secreted fluid from the blood. Indeed, that the se-
cretion takes place in vessels, is proved, if an author is correct
in asserting that the formation of the new substance within
the vessels may be demonstrated “ by forcing coloured injections
into the arteries of growing bones, when the lime is seen to issue
from their orifices in the form of a white powder, and deposit
itself, like the farina of a flower, for the office of consolidation.
In asimilar way, the injected arteries of the common domestic
hen, while her eggs are incomplete, will show the deposition of
lime from their exhalant branches upon the membrane which af-
terwards becomes the shell.” s

Some have thought no organic opening necessary, because the
changes in the blood of the lungs take place through membrane.
But the separation of carbonic acid is a mere physical or chemical
occurrence, not a secretion, and takes place equally in dead
blood, through dead membrane. The entrance of oxygen into
the blood might be equally alleged as an argument against the
existence of absorbent vessels on surfaces.

Just as solids are not originally firm, nor exactly of the
nature they are when their texture is perfect, but the soft
substance, which is their elementary portion, hardens by subse-
quent changes; so the fluids which pass from the blood-vessels
are probably more and more changed, till they ooze perfect
into the secreting canal. Even after this they become more con-
sistent, as may be seen in mucus which has lain upon a mucous
membrane, or the bile which has been in the gall-bladder.

The difference between nutrition and secretion is, that, in the
former, the fluid does not pass away, but remains and coheres
to the solids, and, undergoing further changes, solidifies, and
becomes part of them.

The secreting surface of a gland must be very extensive. The
blind extremities are of endless forms. Not only are some mere
cups or crypts; some longer, so as to be pouches; some longer
still, so as to resemble a portion of blind intestine ; some, again,
extremely long canals, of the same diameter throughout their
course»: but any of these may be single or aggregated, and


® A View of the Structure, &c. of the Stomach, &c. By Thomas Hare, F.L.S,
London, 1821. p. 77.

h « Malpighi, in works repeatedly quoted, and also in his Diss. de glandulis con-
globatis, Lond, 1689, 4to, (but consult especially his Opera Posthuma, ib. 1697,


264 SECRETION,


variously diversified, complicated, and arranged, and collected
into a small space, so as to resemble vegetable forms, and be as
various. These all consist of a single membrane, belonging to
the class of the mucous ; with some of which, indeed, it usually
at last becomes continuous. When the conjunction of tubes has
produced the portion called excretory duct, one or more addi-
tional coats unite with the essential membrane. The secreting
membrane is always white, whitish grey, or whitish yellow, what-
ever the colour of the fluid secreted. Very different secretions
are produced by glands of similar structure, as by the kidneys
and testes; the same secretion is produced by very different
structures in different animals, as the saliva, bile, urine, and semen.
Some appear to require an immense surface to produce a given
quantity ; others one not of great extent. The secreting surface
of the vessels, which by their union form the hepatic duct, must
be immense: the gastric juice proceeds from the limited inner
surface of the stomach ; and this shows also that, for an important
secretion, no gland, that is, no tube, or aggregation of tubes, is
necessary. The saliva, on the other hand, is produced by several
elaborately formed glands. Complexity of gland merely implies
a greater extent of secreting surface; a larger number of canals
being aggregated, or longer canals coiled up together. Amount
of secreting surface is, of course, proportionate, not merely to
the complexity of the tubes, but to the bulk of the whole organ.

The most elaborate fluids, as the semen, bile, urine, are pro-
duced by the most complicated glands, that is to say, such


fol. ; and published likewise elsewhere,) considered the miliary globules, which
are easily discoverable in most glands, as acini, according to his expression,
internally excavated,” and having arteries open into them and excretory ducts
begin from them to carry off the fluid first poured forth from the arteries and then
fully elaborated in the acini. ‘ Ruysch, on the contrary, contended that these
supposed hollow acini were nothing more than glomerules of blood-vessels” which
were continued into the excretory ducts. The acini are merely the blind extre-
mities of ducts, and the blood-vessels, conglomerated into granules, as we saw
when considering the liver. Duverney (Comment. Ac. Se. Petrop. 1750.)
showed that the lactiferous ducts of the hedgehog began as vesicles arranged like
a bunch of grapes. Mascagni and Cruikshank afterwards demonstrated the
same in the human breast, and Mascagni admitted that the excretory ducts began
as blind extremities and had no arteries opening into them. He assumed the
existence of inorganic pores. Dr. Mueller justly proposes to banish the term
acini altogether, and speak only of the elementary parts of glands or blind be-
ginnings of the secreting tubes,


SECRETION. 965


fluids appear produced in small quantity from a given surface ;
and a fluid nearly aqueous, or at least with no peculiar consti-
tuent, is produced from so small a surface as that of a mucous or
serous membrane, or crypts or follicles. Whatever may be
the constituents of the fluid, if they are secreted with a large
quantity of water, the complexity and bulk are not in proportion
to the quantity of such secretion. For instance, the urine far
exceeds the bile in quantity, yet the two kidneys together are
not more conglomerated, and are smaller, than the liver ; for the
elaborate contents of the urine are greatly diluted with a fluid
which requires no extent of surface for its production. I should,
perhaps, say that the elaborate nature of a secretion, its amount,
and its concentration, are all elements that require a more ex-
tensive secreting surface; and this is given by both complication
and amount of canals, so that the relations of a secretion and
the secreting organs depend not on one, but the whole, of these
points. Asa connection of peculiarity of secretion with pecu-
liarity of structure cannot be discovered, the cause of such
secretion must be certain unknown powers of the secreting
organs, as inexplicable as the powers of formation and the
powers of nutrition.

It is of no consequence, in the case at least of some organs, by
what vessel the blood is conveyed to the secretory apparatus.
Mr. Hodgson, on opening the body of a diabetic person, found
the cavity of one renal artery obliterated by an accumulation of
atheromatous and calcareous matter in its coats. The glandular
structure was perfectly natural. The pelvis contained urine, and
a considerable quantity of that fluid was found in the bladder.
The kidney was supplied with blood by a large branch from one
of the lumbar arteries and by the arteries of the renal capsule.
Dr. Andral once found a kidney in the pelvis, and supplied by the
hypogastric artery. When a breast which secreted good milk is
situated on the thigh, we have another illustration of the same
fact.

The quality of the blood, however, from which the part has to
fabricate the new substance is important. The liver is supplied
with venous blood as the material, and so are the kidneys of am-
phibia. We cannot suppose that arterial blood would have been
suitable. For other secretions dark blood is unsuitable. Various


i A Treatise on the Diseases of Arteries and Veins, &c.
k Précis d Anat. Pathol. t. ii. P. il. pe 628.


266 SECRETION.


secretions, and the quality of the solids of the body, are affected
by the quality of the food and the absorption of different sub-
stances that alter the blood. Dr. Wollaston found the urine of
birds to be nearly pure uric acid, if animal food only was taken.

If the kidneys refuse to secrete, urine may be found in the
ventricles of the brain; and, when there was no outlet for it, an
urinous fluid has been furnished by the stomach, intestines, or
skin, &c.! In the latter cases, it may be said to have been fabri-
cated by the kidneys and discharged by the other vessels, just
as the pus of an abscess has sometimes been absorbed and dis-
charged by the kidneys ™: still we have the singular fact of vessels
allowing to stream through them a fluid totally different from that
which is natural to them.

On the other hand, the circumstance of secretions being fre-
quently performed by vessels not destined or originally employed
for their production, though the blood remains the same, shows
how much depends upon the power of the part itself. Fat accu-
mulates in diseased ovaria, and even the fleshy substance of the
heart may be converted into it, as I once saw in a patient of my
own. Bone is every day deposited between the inner and middle
tunic of the arteries, and the serous membranes, or the subserous
cellular membrane, continually ossified.

The bland mucus of the urethra may, by even mechanical irri-
tation of the canal, be converted to a feetid puriform fluid; the
yellow bile and mild intestinal fluids to green, dark, scalding bile,
and foetid discharges, under the influence of acrid cathartics.
Different animals and different plants require different sorts of
food and soil, — external supplies; and produce different sub-
stances by nutrition and secretion under the same circumstances. ®
So that the requisites for a given production are two — materials
and organic powers; and a change in either will occasion a change
in the product.


' See examples in Haller’s El. Physiol. 1. vii. S. i. § ix. Several such have
come to my own knowledge. Mr. Howship attended a lady who, he says, dis-
charged many quarts of urine alternately from the bladder and rectum, after
intervals of several weeks of suppression; and this for four years without serious
injury. Practical Treatise on Diseases of the Urinary Organs. 1823.

™ See Dr. Hennen’s Military Surgery ; and perhaps Heberden’s Commentarii,
p- 408.

" “Tf wheat and peas be sown in the same water, earth, or medium, the
former will uniformly deposit silex in their cuticle, and the latter none.” Jntro-


duction to Botany, by John Lindley, F.R.S. Prof. of Botany in the University
of London, p. 235.


SECRETION. 267


Though many constituents of secretions are not discoverable
in the blood, some curious circumstances are related to show the
importance of the qualities of the blood, as well as of the secretory
organs, in producing peculiar substances. It is asserted that the
blood will contain bile if secretion in the liver is prevented by
tying the vena porte; and urea appears in the blood, if the kidneys
are removed, so that none can be secreted.

In secretion the change must be chemical. Gelatine is merely
decarbonised albumen; diabetic sugar is urea deprived of azote
and some of its hydrogen ; and the labours of Dr. Prout are dis-
playing the various proximate principles of animals and vegetables
to have the same elements, and to differ merely in the proportion
of component water, or by the presence of a minute proportion of
additional substance hitherto regarded as accidentally present
and unimportant. Some substances, it is true, exist in vegetables
and animals that cannot at present be entirely ascribed to exter-
nal sources. Dr. Prout, from most careful experiments, concluded
that there is strong reason to believe that the bones of the chick
are not derived from the shell, but from internal production.P
Vauquelin found the lime of the excrements of hens, and of the
shell, to be too great to be ascribed to the food 4; and the products
of plants, fixed in sand and moistened with distilled water, contain
so much more carbon and earthy matter than can be supposed to
enter them from the atmosphere or the water, that Dr. Bostock
and others of our best chemists conceive their existence inex-
plicable entirely upon these sources.* If such is the fact, we
may conclude that these substances, though classed, as air and
water once were, as elements, because not yet decomposed by
chemists, are really not so; for creation by natural powers is
impossible.s But, although secretion is, I apprehend, merely a
chemical process, dependent upon the quality of the blood,


0 Prevost and Dumas found that the removal of one kidney has no particular
effect ; but that the removal of both occasions copious vomiting and purging of
brown liquid, and death; and 50z. of blood yielded 91. of urea. Annales de
Chimie, tom. xxil.

P Phil. Trans. 1822.

4 Annales de Chimie, tom. xxix.

T See Dr. Bostock, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 387. sq. Braconnot concludes that earths,
alkalies, metals, sulphur, phosphorus, carbon, and perhaps azote, are thus pro-
duced. The immense quantities of calcareous strata, which appear to be the
remains of marine animals, are thought referable to organic production only.

’ Dr. John ascertained that some plants conyert potass into soda, —Professor
Lindley, 1. c.


268 SECRETION.


the chemical relations of the various particles, existing quite in-
dependently of life, and perhaps aided by the length and dia-
meter of the vessels and other mechanical circumstances, are
brought into play — circumstanced so as to become efficient —
by the vital powers. How, we know not. But life cannot create
any more than it can annul the physical or chemical qualities
of matter; nor can it create matter. It may counteract one
inanimate force by opposing to it another inanimate force ; it
may render one inanimate force efficient by withdrawing op-
ponent inanimate forces. But this is all; how it accomplishes
this, is yet unknown.

Secretion does not depend on the mind, though, like every
function, much influenced by it. Fear increases the production
of urine, rage dries up the mouth; any depressing passion will
vitiate the milk. How far it depends upon nervous influence we
shall consider when speaking of the nervous system.

“ There is this difference among the various fluids secreted by
the organs and powers now described, — that some pass to the
place of their destination immediately, while others are depo-
sited in receptacles, and detained there for a length of time, be-
coming more perfect before their excretion. The milk in its
ducts, the urine, bile, and semen in their respective bladders, and
in some degree the serum of the vesicles of De Graaf, are ex-
amples of this.”

The more watery portion is absorbed, and therefore, the longer
the stay in the ducts or receptacles, the more consistent does the
fluid become. If the stay is considerable, the other portions
also are absorbed, as seen in the case of jaundice from obstruc-
tion of the ductus hepaticus or choledochus. The detention of
the urine is not for the purpose of perfecting it, but for con-
venience.


269


t.
CHAP. XVI.


PERSPIRATION.


Tue skin is not only the organ of touch, but also, like the lungs,
an organ of inhalation and excretion.

It *‘ consists of three membranes :— The corzum, internal ; the
cuticle, external ; and the reticulum, intermediate. ;

“ The cuticle, or epidermis @, forms the external covering of the
body, is separable into several lamellae,” though it does not con-
sist of imbricated scales¢, “ and is exposed to the atmosphere, the
contact of which can be borne by ” no “ other part, if you except”
the hairs and nails, and the feathers, wool, horny hoofs, and
claws of brutes, which are really of the same nature with it, and
«the enamel of the teeth. For this reason, the internal cavities,
and the canals which communicate with the surface for the pur-
pose of admitting air, especially the respiratory passages and the
alimentary canal,” at least as far as the end of the cesophagus,
«< the tongue, the inside of the cheeks, the fauces, and the organ of
smell, are covered by a fine epithelium, originating from the epi-
dermis.‘

‘‘ The texture of the epidermis is extremely simple, destitute
of vessels, nerves, and true cellular membrane, and consequently”
not organised; ‘‘ very peculiar, however®; remarkably strong,


a « Al, Monro (Prius), Oratio de Cuticula Humana. Opera. English
edition. Edin. 1781. 4to. p. 54 sq.”

b « Among others, consult J. Mitchell, Philos. Trans., vol. xiii. p. 111.”

© Cloquet, Manuel d’ Anatomie descriptive, p. 260.

4 « Abr. Kaau, Perspiratio dicta Hippocrati, p. 7.

Lieberkiihn, De fabrica Villor. Intestin. Tenuium, p. 16.

Cruikshank, Expls. on the Insensible Perspiration, p. 5.

Rudolphi, Reisebemerkungen, t.1. pp. 29. 140,

Jens. W. Neergaard, Vergleichende Anat, der Verdauungswerkxeuge, p. 21. et
alibi.

J.B. Wilbrand, Hautsystem in allen seinen Verzweigungen, Giessen. 1813. 8vo.”

¢« The very dense epidermis of some immense animals consists of vertical fibres,
which, in arrangement, somewhat resemble the structure of the Boletus igniarius,
Its internal surface is porous, and penetrated by the silky filaments of the sub-
jacent corium. This is remarkably exemplified in a preparation now before me,
taken from the skin of the balana mysticete,

T


270 PERSPIRATION.


considering its pellucidity and delicacy, so that it resists suppura-
tion, maceration, and other modes of destruction, for a great
length of time ; and it is reproduced mnorneiiily than any other
of the similar parts. ”

The cuticle separates during life by any irritant that causes a
copious secretion below it; and by putrefaction after death, when
the subjacent parts liquefy, and it retains its firmness. It is com-
posed of gelatine and a cartilaginous substance like coagulated
albumen, with perhaps a trace of salts of lime.

“Ttis” a kind of “ horny lamella, and adheres to the subjacent
corium by the intervention of a mucus, and by numerous very
delicate fibrils which penetrate the latter. f


‘‘ The human cuticle, in certain diseased states, exhibits the same appearance as
in the Englishman called the Porcupine Man, who laboured under a cutaneous
complaint, which he transmitted to his children and grandchildren. Vide W. G.
Tilesius, Beschreibung und Abbildung der beiden sogenannten Stachelschwein-
Menschen (Porcupine Men). Altenb. 1802. fol.

‘© The innumerable polyhedrical papillae and horny warts which I witnessed upon
every part of the skin of these brothers, excepting the head, the palms of the
hands, and the soles of the feet, bore some resemblance to the skin of the elephant,
especially about the vertex and forehead of the animal.”

One of this family exhibited himself a few years ago in Bond Street, and pre-
sented himself again lately at our schools of medicine. He was thirty years of
age, and stated himself to belong to the fourth generation of the descendants of
a savage who was found in the woods of America and had the same condition
of skin. He informed me that it is transmitted to every male without exception
in the male line, but has never appeared in the females or their male offspring :
and that the horny warts first show themselves at two months from birth; are
constantly growing, though most in summer; and are constantly being shed, but
particularly in winter, till the thirty-sixth year, after which they are never shed,
but continue to grow; so that in this man’s father, who was eighty years of age,
and lived in Suffolk when I saw the man, they were of very great Jength. They
are set so close together, that their tops form a tolerably smooth surface, unless
they are separated by extending the skin. Nearest those parts in which there are
none, they gradually become smaller. Besides the parts mentioned by Blumen-
bach, the glans penis, I understood, was free from them. An arm of this family
is well represented in Dr. Alibert’s Description des Maladies de la Peau. See also
Ph, Tr. 1731, for the first case known in the family.

‘“‘ Similar, also, to the horny warts of this family are corns and the brawny
cuticle of the feet in those who walk barefooted. Vide Carlisle on the Produc-
tion and Nature of Corns, Med. Facts and Observations, vol. vii. p. 29.”

f « W. Hunter, Med. Observations and Inquiries, vol. ii. p. 52. sq. tab. i,
fig. 1,2. The conjecture of this eminent man —that these fibrils are vessels

hich excrete the perspirable matter — is, I think, improbable.”

Cloquet, however, says they appear to be exhalants and aksorbents. l.c. ibid.


PERSPIRATION. 71


«The pores, which Leuwenhoek imagined in it,” are not
visible. .

“ The importance of the cuticle to organised systems is de-
monstrated by its universality in the animal and vegetable king-
doms, and by its being distinctly observable in the embryo from
the third month at latest after conception.”

The purpose of the cuticle is, 1. To cover the cutis like oiled
silk, and preserve it moist and fit for its functions. Were the
cutis exposed to the atmosphere, it would dry, and its vessels
could neither excrete nor absorb, nor its nerves feel. This is
partly seen, in regard to mucous membranes, when the uterus
remains prolapsed beyond the opening of the vagina.é The pro-
truded membrane of the vagina then becomes pale and shrivelled,
like a dried bladder. The mucous membrane of the eyes and
nostrils, and of the mouth, would dry up, but for the additional
moisture supplied to the former by the lachrymal glands, and to
the latter by the salivary; and so would the bronchial mucous
membrane, if the air did not become first charged with moisture in
passing through the mouth and nostrils, and if it passed through
the bronchize instead of entering and returning. 2. To protect
the cutis, thus preserved moist, from the immediate contact of
substances; some of which would be too easily absorbed, and
others would produce painful sensation.

«‘ The inner part of the cuticle is lined by a fine mucous mem-
brane, denominated, from the opinion of its discoverer, reticulum
Malpighianum, and by means of which chiefly the cuticle is
united more firmly to the corium.}

“Its nature is mucous; it is very soluble; and, being thicker in
Ethiopians, may be completely separated in them from both the
corium and cuticle, and made to appear as a true distinct mem-
brane.” i


& Skin and mucous membranes have much relation to each other; and by
constant dryness of the latter, and constant moisture and excitement of the
former, a great approximation may be effected. ,

h « Ffence I have found the epidermis of dlbinoes separate easily by the heat
of the sun; whereas, in negroes, it scarcely does so on the application of a blister
Consult Mitchell, 1. c. p. 108.”

i «¢ B.S. Albinus, De sede et causa coloris Aithiopwm et ceteror. hominum.
Lugd. Batay. 1737. 4to. fig. 1.

Sam. Th. Soemmerring, iiber die kiirperl. Verschiedenh. des Negers vom Eu-
ropier. Ed. 2. p. 46. sq.

Some even of the moderns have assigned many laminz, and even different

YE


272 PERSPIRATION.


Dr. Gordonk and Mr. Lawrence! assert that they have never
been able to detach any thing from the cutis of Europeans in
the form of a distinct membrane; but the rete Malpighianum
does exist in negroes, and the latter gentleman allows that the
various complexions of Europeans and the peculiar cream white
of the Albino, who has unquestionably no colouring matter in his
eyes or skin, show that the substance exists even in us. Indeed,
M. Gaultier considers that it has actually four layers: 1. An in-
ternal, composed of blood vessels; 2. One above this, of a white
colour; 3. Another, composed of minute granules, which are
brown in negroes and white in Europeans; and, 4. An external,
also white, like the second. Some say that the black matter, as
seen in negroes, when washed out, leaves a membrane and sub-
sides to the bottom of the water, as a powder, and that it resembles
the pigmentum of the eye and the matter of melanosis.

‘* Our colour resides in it. In all persons the corium is white,
and, in almost all, the cuticle white and semipellucid, though in
Ethiopians it inclines to grey. But the mucous reticulum varies
after birth, with age, mode of life, and especially with difference
of climate.

‘‘ Thus among the five varieties into which I would divide the
human race, in the first, which may be termed Caucasian, and em-
braces Europeans (except the Laplanders and the rest of the
Finnish race), the western Asiatics, and the northern Africans, it
is more or less white.

‘“‘In the second or Mongolian, including the rest of the Asiatics
(except the Malays of the peninsula beyond the Ganges), the Fin-
nish races of the north of Europe, as the Laplanders, &c. and the
tribes of Esquimaux widely diffused over the most northern parts
of America, it is yellow or resembling box-wood.

‘In the third or Ethiopian, to which the remainder of the
Africans ™ belong, it is of a tawny or jet black.


species, to the reticulum; as Lieutaud, ZLssais Anatomiques, p. 103. edition
1766.

Cruikshank, 1. ¢. pp. 43. 99.

But especially G. A. Gualtier, Recherches Anatomiques sur le Syst?me cutané
de? Homme. Paris, 1811. 4to.”

K System of Anatomy, vol. i. p. 242.

' Rees’s Cyclopedia, art. Integuments.

™ “Jo. Nic. Pechlin, De Habitu et Colore Zthiopwm, qui vulgo et Nigrite.
Kilon. 1677. 8vo.

Camper’s oration on the same subject will be found in his XTeiner Schriften,
yol. i. P.sis pp, 24—49,”


PERSPIRATION. 278


“ In the fourth or American, comprehending all the Americans
excepting the Esquimaux, it is almost copper coloured, and in
some of a cinnamon, and, as it were, ferruginous, hue.

“In the fifth or Malaic, in which I include the inhabitants of
all the islands of the Pacific Ocean, and of the Philippine and
Sunda, and those of the peninsula of Malaya, it is more or
less brown, — between the hue of fresh mahogany and that of
cloves or chestnuts.

‘“‘ All these shades of colour, as well as-the other character-
istics of nations and individuals, run so insensibly into one
another, that all division and classification of them must be more
or less arbitrary.

‘«‘ The essential cause of the colour of the Malpighian mucus
is, if we mistake not, the proportion of carbon which is excreted
together with hydrogen from the corium, and which, in dark
nations, being very copious, is precipitated upon the mucus, and
combined with it. ®

“‘ The corium, which is covered by the reticulum and epidermis,
is a membrane investing the whole body, and defining its surface ;
tough; very extensible”; thicker on the posterior part of the
trunk and neck than the anterior, and on the outside than the
inside of the extremities; of a fibro-cellular texture ; consisting
almost entirely of gelatine; ‘‘ every where closely compacted, and,
as it were, interwoven, especially externally, but more loosely at
its internal surface, in which, excepting in a few regions of the
body, we generally discover fat.” On the outer surface of the
corium, we observe innumerable, very minute, soft, erectile pa-
pilla, supplied with vessels and nerves. They are far most distinct
in the soft part of the ends of the fingers and toes, and upon the
palms and soles, and scarcely distinguishable in other parts where
the corium is thinner.

“‘ Besides nerves and absorbents, of which we shall speak here-


n «J have given this opinion at some length, in my work, De Gen. Human,
Varietate Nativa, p. 122. sq. ed. 3. Some eminent chemists accord with me,
among whom suffice it to mention the celebrated Humphry Davy, Journals of
the Royal Institution, vol. ii. p. 30. ‘ In the rete mucosum of the African, the
carbon becomes the predominant principle; hence the blackness of the negro.’
W. B. Johnson, |. c. vol. ii. p. 229. ;

F. B. Osiander has given an abundance of very careful observations upon the
various proportions of the carbonaceous ele:ment in the Malpighian mucus, Com-
ment. Soc. Reg. Scientiar. Gotting. recentiorum, vol. iv. p. 112. sqq.”


T 3


=.


274: PERSPIRATION.


after, innumerable blood-vessels penetrate to its external surface;
upon which they are shown, by minute injection, to form very
close and delicate networks.

“A vast number of sebaceous follicles,” or bags with a single
opening in their upper part and minute ramifications of blood-
vessels on their interior, “also are dispersed throughout it” except
the palms and soles, ‘‘ and diffuse over the skin an oil, which is°
very thin, limpid, does not easily dry,?” keeps the cuticle in a
pliable state, and preserves it from any excessive operation of
moisture, is altogether distinct from the common sweat, and does
not possess any odour” except in certain parts.

“ Lastly, almost every part of the corium is beset with various
kinds of hairs 4, chiefly short and delicate, more or less downy,
and found nearly every where but on the palpebre, penis, the
palms of the hands, and soles of the feet. In some parts, they
are long and destined for peculiar purposes; such are the
capillamentum, the eye-brows, the eye-lashes, the vibrissa,
mustachios, beard, and the hair of the armpits and pudenda.

“Man is, generally speaking, less hairy than most other
mammalia. But in this respect nations differ; for, not to
mention those nations who to this day carefully pluck out their
beard or the hair of other parts, others appear naturally destitute
of hair, v.c. the Tunguses and Burats." On the contrary, very


° « Chr. Gottl. Ludwig, De Humore cutem inungente. Lips. 1748. 4to,”

P  Lyonet, Lettre a M. Le Cat, p. 12.”

a «J. Ph. Withoff, De pilo Humano. Duisb. 1750. 4to. Compare the Com-
mentar. Societ. Scient. Golting. vol. ii.

Job. Baster, Verhandel. der Maatsch. te Haarlem, t. xiv. p. 382.

C. Asm. Rudolphi, De pilorum structura. Gryph. 1806. 4to.”

* Dr. Wells describes the singular case of a man whose hair fell off throughout
his body in about six weeks, without any evident cause or derangement of health,
and did not return, except that about two years afterwards, while labouring under
a suppurating tumour of the neck that discharged through several small holes, a
fine down appeared upon his cheeks and chin, which occasioned him to shave
once a week for about three months, when it disappeared. He always looked
afterwards as if just shaved, and by wearing a wig would not have been noticed
for any peculiar appearance. (T'ransactions of a Society for the Improvement of
Medical and Surgical Knowledge, vol. ii.) Dr. P. Frank saw a similar case. (De
curandis hominum morbis, t. iv. p. 124.) Another case will be found in the Edin-
burgh Journal of Medical Science, 1827. Morgagni mentions a man who had no
hairs, except a few at the root of the penis, and yet whose genitals were well de-
veloped (De Sedib. et Causis Morb., 1. iii. Ep. 46. ); Heister, a man who lost
his hair without any obvious cause for ten years. Consult Dr, Otto’s Compends


PERSPIRATION. 275


credible travellers assert that some inhabitants of the Kurille and
other islands in the Pacific and Indian Ocean are remarkably
hairy.” * But Krusenstern, a late circumnavigator, declares that
he observed no particular hairiness of the people in this part of the
world, and that former accounts are at least exaggerations.* In the
island of Anicoa, he indeed met with one child, eight years of age,
covered with hair; but such an instance has occurred in Europe.
Zacchias, in 1613, saw a tall man at Rome covered with fine, long,
straight hair, of a light yellow colour. There was a sister
similarly hairy, and the father had been a hairy person, but the
mother had not differed from other women. The man married ;
and, of four children, one girl and one boy were born covered
with black hair, looking, says Zacchias, like black kids, and re-
minding the attendants of the account of Esau’s birth : — “ The
first came out red, all over like a hairy garment.” " In fifteen
days the whole of this hair fell off; and, as puberty approached,
soft fine hair sprung up all over the body, even over the
temples and forehead.* Shenckius has collected several similar
cases. Y

Evelyn says, “ On the 15th of August, 1657, I saw the hairy
woman, 20 years old, whom I had before seen when a child. She
was borne at Augsburg, in Germany. Her very eyebrowes were
comb’d upwards, and all her forehead as thick and even as growes
on any woman’s head, neatly dress’d; a very long lock of haire
out of each eare; she had also a most prolix beard, and musta-
chios, with long locks growing on the middle of her nose, like an
Iceland dog exactly, the colour of a bright browne, fine as well-
dress’d flax. She was now married, and told me she had one child


I


of Path. Anat., translated by Mr. South, with additions, 8vo, Lond. 1831;
where will be found abundant references to cases of most curious singularities of
all the common integuments. Inflammation of the skin will make the hair fall
off; as well as dirt, fever, pain of the head, the administration of mercury, and
other causes of debility. They generally grow again, when the health is re-
novated, whether recourse is had to shaving or not,

s & De Generis Human. Variet. Nativ., p. 29.”

t Voyage round the World. Translated from the original German by G. B.
Hoppner, vol. ii. p. 78.

“ Genesis, C. XXV-

¥ Queestiones Medico-Legales, lib. vii. Tit. 1. quest. ix.

Y Tlaparnphciay, sive Observ. &c. Volumen, p. 778. sq.


T 4


276 PERSPIRATION.


that was not hairy, nor were any of her parents or relations. She
was very well shap’d, and plaied well on the harpsichord,” &c.

‘¢ Nor is there less variety in the length, flexibility, colour, and
disposition to curl, of the hair, both in each race of men
enumerated above, and in individuals: v. c. the hair of the head
in the Caucasian variety is rather dingy or of a nut brown,
inclined on the one hand to yellow, and on the other to black;
in the Mongolian and American, it is black, stiffer, straight and
more sparing; in the Malay, black, soft, curling, thick, and
abundant; in the Ethiopian, black and woolly: in individuals,
especially of the Caucasian variety, there are great differences,
and chiefly in connection with temperament, which is found
intimately and invariably connected with the colour, abundance,
disposition to curl, &c. of the hair; and there also exists a
remarkable correspondence between the colour of the hair and
of the irides.

“The direction of the hairs is peculiar in certain parts, ». ¢.
spiral on the summit of the head; diverging upwards on the
pubes; on the exterior of the arm, as is commonly seen in
some anthropomorphous apes (v. c. in the satyrus and troglody-
- tes), running in two opposite directions towards the elbow, 7. e.
downwards from the shoulder, upwards from the wrist; to say
nothing of the eye-lashes and eye-brows.”

A hair consists of a bulb > and stem. The bulb or follicle,
again, is ovoid, traverses the cutis obliquely, and consists of a
capsular membrane, white, firm, and continuous at its outer ex-
tremity with the cutis, and of another internal, reddish, soft, delicate,
and continuous with the rete mucosum. The cavity of the follicle
is chiefly filled with a bud or conical papilla, adherent at its base
to the bottom of the cavity, and free at its summit towards the


2 Bray’s Memoirs of Evelyn, vol. i. p. 307. 4to. 1819. In Granger’s Bio-
graphy an engraving and a mezzotinto of her are described. There is a curious
engraving of her in the Ephem. Nat. Curios., y. ii. obs. xcv. Her name was
Barbara Van Beck.

2 « Galen, Ars Medicinalis, pp.211—235. M. Ant. Ulm, Uterus Muliebris,
p. 128. et alibi, and Lavater, Fragmente, t. iv. p. 112., among many others.”

> « T suspect that the bulb is intended for support rather than for nourishment,
from this circumstance — that the locks of hairs sometimes found in melicera
and steatomata of the omentum and oyarium, some of which I have now before
me, are usually destitute of bulbs, because they are not fixed, but lie naked in the
honey-like fatty matter.”


PERSPIRATION. O47


orifice of the follicle. On the exterior of the base of the follicles,
filaments like roots are seen, and nerves and blood-vessels may
be traced into it. ;

The stem is conoid, and proceeds from the interior of the bulb.
Its base is hollow, and embraces the papilla; very soft, and even
fluid where it is in contact with the papilla, which appears to secrete
it. The rest is a horny, transparent, almost colourless sheath, and
an internal coloured texture, consisting of very delicate filaments,
and in some animals of an areolated texture.

The cuticle just enters the bulb, and is reflected and lost upon
the surface of the stem. °

«¢ The hairs are almost incorruptible, and always anointed by
an oily halitus. Of all parts they appear most truly electrical.
They are very easily nourished and even reproduced, unless where
the skin is diseased.”

They have been represented destitute of life. But they have
turned permanently white in a single night from excessive copu-
lation, and from fear and distress of mind.? In illness they
often grow soft, and hang about the head. I know a lady whose
hair will not keep in curl if she is in the slightest degree indis-
posed, and a young gentleman whose profuse curly hair becomes
straight under the same circumstances: on the other hand, a
case is recorded in which it always curled in a fit of the gout.
Hair taken from a dead body is said to be unfit for artificial use ;
it must be taken from the living: just as intestines taken from
animals, not even diseased, but merely driven from a distance to
the London markets, are said to be unfit for the strings of musical
instruments. Shells are also considered destitute of life ; but they
cannot be rendered beautiful, I am told, if the fish dies of disease,
or putrefies in them. Lastly, the hair has been so sensible in
phrenitis after an injury, that the slightest touch gave severe pain ;
and when the surgeon clipped a hair unseen by the patient, this


© Cloquet, l. c.
d « My hair is grey, but not with years,
Nor grew it white ina single night,
As men’s have grown from sudden fears.”
Prisoner of Chillon.
See Byron’s note to these lines, and Dr. Speranza in Dr. Omedei’s Annali
Universali di Medicina. Feb. 1832. Milan.
© Quarterly Journal of Foreign Medicine, No, xvii.


278 PERSPIRATION.


was instantly felt, and occasioned a paroxysm of rage Now
sensibility cannot be acquired by a part not already alive.

Hair often grows abundantly in portions of the skin usually not
much supplied with it, and these are generally of a brown colour :
it will sometimes grow in parts naturally destitute of it, as the
tongue and even the heart. Sometimes it grows in encysted
tumours, accompanied by fat, and occasionally by teeth and por-
tions of jaw and amorphous bone; and feathers covered by fat
are sometimes found in the thorax and abdomen of tame geese
and ducks. Hair has also been discharged from the urethra.‘
It has many times been seen blue as well as green.

The skin produces chemical changes similar to those which
occur in the lungs!, and, like them, forms a watery secretion


f]. c. ibid.

& See references in Dr. Good’s Study of Medicine, (4th edit.) vol. iv. p. 525.

» Blumenbach, Comparative Anatomy, § 138.

i Phil. Trans. abridg. vol. vy. and ix.

k Various instances of both kinds in man and horse are collected by Dr.
Speranza, l. c. Horses have had curly hair. Otto, 1. c.

1 « W. Bache, On the Morbid Effects of Carbonic Acid Gas on Healthy Animals.

- Philadel. 1794. 8vo. p. 46. Abernethy, ]. c.”? Cruikshanks on Jnsensible Per-
spiration, and Ellis, Further Inquiry on the Changes produced in Atmospheric Air,
&c. Others have questioned this, but no one doubts the fact in regard to cold-
blooded animals. Dr. Edwards found the surface of frogs and salamanders to
carbonise the air (1. c. p. 12.). Frogs are amphibious. They live indefinitely in
extensive or renewed water, and die if it is de-aérated, or not changed (p. 41.
sqq.); as also do aquatic salamanders and the common toad. If their lungs are
removed, they still live indefinitely in such water or in air, and die if no air has
access to their skin, or the water is not purified enough (p. 71.); and die sooner
as they are younger and smaller. Although frogs live in air, mere respiration
appears insufficient after a time ;—some application of air or aérated water to
the surface is also requisite to their life. That they live so long inclosed in wood
or mineral substances, as is commonly known, appears owing to the opposition
afforded, under these circumstances, to transpiration, which, in the open air, is so
great as speediiy to dry them up, while, at the same time, the closeness is not
such as to entirely exclude air (p. 13.). They die in vacuo.

In a limited quantity of water, they die sooner the higher the temperature
(p. 25. sqq-) ; and they support a high temperature better, if previously subjected
for some time to a cold temperature (p. 33. sqq.). Although their skin be care-
fully moistened, they cannot live without respiration in summer (p. 91.). It
appears from Dr. Edwards's experiments to be a general fact among animals,
that the want of air is best borne in a low temperature. The general good effect
of the application of cold in asphyxia by carbonic acid, is well known. The
greater the external heat, on the contrary, the more is air requifed by the skin and


PERSPIRATION. 2°79


and excretes foreign matters, and is an organ of absorp-
t10n.

The watery secretion is sometimes termed perspirabile Sanctori-
anum™, after the patient and acute philosopher who first applied
himself professedly to investigate its importance.

To ascertain the quantity of watery secretion, Lavoisier and
Seguin” enclosed the body in a silk bag varnished with elastic gum
and having a small opening carefully cemented around the mouth,
so that, by weighing the body previously and subsequently to the
experiment, they were able to ascertain exactly what had been
lost, and, by subtracting from this loss the weight of the perspired
contents of the bag, they also ascertained how much of this had
passed off by the lungs. From repeated trials they found the
mean pulmonary discharge in twenty-four hours amounted to


lungs, independently, it would appear, of its chemical effect, as it is of use when
there is no circulation, — when the heart is excised, either in frogs or cats, which
perish after this operation the sooner as the temperature is higher. When the
quantity of water, though limited, is sufficient to support life, the want of re-
spiration causes the frogs to become as slow in their motions as turtles, and dull
to all impressions on the senses (p. 65.). Lizards, serpents, and turtles, also
carbonise the air by their surface ; but serpents and turtles, and, indeed, some
varieties of frogs, can live by respiration only, and this happens where the lungs
‘of the animal are proportionally large (p. 128.). The effect of air, however,
upon the surface, in reptiles at least, does not require the aid of circulation to
distribute its benefits; for, when their heart is removed (and the same happens
with toads, salamanders, and cats), they live much longer in air than in de-aérated
water (p. 3. sqq.); yet they live longer if the heart is not removed (p. 7. sqq.).

m « 4rs Sanctor. Sanctorii de Statica Medicina aphorismor. sectionibus vii. com-
prehensa. Venet. 1634. 16mo.

C. de Milly and Lavoisier, Mémoires de ? Acad. des Sc. de Parts. 1777.
p- 221. sq. 360. sq.

J. Ingen-Housz, Expts. upon Vegetables. Lond. 1779. 8vo. p. 132. sqq.

J. H. Voight. Versuch einer neuen Theorie des Feuers, p.157. sq.”

«¢ The balance employed by Sanctorius to estimate the loss of perspired matter
is described in his Comm. in primam Fen primi L. Canon. Avicenne. Venet,
1646. 4to. p. 781.

Another, much simpler and better adapted for the purpose, is desctibed by
Jo. Andr. Segner, De Libra, qua sui quisque corporis pondus explorare posset.
Gotting. 1740. 4to.

J. A. Klindworth, an excellent Gottingen instrument-maker and engineer,
altered this at my suggestion, and rendered it more convenient and accurate,”

” Memoires del? Academie des Sciences, 1790.


280 PERSPIRATION.


15 oz., and the cutaneous to 30 0z. The quantity of carbon se-
parated by the lungs ought however to be taken into the account.
If it amount to 11 oz. in twenty-four hours,— the quantity stated
by Allen and Pepys — there will be but 4.0z. of pulmonary ex-
halation. But if oxygen and azote are absorbed in respiration,
there must have been correspondently more pulmonary exhalation ;
and we have seen that Hales estimated it at about 20 oz. in the
twenty-four hours. They found the cutaneous transpiration at
its minimum during and immediately after meals, and at its max-
imum during digestion.

The minimum after digestion was found by them to be 11 grs.
per minute ; the maximum 32 grs.: at and immediately after dinner
10,2, ; and the maximum 19,1,, under the most favourable and un-
favourable circumstances. It was increased by liquid, but not by
solid, food. The pulmonary they regard as greater than the cu-
taneous, proportionally to the surface on which it occurs.© What-
ever was taken, the weight was found to become ultimately as
before. Indigestion lessened transpiration, and the body con-
tinued heavier generally till the fifth day, when the original weight
was restored. Transpiration was less in moist air and at a low

-temperature, and the pulmonary and cutaneous transpirations
obeyed the same laws.

Dr. Edwards has made a great number of experiments upon
this subject.p He distinguishes the loss of fluid by evaporation
of what is exuded, from that by secretion.4 The former occurs
even in the dead body, and is increased in both the dead and
living, and among all animals, by the dryness, motion, and dimi-
nished pressure of the atmosphere. It may be suspended by
saturating the air with moisture, and by employing animals (ver-
tebrated, cold-blooded) whose temperature is not above that of
the atmosphere ; for, if those are employed whose temperature
exceeds that of the atmosphere, the air as soon as it touches them
is rarified, can take up more moisture, and is no longer air satu-
rated with moisture. These circumstances, of course, affect only
the removal or evaporation of fluid which may have either trans-
uded or been secreted, but do not affect the secretion. In frogs,


© Annales de Chimie, t. xc.

P jl. c. part iv. ¢. xi.

4 He contends, however, that, in the lungs, all is evaporation without secre-
tion. But, with Dr. Bostock, I must dissent from him,


PERSPIRATION. 981


which perspire copiously, the loss by evaporation at 68° is thus
found six times greater than by mere secretion, and the propor-
tion in man, the temperature being the same and the air dry, must
be greater, as his skin secretes much less.

The secreted fluid may be carried off by evaporation as quickly
as it is formed, so as to be insensible perspiration ; or may be too
abundant for this, and appear as sweat. The transuded fluid may
also be condensed and precipitated on the skin in the form of
sweat.

The cutaneous secretion is not so much augmented by moderate
elevations of temperature as might be imagined; but, as the
elevation proceeds, the augmentation of secretion becomes more
than proportionate. It appeared increased after meals and during
sleep, and, though subject to great fluctuations, if observed at
short intervals, from accidental changes in the atmosphere, under-
went successive diminutions when observed every six hours, from
six o'clock a. ms —the hour of rising —till the return of the
same period. In frogs this regular diminution might be detected
every three hours.

In frogs the cutaneous secretion continues, though at its mini-
mum, in the moistest air and in water; and it would appear to do
so also in man.§

The matter of the cutaneous secretion contains an acid, pro-
bably the acetic, chloride of potassium and sodium, acetate of
soda, and perhaps albumen.t What evaporates is mere water.

Dr. Edwards makes some curious remarks upon the different
effects of dry and moist air, when hot, and when cold. When
hot, dry air will of course communicate less heat to the body
than if moist, and will, by its dryness, cause more evaporation ;
and thus carry off more heat; so that the two operations of air,
dry or moist, will correspond in temperatures above that of the
body. When cold, dry air will remove less heat from the body
than moist ; but, by its dryness, will cause more evaporation, and
therefore tend to cool more, so that the two operations oppose
each other in temperatures inferior to that of the body." The
same remarks apply to cold water.


r For what relates to this function in the batrachians, see]. c. parti. ¢. vy.
and vi.

* p. 92. sqq. 98. sqq. 351. sqq-

* Berzelius, Animal Chemistry, p- 95.

“1. c. p. 386. sq.


282 PERSPIRATION.


He did not find moist cold air to cool animals more than dry
cold air.

In low temperatures, we have seen that the loss by evaporation
greatly exceeds that by secretion. In high, it is the reverse;
and, when the body is covered with sweat, there can be no loss
by the evaporation which occurs, independent of secreted fluid,
whether the air be dry or moist. Vapour will cause more loss by
secretion than dry air ; but no loss can take place by the lungs in
hot vapour.*

Perspiration can never be entirely suppressed; because the
cold which suppresses secretion, causes the air, however moist,
and therefore opposed to evaporation, to rise in temperature, by
coming in contact with the body; and the superior temperature
which it instantly acquires, enables it to hold more moisture, and
evaporation from the skin is thus instantly promoted. y

There is a common belief, that the cutaneous exhalation has
always peculiar properties, invigorating in the young, and debili-
tating in the old. David lay between two young girls to gain
strength; and Dr. Copland declares he has seen a child suffer from
lying with its grandmother.

The elimination of foreign matters by the skin is shewn by the
odour of the perspiration after some odorous substances have
been taken, by its effect upon silver when mercury is prescribed,
and by its green and coppery secretion when copper has been in-
troduced.*

The odour of the secretion of the sebaceous follicles, and that
of the perspiration, are, in some parts, naturally peculiar, and
in different persons more or less intense, and even singular ;
and either always, only under excitement, or only at times
when under excitement, in different parts. In the tonsils,


* p. 380. sq. Y p. 335. sq.

* Dictionary of Practical Medicine, by James Copland, M. D., art. Desiriry.
A work displaying such extraordinary extent of reading, and such deep and
comprehensive reflection, as to demand a place in the library of every medical
man.

* See a case in the Lond. Med. Gazette, Nov. 19. 1832.

“ Hence the danger of contagion from hairs, as miasmata adhere to them very
tenaciously for a great length of time. Vide Cartwright, Journal of Transactions
on the Coast of Labrador, vol. i. p. 273. vol. ii. p. 424.”

““G. Wedemeyer, Historia Pathologica Pilorum (honoured with the royal
prize). Gotting. 1812. 4to.”


PERSPIRATION. 283


when the secretion is solid, it is horridly offensive, really
fecal, and is a frequent cause of fotid breath: in the glands
behind the ears, when the secretion is squeezed out in a solid
form, its smell is said to be caseous: in the parts of generation,
saline and peculiar. In many brutes, the odour of the female
genitals attracts the male, and is strongest when the animal is in
heat. All know that the mere sweat has a different smell in dif-
ferent parts ; in the arm-pits, hircine ; in the feet, sometimes like
that of tan, and sometimes of cabbage-water. If the palms of
the hands of some persons are rubbed briskly together, an odour
something like that of hot boiled potatoes is evolved; in others
general excitement of the system occasions this. A sulphureous
odour, which perhaps was not very dissimilar, is said, in the
Eiphemerides, to have proceeded from Cardan’s arm; from the
head of a boy at Rome; and from a dropsical boy.» Schmidt
mentions a man from whose hands and arms an intolerable foetor
of sulphur proceeded.¢ Egesandro mentions two persons so
offensive that they were not allowed to visit the public baths.¢ In
the same volume of the Ephemerides we read of a literary man
whose stench was far too much for all perfumes ; and Hagendorn
declares he saw a woman who was unbearable at the distance of
some feet, —a second Thais. In America the shrew spreads a
horrid stench to escape its pursuers; and the yellow serpent of
Martinique is known by its foetor to be present. Persons differ
not only in the amount of their general perspiration, but in its
amount in different parts; and under exercise and heat different


> Ephem. Nat. Curios. ann. ii. p. 191. is
© Ephem., ann. viii. Dec. 2.
4 Giornale Venet. t. ii. See Dr. Speranza, l.c. p. 241.
¢ Tam male Thais olet, quam non fullonis ayari
Testa vetus, media sed modo fracta via ;
Non ab amore recens hircus ; non ora leonis;
Non detracta cani Transtiberina cutis ;
Pullus abortivo nec quum putrescat in ovo:
Amphora corrupto nec vitiata garo,
Virus ut hoc alio fallax permutat odore
Deposita quoties balnea veste petit ;
Psilothro viret, aut acida latet oblita creta ;
Aut tegitur pingui terque quaterque faba.
Quum bene se tutam per fraudes mille putes?
Omnia quum fecit, Thaida Thais olet.
Marr. l.vi. ep. 93.


284 PERSPIRATION.


persons sweat most in different parts. Now a person, from merely
happening to sweat most in a part, the secretion of which is ge-
nerally offensive, may probably acquire the characteristic odour,
without having a particular disposition to filthiness of secretion.
The general perspiration of every one probably smells peculiarly,
for savages can distinguish the nation of persons by the smell. ¢
(Haller and Humboldt.) The boy born deaf ‘and blind, whose
history is related by Mr. Dugald Stewart, distinguished people
by their odour; and I once saw, in the report of a trial in
the newspapers, that dealers in hair boasted of being able to
tell the nation from which the hair came, merely by the
smell. The power possessed by brutes in distinguishing and
tracing us and other animals is well known; and we perceive the
various odours of many brutes, especially if they perspire freely
and are numerous. The odour of a dog-kennel on the one hand,
and of a heated flock of sheep in the road, must be known to
every one. No doubt every animal and vegetable, like all
inanimate matter, exhales a peculiar odour, cognisable to organs
which are of sufficient acuteness and not blunted by habitual
exposure to it.

In different diseases the odour of the perspiration is often pe-
culiar ; and the admission of certain substances into the system,
that escape by the pulmonary and cutaneous secretions, will ne-
cessarily give them an odour. Some odours of animals are
most intense during sexual heat.

The odour of some persons is said to have been quite a per-
fume. Plutarch mentions that Alexander the Great smelt, not
of carnage like a hero, but most pleasantly. Fragrance proceeded
also from Augustus.s In the memoirs of the Queen of Navarre
we read that Catherine de’ Medici was a nosegay; and Cujacius


© « Fr, L. Andr. Koeler, De Odore per cutem spirante in statu sano ac morboso.
Gotting. 1794°* 4to.”
Elevés dans Paris,


-Sentent encore le chou dont ils furent nourris.


Mourmre.
® Since both these were worshipped as gods we cannot wonder at the thing; for
the most elegant of the gods and goddesses had all this attribute. Diana was
recognised by Hippolytus from her divine odour,
72 Setoy aie wnt —


“Eor by Souores rato’ y oe Sed 5
Evririwwes, Hippolytus, 1391.


PERSPIRATION. 285


the civilian, and Lord Herbert of Cherbury, were equally de-
lightful. Dr. Speranza lately witnessed a strong balsamic fra-
grance from the inner part of the left forearm of a healthy man,
which continued, especially in the morning, for two months,
and ceased for good on the supervention of fever.i Van Swieten
mentions a man whose left armpit smelt strongly of musk ; and
Wedel and Gahrliess saw each a similar example.‘

Absorption by the skin, unless friction is employed or the cu-
ticle abraded, has been denied. We are told that Dr. Currie’s
patient, labouring under dysphagia seated in the cesophagus,
always found his thirst relieved by bathing, but never acquired
the least additional weight!: that Dr. Gerard’s diabetic patient
weighed no more after cold or warm bathing than previously ™:
that Seguin found no mercurial effects from bathing a person in a
mercurial solution, provided the cuticle remained entire; while
they occurred when the cuticle was abraded.»

But the two former cases are no proofs that water was not
absorbed, because the persons immersed did not lose in weight,
which they would have done if not immersed, owing to the pul-
monary and cutaneous excretions; these therefore must have been
counterbalanced by absorption somewhere, and no shadow of proof
can be urged against its occurrence by the skin, as Dr. Kellie
remarks in his excellent paper on the functions of this part.°
Seguin besides found two grains of the mercurial salt disappear
in an hour from the solution when of the temperature of 723°.

There is every reason to believe the occurrence of cutaneous
absorption independently of friction or abrasion of the cuticle.
First, the existence of absorbents all over the surface cannot be
intended for use merely when friction is employed or the cuticle


When Venus showed herself to her son,
Ambrosizque come divinum vertice odorem
Spiravere. 4Eneid, 1. 403.
Homer says the same of Venus (Odyss. 5), and of Juno (Iliad, . 170. sqq.)
Flora, Ceres, and Apollo also were nosegays.— Ovid, Fast. y.; Homer, Hymn.
in Cererem.
1 Annali universali di Medicina, Feb.1832.
* Ib. Where three other cases of fragrance are referred to, in two of which it
proceeded from the hands ; as well as singular examples from among brutes;
1 Medical Reports, &c. ™ Rollo, On Diabetes,
" La Médecine éclairée, &c. t. 3.
° Edinburgh Med, and Surg. Journal, vol, i.
U


286 PERSPIRATION,


abraded. So numerous are its absorbents, that, when successfully
injected with mercury, the whole surface looks like a sheet of
silver.P Secondly, we have many facts which prove absorption
without these circumstances, either by the skin or lungs, or both,
while no reason can be given why they should be attributed
solely to the lungs. A boy at Newmarket, who had been greatly
reduced before a race, was found to have gained 30 oz. in weight
during an hour, in which time he had only half a glass of wine.a
Dr. Home, after being fatigued and going to bed supperless,
gained 2 oz. in weight before seven in the morning.4 In three
diabetic patients of Dr. Bardsley’s, the amount of the urine ex-
ceeded that of the ingesta, and the body even increased in weight,
and in one of the instances as much as 17 Ibs." Dr. Currie
allows that, in his patient, “ The egesta exceeded the ingesta in a
proportion much greater than the waste of his body will explain;
and, indeed, such facts occur every day.” The same patient's
urine, too, after the daily use of the bath, flowed more abundantly
and became less pungent. Keill says that he one night gained 18
oz. in his sleep: and Lining, that, after drinking some punch one
cool day, “the quantity of humid particles attracted by his skin
exceeded the quantity perspired in these two hours and a half
_ by 8} 0z.,” and gives two more such instances in the same table.s
Dr. Edwards observed similar facts in guinea-pigs. Thirdly, t
we have positive evidence of cutaneous absorption without
friction or abrasion, in the case of frogs, toads, nay, in scaly
lizards, which will increase in weight by cutaneous absorption,
even if only a part of them is immersed in water; and remark-
ably so if previously made to lose much of their moisture by
exposure to the airt, although they never Surpass the point from
which the loss of weight began.Y The increase is much greater
in water than in the moistest air.x Dr. Beaupré says, that, if a
new born puppy is held a quarter of an hour in warm ink, the
urine subsequently made is coloured. Y


P Dr. Gordon, Anatomy, p. 234.
2 Bishop Watson, Chemical Essays, vol. iii. p. 101.
Medical Facts and Experiments.
* Phil. Trans. vol. xlii. p. 496. ‘le. p. 362.
Dr. Edwards, 1. ¢. part iv. ch. xii. Y dies p: 101.
Xo ae: p. 860.
* A Treatise on the Effects and Properties of Cold, by M. Beaupré, M.D,,
translated, with notes, by Dr. Clendinning. Edin. 1826. p. 56.


PERSPIRATION. 287


In all the cases which have been mentioned, there is no reason
to suppose that exhalation did not continue, both on the skin and
in the lungs, so that the absorption must have been greater than
it at first sight appears. When no increase of weight has taken
place on immersion in the warm bath, absorption must have oc-
curred to maintain the weight, notwithstanding the cutaneous and
pulmonary losses ; and, when some decrease of weight has been
observed, we are not justified in concluding that absorption had
not taken place and not lessened the amount of the loss which
would have happened. Indeed, there is no doubt that per-
spiration is considerably increased in the warm bath.—I may
remark that, while absorption is more active accordingly as more
fluid has been lost, it gradually becomes less as it approaches the
habitual standard of plenitude in the individual, and that, while
transpiration is increased by elevation, the proportion of absorp-
tion is increased by depression of temperature. 2

Dr. Massy, of America, about 1812, found that, if the body
were immersed in a decoction of madder, this substance became
discoverable in the urine by the alkalies; and Dr. Rousseau, in
conjunction with Dr. S. B. Smith, made, in consequence, a num-
ber of experiments, from which they conclude that rhubarb and
madder are so absorbed, and that these only of all absorbed
substances can be discovered in the urine, and are seen in this
fluid only, and are absorbed by no other parts than the spaces
between the middle of the thigh and hip, and between the middle
of the arm and shoulder. @


7 le. p. 98. sqq. 352. sqq.
" * Discourses on the Elements of Therapeutics and Mat. Med. 1817. vol. i.
p. 56. sq.


Vegetables perspire copiously during the day; not so much according to the
temperature, but to the intensity of light; and De Candolle found that lamps had a
similar power on the function to that of the solar ray, and proportionately to their
intensity. (Physiologie Végétale, t. i. p. 112.) The number of pores or stomata
through which the fluid exhales, will also influence its quantity. Hales inferred
that a sunflower, three feet high, exhaled only twenty ounces, — seventeen times
more, according to him, than would have been perspired from an equal extent of


wu 2


ae


288 PERSPIRATION,


the human surface. Generally the sap loses about two thirds of its water, and the
exhaled portion is probably pure, or does not contain more than a 10,000,000th
part of the foreign matter which it had when first absorbed. (Dr. Roget, Bridge-
water Treatise, vol. ii. p. 27. sq.)

The greater number of cellular plants absorb water equally at every part of
their surface. Lichens only in particular parts. In vesicular plants the surface
absorbs but little, except when the roots haye been removed, or can obtain no
water.


289


CHAP. XVII.


THE URINE.


Tuere is another fluid incessantly secreted, and always dis-
charged from the body, that serves no direct purpose, like the
bile or saliva, —is not recrementitious ; nor indirect purpose, like
the perspiration, which regulates our temperature and preserves
the skin in a fit and healthy state; but is purely excrementitious.
It is the urine, and is produced by the kidneys.

“ The kidneys, are two viscera, situated at the upper part of
the loins on each side, behind the peritoneum ; rather flattened ;
more liable than any other organ to varieties of figure and num-
ber>;” connected with the aorta and vena cava inferior by the


vl


a, renal capsule. c, ureter. e, branches of renal artery.
b, kidney. d, branches of renal vein,


a ee en A ee eee
* « See Al. Schumlansky, 1. c.”


> « See Jer. Blasius, Renum monstrosorum evempla, at the ont of Bellini, de
Structura et usu renum. Amstel. 1665. 12mo.”


vu 3


290 THE URINE.


renal artery and vein’, “ which are excessively large in propor-
tion to them; and imbedded in sebaceous fat.

“They are enveloped ina membrane of their own, which is
beautifully vascular; and each, especially during infancy, con-
sists of eight, or rather more, smaller kidneys, each of which
again consists, as Ferrein asserted, of seventy or eighty fleshy
radii, denominated by him pyramides albide.

“« A kidney, if divided horizontally, presents two substances ;
the exterior, called cortex ; the interior, medulla.4

‘Each abounds in blood-vessels; but the cortical portion has
likewise very minute colourless tubes which “are the origins of
the uriniferous ducts ¢; the medullary part contains these ducts.
The blood-vessels are distributed in rather a reticulated manner
among the tubes, with which they have no communication of canal.
Small round hollow bodies are also seen, containing blood, and
connected with the blood-vessels, but with them only.

“« These tubes arise, in the manner formerly described” in regard
to the bile ducts, from minute blind extremities, not dilated, but
nearly of the same diameter as the rest of the canal, and “ formed
in the cortical part; of which
they constitute the greatest é
portion.” They preserve an §
angular course in the cortica
part; but in the medullary,
where they are called the Bel-
linian tubes, they run straight.
The cortical part “ principally ||
consists of them; and, after ‘
they have coalesced into fewer
trunks, their mouths perforate,
in the form of so many cones,


a, cortical part.
6, medullary.

# c, papillae.

4 d, infundibula,
my e, pelvis.

J; ureter.


° « Kustachius, tabule, i.—v., which belong to his classical work De renibus
published with this great man’s other Opusc. anatom. Venet. 1564. 4to. Also
tab, sa.”

4 « C, W. Eysenhardt, De structura renum Observationes Microscopice. Berol.
1818. 4to.”

“ « ‘These appear to have imposed upon Ferrein as a new description of vessels
which he called neuro-lymphatics, or white tubes, and of which he imagined the
whole parenchyma of the viscera to be composed. He affirmed that they were of
such tenuity, that their length in each kidney of an adult man was equal to 1000
orgyie (60,000 feet) or five leagués.”

" Mueller, De glandularum secernentium, &c. p. 102,


THE URINE. 291


like a sieve, the papille of the pelvis of the organ,” or, more pro-
perly, the rounded ends of these cones project as so many papillee.

«« These papilla usually correspond in number with the lobes
which form the kidneys, and they convey the urine, secreted in the
colourless vessels of the cortex and” “ the Bellinian tubes of the
medulla, into the infundibula,” or little membranous canals which
at one end surround the duct or papilla, and at the other ‘ unite
into a common pelvis.

“The pelvis is continued into the ureters, which are mem-
branous canals, very sensible, lined with mucus, extremely dilat-
able, generally of unequal size in the human subject in different
parts, and inserted into the posterior and inferior surface of
the bladder in such a way, that they do not immediately per-
forate its substance, but pass a short distance between the
muscular and cellular coats, which at that part are rather thicker
than elsewhere, and finally open into its cavity by an oblique
mouth. This peculiarity of structure prevents the urine from
regurgitating into the ureters from the bladder.”

As the ureters have a tendency to lose this obliquity of inser-
tion in proportion as the bladder is depleted, two long bands of
muscular fibres run from the back of the prostate gland to the
orifices of the ureters, and not only assist in emptying the bladder,
but, at the same time, pull down the orifices of the ureters, and
thus tend to preserve the obliquity.i When the bladder is dis-
tended, and the urine flows with difficulty into it, the fluid ac-
cumulates in the ureters, and, as the obliquity greatly lessens as
soon as the bladder is emptied, the urine then flows freely into
it, and persons, after making a large quantity of urine, thus very
soon make another quantity.

“ The urinary dladder*,” oviform in the adult, but “ varying
in shape according to age and sex, is generally capable, in the
adult, of containing two pints of urine. Its fundus, which in
the foetus terminates in the urachus, is covered posteriorly by
the peritoneum. ‘The other coats correspond with those of the
stomach,


“ The muscular consists of interrupted bands of fleshy fibres,


8 « Kustachius, tab. xi. fig. 10.”

h « See Nuck, Adenographia, fig. 32. 34, 35. Leop. M. Ant. Caldani, Saggi
dell’ Accad. di Padova, t. ii. p. 2.”

' Sir C. Bell, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. iii.

k « Duverney, Euvres anatomiques, vol. ii. tab, i,—iy,”


u 4


292 THE URINE,


variously decussated, and surrounding the bladder.! These are
called the detrusor urine: the fibres which imperfectly sur-
round the neck, and are inconstant in origin and figure, have
received the appellation of sphincter.

“ The cellular chiefly imparts tone to this membranous viscus.

«The interior, abounding in cribriform follicles ™, is lined
with mucus, principally about the cervix.

‘* The urine conveyed to the bladder gradually becomes un-
pleasant by its quantity, and urges us to discharge it. For this
purpose the urethra is given, which” is a canal beginning at the
lowest part of the bladder, much longer in the male than the
female, and attached to the arch of the pubes by muscular fibres
that are described by Mr. Wilson under the name of compressor
urethre and conceived to act as the sphincter of the bladder,
“ varies with the sex, and will be farther considered in our
account of the sexual functions.

“ The bladder is evacuated from the constriction of the sphinc-
ter being overcome both by the action of the detrusor and by
the pressure of the abdomen.” The assistance of the abdominal
muscles, however, is not absolutely requisite, however greatly it
may contribute ; because, if we keep them motionless, and direct
our attention to the bladder, when it contains urine, a sensation
is immediately felt at its neck; and if we still fix our attention,
we can will the passage of the urine through it, probably by
willing a relaxation of the muscular fibres of the part, as much
as by willing a contraction of the detrusores fibres, — the dia-
phragm and abdominal muscles being still preserved motionless.
“ The last drops of urine remaining in the bulb of the” male
‘“‘ urethra are sent forth by the ejaculatores seminis.

“The nature of the wrine varies infinitely» from age, season
of the year, and especially from the length of the period since
food or drink was last taken, and also from the quality of the


1 « Santorini’s posthumous tables, xv.”’
™m « Flor. Caldani, Opus. anat. Patay. 1803. 4to. p. 4.”

" « See Hallé, Mém. de la Soc. de Médecine, vol. iii. p. 469. sq.”

° “ The specific quality of some ingesta manifest themselves in the urine so
suddenly, even while blood drawn from a vein discovers no sign of their presence,
that philologists have thought there must be some secret ways leading directly
from the alimentary canal to the kidneys, besides the common channels. An
examination of them will be found in Aug. H. L. Westrumb’s Commentary
(honoured with the royal prize) de phenomenis, que ad vias sic dictas lotii clan-
destinas demonstrandas referuntur. Gotting. 1819. 4to., and P, G. C. E. Bark»


THE URINE. 293


ingesta®, &c. The urine of a healthy adult, recently made after a
tranquil repose, is generally a” clear “ watery fluid of a nidorous
smell” while warm, “and of a lemon” or amber “ colour,” saline,
bitter, and disagreeable to the taste, “ and contains a variety of
mattersP held by a large quantity of water in solution, and
differing” in their ebsolute quantity in different persons, and in
the same person at different times.

The more aqueous fluid is taken, and the less the skin and
lungs secrete, as in cold weather, the larger the amount of water
in the urine, which is then paler, more copious, and lighter. The
opposite circumstances, as well as exercise or feverishness, render
it high coloured, scanty, and heavy. Its usual specific gravity
is from 1015 to 1025. Much of the matters dissolved subside
in the form of a pale brown or reddish sediment after it has
stood, if the individual is feverish or dyspeptic, and the tem-
perature to which it is exposed is low; and they dissolve again
if it is warmed. The quantity made daily by adults in health,
though much influenced by the quantity of liquids drunk, is,
perhaps, on the average, about three pints in the twenty-four
hours. After standing some time, the urine, which, when first
made in health, is acid, becomes alkaline, emits a strong ammo-
niacal smell, and is covered with a white mucous pellicle, in which,
as well as on the sides of the vessel, crystalline phosphate of mag-
nesia and ammonia is seen: yellow cubic crystals of chloride
of ammonia are then deposited, next yellow octohedrons of
chloride of ammonia, and lastly microcosmic salt or the fusible salt
of the urine,—phosphate of magnesia and ammonia. The fluid in
the mean time becomes a brown and feetid syrup.

The following is Berzelius’s analysis of urine, in 18094 ;—


Water - - - - 933:00
Uric acid - : E “ 1:00


hausen’s Dissertation (which gained the second prize) de viis clandestinis urine.
Berol. 1820. 8vo.”

Sir Everard Home observed, in his experiments on the spleen, that colouring
matters began to manifest themselves in the urine about seventeen minutes after
they were swallowed, became gradually more evident, then gradually disappeared,
and after some hours, when the mass had unquestionably passed into the intes-
tines, again tinged it as strongly as ever.

P See Fr. Stromeyer, Theoret. chimie, t. ii. p- 609.

9 Med. Chir. Trans. vol. iii.


— 294 THE URINE.


Urea - - - - 30°10
Sulphate of potass - : : 3-7]
Sulphate of soda - = z 3°16
Phosphate of soda - . 2-94.
Chloride of sodium - - ‘ Ae4.5
Phosphate of ammonia - - a 1°65
Chloride of ammonia - - = 1:50
Free lactic acid - - -)
Lactate of ammonia - - :
Animal (extractive) matter soluble in (anhy-
drous) alcohol, and usnally accompanying 17°14
the lactates - - *
Animal matter insoluble in alcohol -


Urea, not separable from the preceding -
Earthy phosphates with a trace of fluate of lime 1:00


Mucus of the bladder - - 0°34:
Silex - - - - - 0:03
1000:00


In the urine of young children and herbivorous animals benzoic
acid is found, united with animal matter, and perhaps thus exists
as a peculiar acid, for which Berzelius proposes the name of
uro-benzoic acid.*

According to some, urine, like the blood, affords carbonic acid
gas under the receiver of an air-pumps’, and more after a meal t;
but others regard its presence as accidental, from not having been
able to find it."

Uric acid is in the form of soft white scales, without taste or
smell, requiring a thousand times its weight of cold water for its
solution, and nearly as much of boiling water. According to
Dr. Prout it consists of


Nitrogen - - - $1°125
Carbon - - - 39°875
Hydrogen - - - 2225
Oxygen - - - 26°775


The urine contains much more uric acid in solution than an equal
quantity of boiling water would dissolve. Hence Dr. Prout con-


* Traité de Chimie, t. viie p. 363. 1833.
* Vogel, Annales de Chimie, t. xciii.

* Mr. Brande, Phil. Trans. 1810.

" Berzelius, 1. c. and Whoeler.


THE URINE. 995


ceives that it is in the state of urate of ammonia, which is
decomposed by the other acids when it cools: while others fancy
that the solution in the urine of substances so little soluble is
a fact analogous to that of iodine being so much more soluble in
water charged with chloride of sodium or ammonia.

Urea is in the form of slender four-sided prisms, colourless,
inodorous, and deliquescent, and affords a cool taste like nitre:
it reacts as neither an acid nor an alkali.

It is a common mistake, even at present, to ascribe the colour
and smell of urine to it. Whoeler has shown that urea is a cya-
nite of ammonia. Dr. Prout has established that it consists of


Hydrogen - ~ 266
Carbon ~ 2 senie79o
Nitrogen ~ - - 1:866
Oxygen - - =* 18066
4000 x


The large proportion of nitrogen in urea leads to the conclu-
sion that the kidneys are the great outlet for azote, as the
lungs and liver are for carbon.

In disease, the specific gravity may exceed 1050, and the
quantity has been greater than thirty pounds a day. Dr. Peter
Frank had a patient who made forty pounds every twenty-four
hours, and occasionally fifty-two pounds; and he knew it exceed
the weight of the body in a few days. On the other hand, no urine
has sometimes been secreted for twenty-two weeks.y Dr. Richard-
son mentions a lad of seventeen who had never made any, and
yet felt no inconvenience? In disease, and even during such
little derangements as are scarcely considered disease, the urine
deposits sediments, lateritious and pink ; and Dr. Prout has shown
that they consist chiefly of the urate of ammonia, and states that
they are formed from the albuminous portions of the chyle. The
red colour he has shown to depend upon the presence of the pur-
purate of ammonia, — a substance formed from the uric acid, and
which, like the other purpurates, colours the urates pink. When
the usual yellow colouring matter is present, this, with the pink,


* Med. Chir. Trans. vol. viii. p. 535.

Y Haller, Biblioth. Medic. vol. ii. p. 200.

2 Phil. Trans. 1713. We had a constant diarrhea,
* De curandis hominum morbis, lib. vy. p. 44.


296 THE URINE.


causes the sediment to be red —of various hues, according to the
proportions ; and, when the colouring matter is absent, as in hectic,
the sediment is pink.>

Various odorous and coloured principles pass off with the urine ;
as turpentine, balsams, asparagus, on the one hand, and red fruits,
cactus opuntia, rhubarb, indigo, &c. onthe other. Mercury, iron,
and prussiate of potass will enter into it; as well as tartaric, oxalic,
gallic, succinic, benzoic, malic, and citric acids, or at least these
will render it acid. Alkaline borates, carbonates, silicates, chlo-
rates, and nitrates, also pass off by the kidney. But the neutral
salts of potass and soda with vegetable acids are decomposed ; the
alkali only, in the state of carbonate, being found in the urine.
Mineral acids, alcohol, camphor, empyreumatic animal oil, musk,
cochineal, turnsol, le vert de vessie, and orcanette, with the oxides
of iron, and preparations of lead and bismuth, when taken, are
not found in it.¢

The urine may be deranged as remarkably as the sweat. For it
is sometimes blue, from containing indigo not taken into the
system, as I have seen through the kindness of Dr. Prout, and from
other substances ; and blueness of it appears to be produced some-
' times by Prussian blue swallowed. Sometimes it is black, perhaps
from containing a peculiar acid, called melanic, without any
danger to the health. Dr. Prout has shown me two specimens of
this, in which the sediment was perfectly black; and it may con-
tain not only the albumen and red particles of the blood, but
absolutely sugar, and occasionally new substances found nowhere
else.


The urine of birds is generally discharged with the faces, becomes solid by
exposure to the air, and contains a large quantity of biurate of ammonia. Urea
exists in the urine of carnivorous birds, not in that of the herbivorous. Dr. Wol-
laston found the uric acid to be only 51, in a goose feeding on nothing but grass ;
and in birds taking nothing but animal food, to constitute nearly the whole mass.
That of serpents is discharged only once in some weeks, is of a caseous consist-
ence, and likewise becomes perfectly solid afterwards. It is almost entirely uric
acid, and superurates of potass, soda, and ammonia.¢ The urine of the turtle


tr pa ar a eee


> Gultstonian Lectures delivered before the College of Physicians. London
Med. Gazette, 1833.
© Berzelius, 1. c.


* Dr. Prout, Thomson’s Annalsxof Philosophy. Dr. Davy, Phil. Trans. 1818.


THE URINE. 297


and tortoise is also destitute of urea, but does not contain urate of ammonia so
pure. That of the frog and toad contains urea, chloride of sodium, and a little
phosphate of lime.® The urine of fish, as well as of birds and reptiles, and the
kidneys of mollusca, contain uric acid." In oviparous animals the urine is formed
from yenous blood, the kidneys having a double venous circulation, exactly as is
the case with the human liver.®

The urine of carnivorous mammalia contains uric acid and urea; while that
of herbivorous brutes contains uro-benzoates and urea, but no uric acid, and is
generally deficient in phosphates, which are replaced by carbonates.


€ Consult Berzelius, 1. c. f Tbid.
& Dr. Jacobson, De system. venos. peculiari in permultis animalibus observato.
Hafniz, 1821; and Edinb. Med. and Surg. Journ, vol. xix. p» 78.


298


CHAP. XVIII.


THE FAT.


In many parts of the. body a fluid exists, which must be con-
sidered before we close our account of the production, application,
and purification of the blood — or, in other words, of the natural
functions. The at, in truth, nourishes the body, when food can-
not be procured or cannot be assimilated.

“ The fat* is” a yellow “ oily fluid, very similar in its general
character to vegetable oils, bland, inodorous, lighter than water;
containing” oleine, stearine, glycerine, and margaric and oleic
acids — substances, together with some others, found in the fatty
secretions of different animals. Stearine is the solid principle,
and oleine the fluid principle, of oils. It consists ultimately of
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen.


Carbon - - 79:000
Oxygen - - 9584
Hydrogen - - 11°416


“ When secreted from the blood and deposited in the mucous
tela, it exists in the form of drops, divided by the lamin of the
tela, in a manner not unlike that in which the vitreous humour of
the eye is contained in very similar cells.

‘« The relation of fat to different parts is various.

“ In the first place, some parts, even those whose mucous tela
is extremely soft and delicate, never contain fat. Such are the
palpebrz and penis.

‘** In very many parts, it is diffused indefinitely, especially in
the panniculus adiposus, the interstices of the muscles, &c.

*« In some few, it is always found, and appears to be contained
in certain definite spaces, and destined for particular purposes.
Such we consider the fat around the basis of the heart®: and in


* « W. Xav. Jansen, Pinguedinis Animalis Consideratio Physiologica et Patho-
logica. Lugd. Bat. 1784. 8vo.” ‘

* «J.D. Brandis, Comm. (rewarded with the royal prize) de oleor. ungui-
nosor. natura. Gotting. 1785. 4to. p. 13.”

* « Henee it is clear how many exceptions must be made to the assertion of


THE FAT. 299


the mons veneris, where it forms a peculiar and circumscribed
lump. 4 ;

“ Its consistence varies in different parts. More fluid in the
orbit, it is harder and more like suet around the kidneys.

“* It is of late formation in the foetus; scarcely any trace of
its existence is discoverable before the fifth month after con-
ception.”

It is accumulated under the skin chiefly in the first years of
childhood, and again between the fortieth year and old age.
Women grow fat earlier, and especially if married. In old
people it gradually lessens, like all solids and fluids, till they
are wrinkled, shrivelled, and very light.

“ There have been controversies respecting the mode of its
secretion: some, as W. Hunter, contending that it is formed by
peculiar glands; others, that it merely transudes from the arte-
ries. Besides other arguments in favour of the latter opinion,
we may urge the morbid existence of fat in parts naturally
destitute of it;—-a fact more explicable on the supposition of
diseased action of vessels, than of the preternatural formation of
glands. Thus, it is occasionally formed in the globe of the eye;
a lump of hard fat generally fills up the place of an extirpated
testicle; and steatoms have been found in almost every cavity of
the body.”

Dr. William Hunter contended that the fat is not contained
in the same cells of the cellular membrane as the fluid of ana-
sarca, but in distinct vesicles: because, —1. The marrow, which
strongly resembles fat, is contained in vesicles or bags; 2. Parts
which are not loaded with anasarca, as the eyelids, never contain
fat; 3. In dropsical subjects, exhausted of the fat, the membrane
which contained fat appears still very different from the other, —
that immediately under the skin, for example, being thin and
collapsed, while that opposite the tendon of the latissimus dorsi is
thick and gelatinous; 4. Parts which become filled with fluid
from gravitation in dropsy, as the penis and scrotum, never con-
tain a drop of oil in the fattest persons; 5. Dropsical parts pit
on pressure ; the fluid disperses, and returns when the pressure
i
the celebrated Fourcroy, — that fat is an oily matter, formed at the extremities of


arteries, and at the greatest distance from the centre of motion and animal heat.
See his Philosophie Chimique, p. 112.”
« « T found this still more distinct in the body of a female of the species simia


cynomolgus, from which, by means of cold, I was able to remove i


t with its sym-
metrical form entire,”


$00 THE ra


is resumed. This is not the case with parts distended by fat,
although it is when oil is poured into the common cellular mem-
brane after death.®

The intestines occasionally discharge fat; sometimes solid,
sometimes fluid, but concreting quickly on cooling. I have
seen such cases, and published a full history of the subject two
years ago.!

‘« The glands which some celebrated characters have con-
tended secrete the fat, are only imaginary. §

«“ Whatever may be the truth of this matter, the deposition
and absorption of the fat take place with great rapidity.

«‘ The use of the fat is multifarious.

“ Tt lubricates the solids and facilitates their movements ; pre-
vents excessive sensibility; and, by equally distending the skin,
contributes to beauty.” It probably supports mechanically,
and lessens shocks; and preserves the temperature of the body,
like an inner garment.

“‘ We pass over the particular uses of fat in certain parts, v.c.
of the marrow of the bones.

“ During health, it contributes little or nothing to nourish-
ment.” But as soon as food or chyle is deficient, or great eva-
cuations occur, it is absorbed, in order to afford as much nourish-
ment as possible. ;

Fourcroy fancied “that it affords a receptacle for the super-


Medical Observations and Inquiries, vol. ii. p. 33, sqq.

Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xviii. I give cases of its discharge from both bowels
and urinary bladder: and one of its discharge from the intestines, while the
kidneys were discharging sugar and the lungs pus. Ambergris is a fatty matter
found in the intestines of the spermaceti whale, but never higher than six or seven
feet from the anus. Its quantity has exceeded a hundred pounds, and, though so
frequently discharged as to be found on the shore and floating on the waves, ac»
cumulation, or the state which occasions it, sometimes appears to destroy life.
It is more abundant in proportion as the animal is costive and sickly. 1. c.

Some birds nourish their young with an oily substance, secreted in their own
stomachs, ‘This is so copious in the petrel, that, in the Faro Isles, people use
petrels for candles, merely passing a wick through the body from the mouth to
the rump. Pennant, Brit. Zool. vol. ii. p. 434.

&® « The singular opinion of the distinguished Home, respecting the origin and
use of the fat, viz. that it is formed in the large intestines, chiefly by the instru-
mentality of the bile, and that it supplies a kind of secondary nourishment to the
body, will be found fully described in the Phil. Trans. 1813. p. 146.”

h « P. Lyonet conjectures, with probability, that insects destitute of blood
derive their chief nourishment from the fat in which they abound. TJ. anat. de
da Chenille qui ronge le bois de Saule, pp. 428. 483, sq. and the Preface, p, xiii,”


4


* THE FAT. ' 301


-


fluous hydrogen, which could not otherwise be easily evacu-
ated.” '

The fattest person on record is, I believe, Lambert of Leices-
ter. He weighed seven hundred and thirty-nine pounds *, and
died at the age of forty years. In him rats and mice might cer-
tainly have nested, if it is true that a bishop of Mentz, or


*¢ A Saxon Duke, did grow so fat
That mice (as histories relate )
Ate grots and labyrinths to dwell in
His postique parts without his feeling.’’ !


Excessive formation of fat may be strongly opposed by regu-
larly taking great exercise, little sleep, and little, but dry, food.™
Fretfulness of temper, or real anxiety of mind, will prevent any
one from getting fat,.and make any fat man thin. A passage
that occurs in the most magnificent of Shakspeare’s Roman
plays, and is founded on some information of Plutarch’s, will in-
stantly be remembered.


Cesar. Let me have men about me that are fat ;
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep 0’ nights ;
Yond’ Cassius has a lean and hungry look ;
He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.

Antony. Fear him not, Cesar, he’s not dangerous ;
He is a noble Roman, and well given.

Cesar. ’*Would he were fatter :— But I fear him not:
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius."


Great obesity occurs sometimes in infants. I saw a prodi-
giously fat female, but a year old, who weighed sixty pounds, and


" See Fourcroy, |. c.

* Dr. Good says that some German Journals mention cases of eight hundred
pounds weight, but he gives no references.

! Hudibras, P. ti. Canto i.

™ Semper vero et certissime debellanda (obesitas), si modo bona voiuntas et vis
animi fuerit, valida corporis exercitatione, brevi somno, parca et sicca dixta. Nee
facile miles gregarius repertus fuerit, qui tali morbo laborat. Dr, Gregory, Con-
spectus Med. Theor. \xxxix. [Iodine is the best medicine against it.

See the intructive case of the Miller of Billericay, in the Transactions of the
Royal College of Physicians, London, vol. ii.

A large collection of cases of obesity will be found in Mr. Wadd’s Cursory
Remarks on Corpulence.

” Julius Cesar, act i. scene 2.


502 THE FAT. Pc


had begun to grow fat at the end of the third month. She was
also of Herculean general development, and, like many dwarfs,
had a flat nose. At an early age I believe females are more
commonly the subjects of the affection than males.

A Frenchman named Seurat, who was shown in London a few
years ago, with the soubriquet of the « Living Skeleton,” was pro-
bably as extreme an instance of emaciation as can be imagined.
An American, named Calvin Edson, shown more Jately, was also
extraordinarily emaciated, and weighed but 58 lbs. They had no
other apparent disease. The Frenchman was about 30 years old,
and had wasted from infancy: the American about 40, and had
wasted for sixteen years. A French penny roll and a little vin du
pays was the Frenchman’s daily food in France ; and in England a
little meat, amounting, with a reduced portion of bread, to three


ounces per diem.
«f *


+a


The fatty substance of various animals has various properties, aud affords
various principles. Vegetables contain fatty cubstances volatile as well as fixed.

Starch is hoarded in plants in small cells, into which the sap penetrates and then
dissolves it, so that it becomes nourishment to the plant, under particular cireum-
stances, just as fat does to animals. This is the purpose of the stock of fecula
in tuberose roots.


, 308


CHAPS XTX,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


WE now arrive at the animal functions —those which consist of
feeling and the exertion of a will,—those, therefore, which, in
their nature, must be peculiar to animals. 4

The organs of these functions are, the encephalon, spinal chord,
and nerves. These, together with bodies called ganglions, con-
stitute the nervous system. F

The encephalon, or brain, is encased in the cranium; the spinal _
chord, or improperly, spinal marrow, or spinal prolongation of the —
brain, in all the vertebra, down to the first or second lumbar;
the nerves pass through openings in the skull, between the verte-
bre, and in the sacrum, and run in all directions through the
system ; while the ganglions are disseminated in the head, neck,
and trunk. ;

The encephalon is the largest solid organ found in the cavities of
the body, except the liver. Its substance is not firm, and on ex-
posure to the air grows very soft. It consists of a pulpy and a
fibrous portion. Its more external part, and some internal parts,
are pulpy, and of various shades of ash colour and yellowish
brown. The chief portion is fibrous and white. It is, therefore,
said by some to consist of a cortical or cineritious, and of a
medullary or white, portion: but what is not white is not always
cortical, neither is its hue always cineritious ; and the white fibrous
portion is totally different from what is properly called marrow.
Gall, therefore, more properly, says it consists of a pulpy and a
fibrous portion.@


, a


3 v


* « We could wish that the term medulla were banished from the nervous
system. The functions of nerves are totally different from those of marrow, and
infinitely more noble. Besides, the idea of marrow always excludes fibrous
structure.”’ (Anatomie et Physiologie du Systtme Nerveux, et du Cons en par-
ticulier, 4 vols. 4to. Paris, 1810—19, with an atlas of 100 plates Vol. i. p. 49.)

While some had said that the white part was all blood-vessels, others that it
contained none, some that it, as well as the cineritious part, was all globules,
some that it was solid, others tubular, Leuwenhoeck, Vieussens, and Stenon,

Y


304 ANATOMY OF


It consists of four masses: one many times larger in the adult
than the second, and called cerebrum ; a second, called cerebellum,


MS AS


i
DN
i


pronounced it fibrous ; and Bonnet, Herder, and many others, conceived a fibrous
structure so fit for the operations of the mind that they adopted this opinion, But
Soemmering and Cuvier did not venture to consider it fibrous throughout; and
many moderns, — the brothers Wenzel, for instance, — declared that, after re-
peated experiments and most careful observation, the brain was not at all fibrous,
but equally pulpy throughout. Walter, Ackerman, and Bichat equally deny
the fibrous structure of the brain, and speak of the white part as only medullary.
(Gall, 1. ec. vol. i, p, 235.) »

Professor Ehrenberg has lately found the proper substance of the brain and
nerves to be fibrous, under a microscope with a power of magnifying to $00 or
even to 800 diameters. In the white part of the the brain, he says, the fibres are
straight and cylindrical, with others like strings of pearls: in the medullary,
these knotted fibres only exist, contained in a dense network of blood-vessels,
and interspersed with plates and granules. He declares the large cylindrical
fibres to be tubular, and believes that the knotted are tubular also. All micro-
scopical observations require careful repetition by many individuals, (Poggen-
dorf’s Annalen der Physik und Chimie, No. 7. 1833.) ;


THE


i. Anterior extremity.

2. Posterior extremity, of the great
central fissure of the cerebrum.

3, 3, 3. Its anterior lobes.

4, 4. Its middle lobes.

5, 5. Fissure of Silvius, separating the
anterior from the middle.

6, 6. Posterior lobes.

7, 7. Convolutions of the external
surface of the hemispheres.

8. Infundibulum.

9. Tuber cinereum.

10. Corpora pisiformia.

11. Grey substance between them; and,

12. The anterior prolongations of the

mesocephalon, or crura cerebri.

13. Inferior surface of the mesocepha-
lon, and the groove which lodges
the basilar artery.

Groove separating the mesoce-
phalon and the superior extre-
mity of the chorda oblongata.

15, 15. Posterior prolongations of the

mesocephalon, or crura cerebelli.

16, 16. Inferior surface of the lobes of

the cerebellum.

17. Anterior, and

18, 18. Posterior, parts of the circum-

ference of the cerebellum.

19, Fissure separating the lobes of the

cerebellum behind,


NERVOUS SYSTEM.


305


Superior extremity of the spinal
chord.
21. Central groove, which divides
22. The corpora pyramidalia.
23. Corpora olivaria.
Corpora restiformia.
25. Olfactory nerve,
26. Its bulb,
27. Extent,
28. Its middle, and
Internal, root.
Optic nerves after their decussa-
tion.
31. Their decussation.
32. Optic nerves before their decus-
sation.
33. Common motor nerve of the eye.
Internal motor, or pathetic, nerve.
35. ‘Trigeminus or trifacial. .
36. External motor nerve of the eye.
37. Facial nerve.
38. Acoustic nerve.
Glosso-pharyngeal or gustatory.
40. Pneumono-gastric or vagus.
41. Accessory.
42,42. Fibres of reinforcement of the
accessory.
43. Roots of the hypoglossal, plunged
in the groove between the para~
midal and olivary bodies. ( Gall. )
,


20.


7


and placed below the posterior part of the cerebrum; a thinds
which unites these, is much smaller than the second, and called
mesocephalon or tuber annulare or pons Varolii; and an apparent
prolongation of this, still smaller, and termed chorda oblongata
or medulla oblongata; an apparent prolongation of which, again,
is the chorda, or medulla, spinalis.

The cerebrum is divided down to its middle into two equal
portions, termed hemispheres. Each of these, again, consists of
three portions or Jobes ; an anterior, a middle, and a posterior.
The outermost part of the cerebrum is rendered far more exten-
sive than the dimensions of the organ, by these divisions; and
still more by being furrowed to about an inch in depth, the
two sides of each furrow being in contact, so that what are
termed convolutions exist. The inner surface of the small intes-
tines is greatly increased by projections of the mucous membrane ;
the inner surface of the lungs, and of glands, by being divided
into innumerable tubes and cells: whence there is far more ab-
sorption of chyle, far more changes of the blood and air, and far

yg


ys)


306 ANATOMY OF


DO ilicailtgae N


a |


AW


iN .


l


4 n\


i Mt i


h
\\
a
* I
NP WA


}


Superior surface of the cerebrum, narrower at the front than at the back;
ivided into two hemispheres, and consisting of convolutions. — In the cut at
p- 804, the lobes are seen.


more secretion, in these respective parts, than there otherwise
could be. As an equally beautiful contrivance augments the sur-
face of the cerebrum, and of the portion immediately subjacent, we
may be certain that the more external parts —those portions which
are thus rendered more extensive (for the mass is rather diminished
by the contrivance) are of the highest importance; and, as the
inner surfaces, thus augmented, are all the seat of the functions of
the respective organs, we may, perhaps, presume that, in the case
of the cerebrum, the seat of chief function is the more superficial
portions. Even a little more increase is effected by the summit
of many convolutions being depressed. In the same way, the
cerebellum is divided into two lobes, and these into sixteen
lobules ; the surface of each lobe consists of about sixty plates,
standing side by side; and even in the sides of these are others,
secondary, seen only on separating the primary, and amounting,
perhaps, to 600 or 700.. The purpose must be the same. We


;


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 307


shall find the surface farther augmented by cavities, and the sur-
face of these cavities also increased by irregularities.

On cutting the hemispheres of the cerebrum away by succes-
sive horizontal slices, we find the mass white and the outermost
portions grey. When the hemispheres are entirely removed, a
continuous surface remains, called centrum ovale ; the two halves


iF i.
oes


ul ih Be
‘ Hi i


iii 2
rHTungti
\


| Hil


I; on mi 2 S pine

ah Kin Tl ; HI i} {la
Wigs te Bal oe
wile.”
Minmn <


| | i H ‘ ay
ils


i} i a
i; yuu
fit iit

jt nntrnnyee

| se i

thie


=
Hl


==


TU
Ht
\ Co


$s . H
5 | {
it! } \ I i
}
3 th » fal
hy
r uf aul
anit “
= tnulil } / ‘
sul r
iAH) ia
mi 1 ee
ie 2 tial NY
. A is _
. .
. | \
.


ig 4 i a


ig}


The cranium is external. The pulpy grey substance next. Then the fibrous
white substance or centrum ovale. The mesolobe in the midst of it; and the
raphe in the centre of this.


> M. Desmoulins contends, Ist, that integrity of surface is the only condition
constantly necessary for the production of nervous actions; 2d, that these are
proportionate to extent of surface ; and, 3d, that they are performed by the sur-
face, and transmitted from it. The energy of an electric apparatus depends very
much upon surface. Dr. Spurzheim asks whether it is not on this account that
the encephalic masses are hollow or convoluted ; and remarks that the nervous
masses of the lower animals are very commonly hollow. The Anatomy of the
Brain, by G. Spurzheim, M.D., p. 206. London, 1826,

Dr. Macartney has Jately declared that the surface of the human brain is thus
proportionately more extensive than that of any other animal. Second Report of
the British Scient. Assoc., p. 454.


2


Y oO


.


308 ANATOMY OF


being united in the centre, and their commissure being termed me-
solobe or corpus callosum. It has a longitudinal depression, called
raphe or suture. When still more is removed horizontally, a
large cavity appears immediately on each side of the centre,
called the dateral ventricle: which runs forwards into the anterior
lobe, making an anterior cornu; backwards into the posterior
lobe, making a posterior cornu, ending like a finger, and thus
forming what is called a digital cavity ; and downwards into the
middle lobe, making an inferior cornu. A septum exists between
the two lateral ventricles, called septum lucidum, with a little space
called the fifth ventricle between the two layers of which it con-
sists. In each lateral ventricle is a white mass, called thalamus


Horizontal view of the cerebrum, sufficient being cut away to exhibit, 1, 1, the
great mass of white fibrous substance, surrounded on the surface by the grey
pulp. 2, 2. Corpora striata, and lateral ventricles. 3. Septum lucidum. 4. Fifth
ventricle. 5, 5. Semicircular band separating the corpora striata from the thalami
optici, upon which lie, 6, 6, the plexus choroides. 7, 7. Fornix. 8, 8. Its posterior
pillars, turning round to face the fimbriated bodies. 9, 9. Part where the superior
part of the lateral ventricles communicates with the inferior, which is not seen.


a Ergot. 11,11. The posterior part or digital extremity of the lateral ven.
tricles,


*


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 309


opticus, with two tubercles on its posterior border, called external
and internal corpora geniculata ; a yellowish mass with white strize,
called corpus striatum; a pale semicircular band, called tenia
semicircularis, between the two; and a plexus of vessels, called
plexus choroides. The floor of the cavity has various promi-
nences: one called hippocampus major, or cornu ammonis, which
is a prolongation of the posterior extremity of the mesolobe in
the inferior cornu; and a small one of the same kind in the
posterior cornu, called hippocampus minor, or ergot ; another
called corpus fimbriatum. Under the septum is another long
white body called the fornix, with a few transverse lines called
lyra at its lower surface, extended over a third ventricle, which
is placed exactly in the centre, and to which an opening leads
at each side of the fornix from the corresponding lateral ven-
tricle. The anterior extremity of the fornix divides into two
pillars, which diverge and run down to two projections at the
base of the brain, called corpora mammillaria, pisiformia, or
albicantia, between which is a grey triangular plate, called pons
Tarini: its posterior extremity does the same, and each pos-
terior division itself divides into two, one of which is the corpus
fimbriatum ; and between this and the thalamus opticus exists a
chink through which the pia mater, or innermost covering of the
brain, enters into the third ventricle and unites with the pieeus
choroides, which is, in fact, a plexus of vessels; connected by
cellular membrane, called, in this part of the body, pia mater. At
the posterior extremity of the fornix are seen four eminences,
called corpora quadrigemina ; the two higher and larger called
nates, or c. g. anteriora ; the two smaller and lower called testes,
or c.g. posteriora ; and, before them all, is a grey body, called
pineal gland, generally containing grit, and attached to the brain
by two medullary prolongations only, which run to the thalami
optici. Behind and below the corpora quadrigemina, is a fine
layer of transverse greyish fibres, called valve of Vieussens, which
is formed by three converging bands, named processus a cerebello
ad testes. Three bands of white matter, called commissures, run
transversely over the third ventricle, establishing more commu-
nication between the two halves of the cerebrum. The anterior
part of the floor of the third ventricle is formed by the upper
surface of a small grey body, called tuber cinereum, which runs
downwards in a conical form under the name of znfundibulum, and
ends in alittle mass called pituitary gland, and lodged in the fossa
y 4&


510 ANATOMY OF


A transverse section of the brain, on a Jevel with the lateral ventricles. The
upper part of the corpus callosum, together with the fornix, removed, so as to
expose the upper part of the lateral ventricles, the middle ventricle, the corpora
striata, the optic thalami, tubercula quadrigemina, and the pineal gland with its
prolongations. ‘lhe valve of Vieussens and the cerebellum are divided in the
middle line, and separated to expose the fourth ventricle and the calamus scrip-
torius. 1. Transverse section of the frontal bone. 2,2. Cranial surface of its
orbitar plate. 3. Anterior extremity of the cerebral hemispheres. 4. Posterior
extremity of the same hemispheres. 5. White substance of the hemispheres.
6, 6,6. Thin grey substance. 7. Anterior part of the interlobular fissure.
&, Cut in the anterior extremity of the corpus callosum. 9. Bent-back portion
of the anterior extremity of the corpus callosum, placed between the corpora
striata. 10. Anterior extremity of the corpus striatum. 11. Posterior ex-
tremity of the corpus striatum, and upper part of the lateral ventricle. 12. Tha-
Jamus opticus. 13. Semicircular band between the thalamus and corpus
striatum. 14, 14, Anterior pillars of the fornix, divided near their origin.
15. Anterior, and, 16. Posterior, extremity of the middle ventricle. 17. Nerv-
ous band or middle commissure, uniting the thalami in the interior of the
middle ventricle. 18, Posterior commissure. 19. Pineal gland. 20. Medul-
Jary prolongations of the pineal gland in the internal part of the optic thalami.
21. Tubercula quadrigemina superiora. 22. Tub. quad. inferiora. 23. Crucial fur-
row between them all, 24, 24. Valve of Vieussens divided, and each half turned
back. 25. Vertical section of the cerebellum and arbor vite. 26, 26. Supe-
rior surface of the cerebellum. 27, Fourth ventricle. 28. Central groove


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 311


running from the aqueduct of Sylvius and the upper surface of the cerebral
protuberance to the upper surface of the spinal chord, and united to, 29. the
cavity commonly called calamus scriptorius. 30. Upper extremity of the spinal
marrow.


seen on the upper part of the ethmoid bone, before the cor-
pora albicantia. (Cut, p. 304.) From the posterior part of the
third ventricle a canal, called aqueeductus Sylvit or iter a tertio
ad quartum ventriculum, runs back, under the base the corpora
quadrigemina, into a cavity in the cerebellum ca 1 the fourth
ventricle. .

On cutting the Cerebellum, which has two lobes united by a
projecting portion called vermiform process at the superior-ante-
rior and superior-middle part, we find it less consistent than the
other parts of the encephalon. Its fibrous substance within is
collected into three masses; two lateral, and sending off prolong-


1. Continuation of the central fissure of the spinal chord. 2. Beginning of
the anterior pyramids. 3,3. Anterior pyramids. 4, 4. Corpora olivaria. 5, 5. Cor-
pora restiformia. 6,6. Cross band uniting the corpora olivaria. 7. Horizontal


312 ANATOMY OF


section of the cerebellum: 7*. Ganglion of the cerebellum. 8. Converging
fibres of the cerebellum. 9. Commissure of the cerebellum or mesocephalon.
10, 10. Par trigeminum. 11, 11. Crura of the cerebrum. 12. Transverse inter-
lacement below the optic nerve. 13. One of the corpora albicantia. 14. Pro-
longation of the corpus albicans towards an anterior pillar of the fornix.
15. Optic nerve. 16, Optic nerve just before their decussation, turned back.
17. Band of transverse fibres of the optic nerve. 17. Reinforcement of optic
nerve at the decussation. 19. Olfactory nerve. 20. Itsinternal root. 21. Its
external ditto, 22. Its middle ditto. 23. Anterior commissure. 24. Internal
part of the great superior ganglion or corpus striatum. 25. External part of
ditto. 26. The bundles of the corpus striatum. 27. Anterior plate of the
corpus callosum, 28. Convolution at the bottom of the fissura Sylvii. — (Gall. )


A lateral view of the encephalon, sufficient having been removed’ to show the
interior of the chorda oblongata. 1. Origin of the anterior pyramid, or great
original band of the cerebrum. 2 The fibres of the anterior pyramid entered
into the mosocephalon or great commissure of the cerebellum, and enlarged in
their passage through it. 3. Crura, or great fibrous bands, of the cerebrum.
4. Their locus niger. 5. The corpus olivare or oval ganglion of the great chorda
oblongata. 6, The thalamus opticus or great inferior ganglion of the cere-
brum. 7,7, 7. The corpus striatum or great superior ganglion of the cerebrum.
8. Corpus restiforme or original band of the cerebellum. 9, Corpus den-
tatum or ganglion of the cerebellum. — ( Gall.)


A smaller division of the brain, but the firmest, is the Meso-
cephalon, so named from its situation in the centre of the base,
between the cerebrum and cerebeilum, and over the spinal chord.
(Cut, p. 311.) Two processes of the cerebrum, called crurq cerebri,
which contain some grey substance, whence the name /ocus niger,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 313


H)
UU ie (Qi! I
anil? }

se i Ml 0

SS


Nf } ine
\


The brain placed upon its base. The knife has passed through ha of
the great commissure or corpus callosum, 1, 1, 1, 1, as far as the infund ee
2, situated below the anterior commissure 3, and as far as the corpora quadri-
gemina 4,4, 4,4. The two hemispheres are separated and unfolded. The
posterior and superior parts of the nervous mass of the spine and brain are seen.
The grooves 5, 5, are continuous with the lateral grooves 6,6. 7. The central
fissure, 8, 8, The space before the fundamental part or processus yermiformis
of the cerebellum open; viz. the fourth ventrical : it is in connection, by means
of a canal situated below the mass of communication called the valve of Vieus-
sens 9, 9, and below 10, with the third ventricle or space, 11, 11, in the midst of
the great inferior cerebral ganglion or thalamus opticus 12. ‘The septum lucidum
or common mass of communication and fornix are cut at 13, on each side, and
entirely removed, in order to expose the great cerebral ganglion 12, 12, and
14, 14, 14, 14. On the side 4, all the inner surface of the cerebellum is seen cut
vertically through the centre. On the side n, the cerebellum has been removed
by a horizontal cut from within outwards, and from before backwards, on a level
with the white fibres 15, situated in the fourth cavity or ventricle, the fundamental
part or vermiform process, and what is seen of the anterior surface of the side a.
By a vertical cut in the direction from 13 to 16 (side a), the anterior and inner
part of the hemisphere s has been removed, to show the diverging direction of
the nervous band above the great inferior ganglion or thalamus opticus, the very
fine fibres of grey substance, the great bands 17 in the middle, the direction of
this mass of grey substance in the internal part 18 and in the external 19, and
the proportional size of each of these divisions. 20, 20. Commencement of the
pyramidal bundle of the cerebrum. 21. Corpus restiforme or original band
of the cerebellum. 22. Fourth ventricle or the space before the fundamental
part of the cerebellum, 23. Entrance of the pyramids below the pons or
great original band of the cerebrum beneath the commissure of the cere-


314 ANATOMY OF


bellum. 24. Median line of the cerebellum. 25. Middle of the nervous
mass of the fundamental part of the cerebellum. 26. Ganglion or corpus
rhomboideum of the cerebellum. 27, 27. Mesolobe. 28, 28. Valve of Vieus-
sens or mass of connection of the primitive part of the cerebellum with the
corpora quadrigemina. 29,29. Pathetic nerves. 30. Commissure of the corpora
quadrigemina. $31. Pineal gland. 32, 32. Superior band of connection of the
pineal gland with the great inferior cerebral ganglion. 33. Soft or middle com-
missure of the inferior cerebral ganglion. $4, 34. Mammillary bodies. 35, 35.
Transverse interlacement of the great cerebral bundle. 36, 36. Transverse in-
terlacement belo optic nerve. 37, 37. Optic thalamus or great inferior
cerebral gang 38, 38. Transverse interlacement of the nervous bands of
the middle |] 9, 39. Transverse interlacements of the great superior cere-
bral ganglion. 40, 40. Fold of the corpus callosum or mass of union of the
inferior convolutions of the anterior lobe. — (Gall. )


7
and two of the cerebellum, called crura cerebelli, appear to run
to it. The corpora quadrigemina are a part of its superior, or,
as it lies obliquely, posterior, portion ; and it, with its continuation
—the chorda oblongata, furnishes the anterior wall of the fourth
ventricle. This cavity is irregularly quadrilateral, and runs ob-
liquely from the aquaeductus Sylvii or iter a tertio ad quartum
ventriculum, under the valve of Vieussens and processus ad
testes, downwards upon the back of the chorda oblongata, and
before the vermiform process of the cerebellum. On the floor of
it, or, as from the oblique position of the parts we might say, the
- back of the chorda oblongata, is a groove which ends in a tri-
angular depression called calamus scriptorius.

The mesocephalon, thus appearing formed of prolongations —
two from the cerebrum, and two from the cerebellum —is itself
apparently prolonged into a short bulbous chord, termed chorda
oblongata, which lies upon the basilar process of the occipital
bone. (Cut, p. 304.) On its anterior or lower surface (for it, like
the mesocephalon, lies obliquely) are seen four elevations ; the two
outer called corpora olivaria, the two inner corpora pyramidalia,
or c. p. anteriora, or anterior pyramids. (Cut, p. 311.) On its lateral
parts are two oblong prominences, called corpora restiformia :
and on its posterior portion two others, called corpora pyramid-
alia posteriora or posterior pyramids. (Cut, p. 313.) This chord
apparently prolonged becomes the chorda spinalis, which runs in
the vertebral canal, from the foramen occipitale to the first or
second lumbar vertebra, larger and smaller in various parts of
its course: smaller at first than the bulbous chorda oblongata, it
swells in the middle of the cervical region, diminishes at the
end of this, swells again at the upper part of the loins, and
diminishes through the rest of its course, till it ends in an oval


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 315


GG cy,


as G


a, a, Anterior corpora py-
ramidalia of the chorda
oblongata b, Corpora oli-~
varia. c,c, Corpora restifor~
mia. d, Glosso-pharyn-
geal nerve. e, Pneumono-
gastric. f, o-glossal. g,
Accessory nerve. h, Poste-
rior root of the first cervical
pair. 7, Anterior root. The
posterior root in this, as in
many subjects, gives a twig,
k, to the aecessory, and
crosses before it to reach the
anterior root. In this in-
stance, not only is there a
communication between the
accessory and the posterior
root of the first pair, but
the accessory actually be-
gins from a twig uniting the
posterior roots together. J,
First root of the accessory.
m, 1, The first cervical pair,
formed of its anterior and
posterior root. m, 2, to
m, 8, are the successive cer-
vical nerves, with their two
roots. 7,1,to m,12, The
successive dorsal ditto. 0, 1,
to 0, 5, The successive lum-
bar. p, 1, to p, 6, The suc-
cessive sacral. 4, 9, 9, 9;
The cervical plexus, formed
by the eight cervical and
first dorsal nerves ; and fur-
nishing, among other nerves,
r, The phrenic. s, s, s, s,
The lumbo-sacral plexus,
consisting of nerves fur-
nished by the lumbar and
sacral nerves. ¢, The cer-
vical enlargement of the
spinal chord. wu, The lum-
bar enlargement. v, Its
termination, where it splits
into many nerves, called
altogether, w, w, The cauda
equina. «2, The last nerve
of the lumbro-sacral plexus,
or sciatic. — (Dr. Manec. )


316 ANATOMY OF


bulbous extremity. A fissure in front, beginning between the
anterior pyramids, (Cut, p. 311.) divides it into two lateral halves.
Another, less deep, beginning between the posterior pyramids,
divides it posteriorly. . Thus it appears two long chords, united
in their middle line; for at the bottom of each fissure a layer
of white substance is seen, running longitudinally in the form of
two bands at the posterior fissure, and consisting of transverse
filaments tlie anterior, as Gall first pointed out. Two faint
grooves are seen at each side, in the cervical portion; the one
near the posterior, the other near the anterior, fissure. Its con-
sistence is generally less than that of other nervous parts. It is
composed chiefly of white fibrous substance; but in the midst of
this is seen a fine layer of grey pulpy substance, very irregular in
shape,—not solid, but, as Mr. Mayo mentions, really a capsule.


We will now trace the several parts of the encephalon.


B, Right side of the base of the encephalon. I, Hemisphere entire of the
cerebellum. The primitive band or corpus restiforme e e of the cerebellum plunges


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 317


between the facial nerve, 11, and the acoustic nerve, 9. The trigeminus or fifth
is still covered entirely by the transverse fibres of the cerebellum. The olivary
ganglion, a, is prolonged below the transyerse fibres 6 of the cerebellum ; one
part of the transverse fibres of the cerebellum is removed to show the continu-
ation of the pyramidal band 1, c, c, which begins to diverge and be reinforced.
Outside the optic nerve g, ¢, v is seen the expansion of the nervous bands, in the
inferior convolutions w, w, w of the middle lobe 26, 27.

A, Left side of the base. A verticle cut of the cerebellum, directed through
the entrance of its original bundle ee, and through the middle of its ganglion s,
in the direction 92, 28, B, to show the reinforcement of the original bundle in
the ganglion, and the ramifications and subdivisions of the nervous chords. All
the transverse fibres of the cerebellum which cover the trigeminus 4, i, and
the prolongation / of the pyramidal bundle 1, c,c, are removed. ‘The pro-
longation of the olivary ganglions a, a is still covered by the transverse fibres,
The optic nerve is removed from the great fibrous bundle g, and cut at 2, g.
The pyramidal bundle is seen prolonged from the deeussation 1, to the trans-
verse interlacement 35, below the optic nerves. ‘The grey mass 17 has been
removed by scraping, to show the two cords of the mammillary bodies 16,16; the
one y, towards the transverse interlacement 35, the other, 7, towards the common
mass of communication or fornix. The nervous fibres which spread out in the
convolutions of the middle lobe, and contribute to its functions, are cut at h,h,h
between 35 and 37, on a level with the anterior commissure ; and the middle
lobe is entirely removed. The mass of grey substance of the great superior
ganglion of the brain, and a part of the convolutions situated below the great
fissure, between the middle and anterior lobes, are cut in the same direction.
We thus see how this great mass is divided by the nervous bundles S into an
inner part /, and an outer part, L L.; how the finest fibres are implanted in the
grey substance; how the convolutions 40, 41 are formed by the posterior
chords of the great fibrous bundle or crus placed before g, and what are the
depth and length of the great fissure 39, 39 between the anterior and middle
lobes. By the removal of the middle lobe, the posterior edge of the great
cerebral cavity N N becomes visible. This cavity is prolonged inwards ‘and
forwards below the great fibrous bundle or crus g. Between 40 and vii. are
seen the conyolutions situated above the fissura Sylvii between the anterior and
middle lobes. The anterior lobe is but slightly cut.

21. Internal root of the olfactory nerve. 18. Its external root. 23. Its bulb.
25, 26. Anterior lobe of the cerebrum. 27. Its middle lobe. 28. Its pos-
terior lobe. 20. Optic nerve. 32. Decussation of the optic nerves. v. Optic
nerve after its decussation. 33. Transverse interlacement of the upper edge of
the great commissure of the cerebellum. 34, 34. Transverse interlacement of
the great fibrous bundle. 36. Transverse interlacement of the nervous bundles
of the middle lobe. 37. Tranverse interlacement of the great superior cerebral
ganglion. 38, 38, 38, 38. Situation of the tissue of the two orders of nervous
filaments. 13. Pathetic nerve. 06, 6. Pons Varolii. 91. Central fissure of the
posterior part of the spinal chord. 61. Anterior commissure of the cerebrum.
— (Gall. )


According to Gall*, many primitive bundles of nervous fibres
give origin to the cerebrum and cerebellum. The anterior and
posterior corpora pyramidalia, bands proceeding immediately from
the corpora olivaria, longitudinal bands which contribute to form
the fourth ventricle, and many others concealed in the chorda
oblongata, to the cerebrum ; the corpora restiformia to the cere-
bellum.

The bands arising from the anterior pyramids are the only ones


¢ J, c. vol. i. 270. sqa.


318 ANATOMY OF


which decussate ; the two halves of the cerebrum, the cerebellum
and spinal chord, being united by commissures. MM. Magendie
and Desmoulins, just as Prochaska, Barthez, Sabatier, Boyer,
Dumas, Bichat, and Chaussier did before them, deny the decus-
sation; but it was known of old, as Gall remarks in his demon-
stration of it, and cannot be disputed. The following, from Mr.


a, Corpora olivaria; 6, Corpora pyra-
midalia, seen to discussate at their low-
est part, where are three sets of ascend-
ing fibres on each half —one turning
from behind c, the corpora restiformia,
another running straight, and the third
decussating. This writer, however,
speaks of them not as ascending, but
descending.


Mayo, shows it well. This forms an exception to the rule ob-
served in every other part of the cranial nervous organs, except
the optic nerves and the fibres which run from the genitals to
the cerebellum, of the nervous fibres, destined to each side of
the body, running on the same side of the brain; and we hence
explain why injuries of one side of the brain, causing paralysis,
generally influence the opposite side of the body.“ The spinal
chord has no decussation, whence injuries of one side of it in-
fluence the corresponding half of the body. Decussation has not
been discovered in the cerebellum; and vivisectors say that an
injury of a cerebellic hemisphere affects the same side ; but Gall
found that extirpation of a testicle caused the opposite lobe of
the cerebellum to shrink.¢

After their decussation, the bands of the anterior corpora py-
ramidalia ascend on the anrerior part of the chorda oblongata
(called by Gall the grand renflement), enlarging as they proceed.
As soon as they enter among the transverse fibres of the meso-
cephalon, called by Gall the great commissure of the cerebellum,
they divide into many bundles, which are imbedded in a large
quantity of pulpy substance, from which proceed many fibres,


¢ [ have never known an exception to this; but exceptions are recorded, and
probably some difference of situation is the reason of the difference of effect.

€ lc. vol. iii, p. 112. sqq. Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. iil. p. 291. sqq.
Dr. Vimont has repeated Gall’s experiments with the same results. Traité de
Phrénologie humaine et comparée, par J. Vimont, M.D, 2 vols. 4to. with an
atlas of 120 plates. Paris, 1832—5. vol. ii. p. 233.


GALL'S ANATOMY. 319


joining and augmenting them while passing through this ganglion,
for such it really is; so that they come out increased enough
to constitute, on the anterior and outer part, at Jeast two thirds of
the crura cerebri, or, as Gall terms them, the great fibrous bundles
of the hemispheres. They contain a large quantity of pulpy sub-
stance, and enlarge the most at their superior extremity, where
the optic nerve turns round them. Their filaments and bundles
leave the great fibrous mass at the anterior or outer side of the
optic nerve, and, diverging more and more, form the lower,
anterior, and outer convolutions of the anterior and middle lobes,
which, with the anterior and outer part of the crura and gan-
glion in the mesocephalon, are always in direct proportion to the
pyramids. (Cut, p. 311.)

The corpora olivaria are true ganglia. A large bundle pro-
ceeds from each, and ascends with the posterior bundles of the
chorda oblongata among the transverse fibres of the meso-
cephalon, like the bundles of the pyramids, t acquiring fewer
additional fibres than these from among the pulpy matter. On
leaving the mesocephalon, they form the posterior and inner
part of the crura cerebri. They acquire their greatest increase
on entering the crura, on account of the large quantity of pulpy
substance which is there, called locus niger, which, with the fibres
it produces, forms the two thalami optici, that are here pretty
firm ganglia, and are called the great inferior cerebral ganglia by
Gall. The bundles, on leaving the superior part of these ganglia,
reunite into fibres less diverging, and then traverse two other
ganglia — the corpora striata, called by Gall the external masses
of the pulpy substance of the great superior cerebral ganglion. Here
they acquire another increase, sufficient to enable them to form
the posterior lobes and all the superior convolutions of the an-
terior and middle lobes (Cut, p. 312.), which are always in direct
proportion to the thalami.

All these fibres of the brain (Cut, p. 312.) are styled by Gall
diverging, departing, or apparatus of formation. But those of
the two sides, that are united by transverse fibres or commissures,
are styled by Gall converging or entering fibres. The mesolobe is
the great commissure of the superior convolutions of the hemi-
spheres. The inferior convolutions of the anterior lobes are united
by what was called the anterior fold of the mesolobe, — by the
anterior portion of it, which was considered to bend down and thus
form the anterior extremity of the lateral ventricles, afterwards

Z


B25 GALLUS ANATOMY.


forming their floor by running on backwards, just as before bend-
ing down it had formed their ceiling. This pretended anterior
fold is consequently termed by Gall the mass of the union of
the inferior convolutions of the anterior lobes. The fornix is the
commissure of the posterior convolutions of the middle and of all
of the posterior lobe, and is called by Gall the mass of the general
communication of the brain. The lyre is the assemblage of the
filaments of union in the fornix. The pretended posterior fold
of the mesolobe is the commissure of the posterior internal con-
volutions of the middle lobe. The anterior convolutions of the
middle lobe, and some situated at the bottom of the great fissure
of Sylvius, called by Gall the great fissure between the anterior aud
middle lobes of the cerebrum, give rise, by their union, to what is
called the anterior commissure of the lateral ventricles, but by
Gall the union of the anterior convolutions of the middle lobe. The
posterior conn of the lateral ventricles cannot be traced to
the convolutions, but only just into the thalami optici, and is
therefore named by Gall the posterior commissure of the great in-
ferior cerebral ganglion. The middle commissure, for the same
reason, and on account of its softness, is called by him the soft
union of the great inferior cerebral ganglion. (Cut, p. 313. 316.)
Each of these points of union is proportionate to the parts which
it unites. Gall considers the origin of the converging fibres to
be in the superficial pulpy substance.

The converging fibres of all these commissures, after lining the
interior of the two lateral ventricles, or great cavities of the cere-
brum, as Gall styles them, while he terms the third ventricle the
space between the great inferior cerebral ganglia, interlace with the
diverging fibres, and thus form a true tissue. (Cut, p. 313. No.
35, 36. 38, 39.; p. 316. No. 33, 34. 36; 37.)

The diverging fibres are then prolonged in the form of a
fibrous expansion.

If the ventricles are opened, and their walls gently expanded
with the hand, or if fluids collect in them, as in hydrocephalus,
the tissue of diverging and converging fibres is at length lacer-
ated. After this, the expanding force acts upon merely diverging
fibres, and all the convolutions disappear ; the brain becoming
expanded into a smooth bag. A convolution is thus proved to be
two fibrous layers, placed side by side, and very slightly united :
therefore, if air or water is impelled against the centre of a


GALL’S ANATOMY. 321


convolution cut transversely, it opens this from its base to its
summit. £


A convolution. The centre (a) of the white
substance is seen opened by the impulse of air.


Many fibres, especially those at the sides, are short; while
others are longer, and this the more central they are. Hence
the prolongations and depressions of the surface of the cerebrum—
or, in other words, the convolutions. The parts most developed
have the fewest convolutions; and, in hypertrophy of the brain,
the surface is also more regular and smooth, the shorter fibres
approaching in length to the longer. The convolutions are sel-
dom quite vertical, and their white substance is thicker at their
lower parts, since there both the shorter and the longer fibres
exist.

All the fibres are covered by cineritious pulpy substance at
their extremities. _

The origin of the cerebellum is in the corpora restiformia, ac-
cording to Gall.¢ They increase as they ascend, and, entering
the cerebellum, penetrate to a mass of grey substance of a
somewhat rhomboidal form and with serrated edges, whence it is
styled corpus rhomboideum or dentatum. It is considered by Gall


* Gall, from observing the mind of hydrocephalic patients to be little or not at all
impaired, was certain that Walter, Ackerman, and numerous others, were wrong,
who maintained that the brain was destroyed in the disease. Finding a female,
54 years of age, with her head greatly enlarged, he entirely supported her, as he
informed me, till she died, in order to prove the correctness of his opinion. He
examined her brain, and was thus led to discover the true nature of the convolu-
tions and the operation of the distending fluid in hydrocephalus. Mr. Chenevix,
Dr. Spurzheim’s friend, suppresses this (British and Foreign Quarterly, 1880), and
says that a fortunate accident occasioned the discovery (p.10.). His article con-
tains other instances of inaccuracy and injustice towards Gall; but received Dr.
Spurzheim’s sanction, By this discovery alone, Gall proved that those, who still
obstinately spoke of the brain as pulp, were wrong. Pulp would be washed or
blown away at the centre, and every where else, by the impulse of air or water,
and would not separate into two regular layers. Yet I recollect that in Edinburgh,
in 1809, when I was studying, his anatomy and his assertion of the fibrous struc-
ture of the brain were ridiculed as too absurd.

* Anat. et Phys., vol. i. p. 249. sqq.


fa Tee


529 GALL’S ANATOMY.


as intended to increase the formative fibres of the cerebellum, and
therefore he terms it the ganglion of the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 311.
No.7.*; p.312. No.9.) One of the principal bands which proceed
from this advances towards the median line, and with its fellow
becomes a long rounded eminence, or ridge, rising from before
backwards, and usually called the vermiform process, but by Gall
the fundamental part of the cerebellum, because it is always found
in animals which have a cerebellum. (Cut, p. 313. No. 8.) The
other bands from the ganglion proceed upwards, downwards,
backwards, and outwards, disposed in thin horizontal layers;
those which are nearest the middle being the longest, and those
nearest the spot where the original bundles enter the ganglia the
shortest. Their extremity distant from the middle is covered
with cineritious pulpy substance. A vertical cut exhibits the
white layers as branches and twigs, each being surrounded by
cineritious substance ; the twigs so surrounded resemble leaflets ;
and the whole is known by the name of arbor vite. (Cut, p. 312,
313. 316.)

Besides these diverging fibres, there are, as in the cerebrum,
converging fibres, having no immediate connection with the pri-
mitive bundle, with the chorda oblongata, or.with the ganglion.
These arise from the pulpy substance, and proceed in different
directions among the diverging fibres towards the external an-
terior part, where those from each side, under the name of crura
cerebelli, unite together and form the mesocephalon, or, more
properly, the large commissure of the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 304.
No. 13.; p. 311. No. 9.; p. 318. No. 27.3; p. 316. 6.) Thesize of
this is in direct proportion to the size of the hemispheres of the
cerebellum, just as the corpus restiforme, ganglion, and cerebel-
lum, are all proportionate to each other. Another cerebellic
commissure exists at the vermiform process, by means of the
soft delicate layers of transverse fibres of its superior and in-
ferior part. A layer of fibres, under the name, according to
Reil, of inferior medullary veil, or commonly of valve of Vieus-
sens and processus a cerebello ad testes, or, according to Gall,
of mass of connection between the primitive part of the cerebellum
and the corpora quadrigemina, establishes a commissure between
the cerebellum and the corpora quadrigemina: and another layer,
termed by Reil the superior medullary veil, establishes a commis-
sure between the lower portion of the fundamental part or ver-
miform process and the posterior pyramidal bodies of the chorda
oblongata. (Cut, p. 313.) The fourth ventricle is a mere space


NERVES. 323


between the chorda oblongata and the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 313.
No. 8, 9, 10.) Gall terms it the space placed before the funda-
mental part of the cerebellum, just as he terms the third ventricle
the space between the great inferior cerebral ganglions; and the
lateral ventricles he styles the great cavities of the cerebrum.
Dr. Macartney has lately declared that the sides of the ence-
phalic cavities are so closely applied to each other that no cavity
really exists; so that there is merely an extension of internal
surface.)


The encephalon communicates with the rest of the body by
the spinal chord and other chords termed nerves. These appear
proceeding from its base and from the spinal chord. If we in-
spect the base of the brain (see Cut, p. 304.), we observe, besides
the cerebrum and cerebellum with their lobes, the mesocephalon
and chorda oblongata, the corpora albicantia, pons Tarini, tuber
cinereum, infundibulum, and pituitary gland — the four latter of
which are, like the parts in the ventricles, most absurdly named,
and the five latter of which are masses of pulpy substance — eleven
pairs of nerves : — the glosso-pharyngeal, for taste only; the olfac-
tory, for smell only; optic, for sight only ; acoustic, for hearing
only; three conveying volition to the muscles of the eye, the
common motors, trochleare or pathetic or internal motor, and ab-
ducent or external motor ; the lingual, conveying volition to the
muscles of the tongue; the facial, conveying volition to some
muscles of the face ; the vagum, or, according to Chaussier, pbeu-
mo-gastric, but correctly pneumono-gastrici,—a pair of sense
and motion, communicating between the lungs, larynx, trachea,
and stomach, &c., and the brain; and the trigeminum, which also
is double, and furnishes many nerves giving common sensibility to
the face and head at large, and conveys the will to the muscles
of the lower jaw. *


” Report of the Third Meeting of the British Scientific Association, p. 453.

Such words, compounded of two Greek or Latin nouns, are made with the
dative of the first, its last syllable being generally made to end in o. The geni-
tive of mvetuwr is mvevudvos, and the dative myevydu, See my paper on the Medi-
cinal Properties of Creosote, in the 19th vol. of the Transactions of the Royal
Med. and Chir. Society, p. 11. sq.

* In old language, the glosso-pharyngeal ; the first; second ; portio mollis of
the seventh ; the third, fourth or pathetic, and sixth; ninth; portio dura of the
seventh; the eighth, of which the glosso-pharyngeal was considered a part; and
the fifth, or mixed pair, as Gall called it from being satisfied of its mixed functions.


Zz 3


494 NERVES.


The olfactory, optic, and common and internal motors of the
eye, arise from the cerebrum or mesocephalon; the rest from
the chorda oblongata. From the chorda spinalis, thirty-one pairs
of nerves, double in substance and function, like the trigeminum,
proceed on each side, by an anterior and a posterior root ;—
eight pairs in the neck—the first above the first cervical ver-
tebra, the last below the last cervical vertebra; twelve in the
back; and five-in the loins, — the last below the last lumbar verte-
bra. The anterior root of these double nerves is smaller than the
posterior, and each begins by many filaments, which unite in
their passage out. The posterior root forms a ganglion, and the
nerve externally to this unites with the anterior nerve.

, The five pairs of the lumbar portion, proceed, enclosed in mem-
Brahe, together with five or six other pairs, from the bulbous
extremity of the chord, and pass through the foramina of the
sacrum. ‘This splitting of the chord is termed the chorda eguina.
Besides these, a pair arises at about the seventh or eighth cervical
pair, called accessory, running up into the cranium through the
foramen magnum, and coming in contact with the pneumono-
gastric nerve; and it passes out again through the foramen
lacerum.

Many nerves unite: for instance, twigs of the portio dura with
twigs of all the branches of the trigeminum; and twigs of the
ninth with the lingual branch of the trigeminum. Many nerves
unite to separate again, forming what are termed plexuses ; and
the nerves running into and from a plexus may be different in
number. (Cut, p. 315.) On some nerves we observe nodules of
various shapes, called ganglions ; and sometimes more than one
nerve have the same ganglion. We have seen that Gall applies
the word ganglion to masses of nervous substance also in the
encephalon and spinal chord; and other anatomists, in a similar
manner, apply it to the enlargements of the fifth cerebral nerve
and of the posterior spinal nerves.

Nerves are collections of white filaments contained in delicate
membranes, and united into fibres like those of the brain, and
all invested with another membrane, called neuwrtlema, which again
is enclosed in a firm white membrane. M. Raspail has lately ex-
amined them, and finds them to be aggregations of solid cylin-
ders, each invested, like muscular fibrils, with a fine membrane,
and the whole with a common covering to formatrunk.! He de-
clares that no tube exists in them, as many have asserted. A


' Nouveau Systeme, § 513. sqq.


PLEXUSES. 325


thin transverse section of a branch of a ganglionic nerve ex-
“


Slice of a branch of a ganglionic nerve. —(M. Raspail.)


hibits a single chord; but a similar section of the median of the
arm exhibits several, every chord having its own membrane, as


*

Slice of the median nerve of the #. :
the cut ends of the fibrils are seen, with
\ the covering of every bundle, and of the


‘ whole. ‘The single spot represents a
blood-vessel. —(M. Raspail.)


well as the whole one in common; and their number is greater,
the further from the head the examination is made.

A longitudinal view presented the filaments with a granulated
appearance, like the orifices of tubes; but this was probably the
effect of the refraction of light, and it occurred when other
textures were examined in the same way. (See first cut over-
leaf.) Each cylinder of a human nerve is said by M. Raspail to
be about 00787 of an inchin diameter.™

Though the fibres are parallel, their filaments continually unite,
so that a nerve appears more or less reticular.

A plexus is the same arrangement on a large scale."

Ganglions consist, like the encephalon and spinal chord, and


m Professor Ehrenberg says that the olfactory and optic nerves, and the branches
of the sympathetic, are entirely composed of granulated or knotted fibres ; while
nerves of motion and the regular spinal nerves are cylindrical and tubular, and
continuations of knotted fibres of the brain now become cylindrical.

» Dr. Macartney asserts, indeed, that in all plexuses a complete mingling of the
substance of all the nerves takes place, and that there no less is a mingling of the
roots of the spinal nerves with the spinal chord. (I. c. p. 451.)

Z 4


$26 GANGLIONS.


eth it \C DPIEL P/M


Longitudinal view of the fibrils of a nerve. — (M. Raspail.)


the swellings at the roots of the nerves of sense, called also
ganglia, of white fibrous substance, and of a pulpy, greyish, red-
dish, or whitish substance in which this is plunged and from which
it is easily distinguished. The white filaments anastomose and
interlace or mingle most freely, and membranes exist similar to
those of nerves, within them and without. M. Raspail represents
a ganglion like the median nerve, only that the separate portions
half enclose each other.


Slice of a ganglion of the sympa-
thetic nerve. The nervous trunks
are only half enclosed in each other,
but all inacommon covering. The
black spots represent blood-vessels,
—(M. Raspail. )


GANGLIONS. 327


Besides the ganglia of the encephalon and of encephalic and
spinal nerves at their origin, there are, on each side, several
ganglia in the head ;—the ophthalmic or lenticular, the spheno-pa-
latine or Meckel’s, and the cavernous, the otic, and sub-maxillary ;
there are three cervical; twelve dorsal; five lumbar ; and five
or six sacral; one at the heart, called cardiac; and two in the
abdomen, called semilunar. Branches connect them with the
encephalic and spinal nerves. Single branches run longitudinally
between them all, connecting their whole series; and the lines
unite in a single ganglion on the os coccygis. Old anatomists
gave the whole the name of sympathetic or intercostal nerve,
and supposed it to arise from the encephalo-spinal nerves.o The
ganglionic nerves are less firm than the encephalo-spinal, and of
a less clear white.

We must not forget that every part of the nervous system
throughout the body is directly connected with others, and in-
directly with all the rest, just as is every blood-vessel in regard
to its system.

Nerves subdivide and soften till they are lost, with the ex-
ception of the optic, which expands into a membrane called retina,
and of the coalition of nerves. The diameters of branches are
said usually to exceed that of a trunk.

I have used the words prolongations, arise, &c., but merely for
the purpose of ocular description ; since Gall has shown that the
nerves and spinal chord do not arise from the brain, but only
communicate with it ; nor the spinal nerves from the spinal chord :
for, when the brain is absent, the foetus may equally possess ence-
phalic nerves and spinal chord P ; and, when the chord is absent, the
foetus may equally possess spinal nerves ; and the brain and spinal
chord, and the brain and encephalic nerves, are in no proportion
to each other in the various species of the animal kingdom, nor
the spinal nerves to the spinal chord, nor does the latter diminish
as the nerves go off.

The idea of the nerves proceeding from the brain is as un-
founded as that of the arteries proceeding from the heart, or one
portion of an extremity from another. Foetuses are seen with an
arterial system, and no heart; others born with no arms, but


° Writers say cerebro-spinal. But, if cerebrum is not allowed its classical
meaning — the whole cranial nervous mass, as well as its scientific application to
a portion only, the term cerebro-spinal must be replaced by encephalo-spinal.

P Gall, 4to.t. ii. p. 77. sq.; $vo. vol. i. sect. ii, For spinal nerves without
chord, see Hist. de ! Acad. des Sciences, 1746, p. 42.


328 GALL’S ANATOMY.


fingers at the shoulders. Independently of contrary arguments,
we may demand proofs of the opinion : none are given; and it
has, no doubt, been derived from the shooting of vegetables.
Gall’s opinion is now universal. Yet, when he wrote, he found
no recent modern writer doubt that the spinal chord was a pro-
longation of the encephalon.4

When I published my last edition, Gall’s anatomy was so little
known, and his mode of dissecting the brain by tracing its con-
stituent parts so disregarded, that I felt it right to express my
wonder, as one of his disciples, M. Barbeguitre, did thirty years
ago in Berlin’, that, while students were not instructed to dissect
limbs and trunks by slices, as we cut brawn, they should be taught
no other mode of examining the brain, and thus be left in igno-
rance of its true structure. But now his anatomical discoveries
are referred to in every good book upon anatomy ; and are given
at full length in Dr. Cloquet’s Manuel d’ Anatomie descriptive,
and the excellent Elements of Anatomy by Dr. Quain; and his
mode of dissecting the brain is taught in all the best schools.s


4 “ This was the opinion of MM. Sabatier, Portal, Chaussier, Boyer, Cuvier,

Fodéré, Dumas, Ackerman, Walter, &c.” (Anat. et Physiol., vol. i. p. 50.),

. just as of the ancients, and of other moderns, except Bartholin and Vieussens ;

of whom the former began to doubt, and the latter, indeed, expressed himself
decidedly ; but then in his descriptions and figures Vicussens still represented
the brain as the origin of all the nerves ; — an inconsistency committed by Soem-
merring, who, while he regards the spinal chord as self-existent, declares it is
produced by the mixture of the medulla of the cerebrum and cerebellum. Haller,
Soemmerring, Blumenbach, derived the nerves from the brain and spinal chord ;
Prochaska, Reil, Bichat, Cuvier, even the ganglions also from the latter; and all
continued to regard it as a prolongation of the encephalon. The French com-
missioners gave way; but Ackerman and Walter persisted! (I. c. vol. i. p. 49.
sqq-)

* Exposition de la Doctrine de Gall sur le Cerveau et le Crane, par Dr. C. H. E.
Bischoff ; traduit de la seconde édition de l’Allemand, par G. Barbeguiére.
Berlin, 1806. “ Is it not the height of folly to pretend to demonstrate the brain
accurately by destroying it in slices?”’ (p. 19.)

* We may see in a report of Cuvier’s, upon the experiments of M. Fleurens,
after the fall of Napoleon, his admission of many of Gall’s discoveries, which, in
order to please Napoleon, who was jealous of the German, from being vexed
with the honours paid by the Institute to another foreigner, — our countryman
Sir Humphry Davy, he had previously doubted, or absolutely denied (having been
favourable to Gall’s views till he suddenly learned Napoleon's feelings) in a
report presented by him and others upon Gall’s anatomical discoveries to the
French Institute, in 1808 ; —« A report,” says Gall, which will always be
one of the most valuable proofs of the backward state of the anatomical and


NERVOUS SYSTEM. 329


There are great varieties in the absolute and relative amount
of the several portions of the nervous system. But the brain of


physiological knowledge of the nervous system at that time, and how much
science owes me in this respect.” (Sur les Fonctions du-Cerveau, t. vi. p. 318.)
Even in this report, Cuvier had been obliged to confess that “ the most accredited
method of the schools, and that usually recommended in books of anatomy,
is to take away successive slices of the brain, and observe the appearances
offered by each. This is the easiest in practice for demonstration, but it is
the most difficult for the imagination. The true relation of parts, which are
always seen cut across, escape not only the pupil, but the master himself.’’ Yet,
rather than give Gall the due credit of unfolding the brain from the chorda ob-
longata, the Committee of the Institute pretended that Varolius and Vieussens
had, two centuries before, done the same thing ; whereas Vieussens dissected the
brain from the centrum ovale, and he is declared by the Committee to have
practised the same mode of dissection that Warolius employed. Varolius, on
the contrary, began his dissection at the base, yet not in order to trace the parts
from the base, through the brain, but simply, he says, because the brain com-
pressed the several organs at the base, against the skull, especially in the dead
body, and rendered the ordinary mode of dissecting from above inconvenient.
He had so false an idea of the anatomy of the brain, that he conceived the crura
cerebri and cerebelli were shoots from the respective parts, and produced the
spinal chord : while, however, he also declares the spinal chord to be formed
from the cerebrum, between the hemispheres and the pons! In truth, our coun-
tryman Dr. Willis, who lived a century and a half ago (Cerebri Anatome), was
the first who objected to slicing and dissected the brain from the base; but by
base he understood the corpora striata and the thalami: and from these he hath
ascended and descended to the chorda oblongata. (Rapport des Commissaires de
LP’ Institut de France, in Gall’s Recherches sur le Systeme Nerveuu en général, et sur
le Cerveau en particulier.)

The Edinburgh Review, which we shall see viewed the whole doctrines of Gall,
“© anatomical, physiological, and physiognomical,” as a piece of thorough quack-
ery from beginning to end, in June, 1815, did him justice, like Cuvier, lately, in
a most remarkable manner, but without the generosity of mentioning his name.
(No. xciv. 1828.) ‘ Even within our own time,” it now says, ‘ although many
great anatomists devoted themselves almost exclusively to dissecting the brain,
this organ used to be demonstrated by the greater number of teachers, in a manner
which, however invariable, was assuredly not particularly useful. It was so me-
chanically cut down upon, as to constitute a sort of exhibition worth nothing. The
teacher and the pupil were equally dissatisfied with the performance, and the former
probably the most. The latter soon gave up the painful attempt to draw any kind
of deduction from what he witnessed, and disposed of the difficulty as he best could,
when he had to render an account of what he had seen. Up to this day, our me-
mory is pained by the recollection of the barbarous names and regular sections of
what was then the dullest part of anatomical study, which, although often re-
peated, left no trace but of its obscurity or absurdity. Here an oval space of


330 WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN.


an adult, probably between 20 and 60 years of age, is said
to weigh, on the average, between 40 and 50 ounces; the


ee ee ee


white colour, and there a line of grey, or one of red, were displayed; here a
cineritious, there a medullary, mass: here a fraction white without, grey within ;
there a fraction white within, and grey without: here a gland pituitary, there a
gland like grains of sand: here a ventricle, and there a cul de sac with endless
fibres, and lines, and globules, and simple marks with appellations no less fanciful
than devoid of meaning.” These are just Gall’s views, for which he was loaded
with opprobrium. Anat. et Physiol., vol. i. p. 287. sq. 285.

Loder, who not only had attended Gall’s lectures at Halle, but dissected nine
human and thirteen brute brains with him, adds, after specifying Gall’s ana-
tomical discoveries, ‘“« These discoveries alone would be sufficient to immortalise
Gall’s name: they are the most important which have been made in anatomy
since the discovery of the absorbents. The discovery of the unfolding of the
brain is admirable.” ‘¢I am ashamed and indignant with myself for having,
with others, been slicing hundreds of brains, like cheese: J never perceived the
forest for the multitude of the trees.” “I say, with Reil, that I have found more
than I thought one man could discover in the course of his life.””*

“ Reil,” said Professor Bischoff, above thirty years ago, ‘ who, as a profound
anatomist and judicious physiologist, requires not my praise, rising superior to al}
the littlenesses of vanity, has declared that he found more in Gall’s dissections of
the brain than he thought any man could have discovered in his whole life.” Ea-
_ position, just quoted, p. xxvi.

Such is the judgment of Reil on what Mr. Mayo calls Gall’s “ popular and
showy anatomy,” dependent for its correctness, when it is correct, “ rather to
bold and fortunate conjecture, than to cautious and philosophical research ; ”’
amounting to “little more than an expansion of the views of Willis,” and desti-
tute of the force of ‘demonstration which belongs to the researches of ” Reil —
their “ rival.’? Gall, so far from regarding Reil as a rival, thus speaks of him :
— «“ With what readiness would the nervous system, this noble part of anatomy
and physiology, the knowledge of which has so long made such small progress,
have been restored to its dignity, if, in every country, men like Reil, animated
with the love of truth, and endowed with a spirit of profound observation, had fol-
lowed his example! We are proud that the discoveries made by this able
naturalist in the cerebellum, by following a totally different course from ours,
agree so perfectly with ours” (Anat. et Physiol., p- 250.) In truth, Gall was
too good towards Reil; for, after Gall’s report to the French Institute, Reil,
from whom Gall was said by Dr.Gordon and Mr. Mayo to have borrowed, but
from whom he could have learned nothing, because Reil had not published at
the time of Gall's discoveries, promulgated, in his Archives, views similar to
those of Gall, without, indeed, claiming them as his own, but without ascribing
them to Gall or any one. He also gave the parts different names — such as


* Bischoff, lc. p. xxix. Also Gall, 4to. vol. iv. p. 378. sqq.; 8vo. t. vi.
p. 493. In this sixth volume will be found copious answers to Tiedemann,
Rudolphi, Serres, &c., and a refutation of many of their anatomical assertions.


WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN. $31


spinal chord about an ounce and a half; and the corresponding
nerves, could they be collected to their minutest ramification,


wings, mountains, teeth, lobules — agreeable to none but mechanical dissectors,
who, like Dr. Gordon, as Dr. Spurzheim remarks, consider the anatomy of the
brain unnecessary to physiological and pathological views.

Gall demonstrated the brain to Reil in the summer of 1805 privately, and so
much pleased him that he gave Gall some of his drawings. (Ezamination of the
Objections made in Great Britain, &c., by Dr. Spurzheim. Lond.1817.) Dr.Spurz-
heim here says, that Gall and he demonstrated. But he had been engaged by
Gall only some months before as his assistant and dissector; and Reil’s presents
in return were, he confesses, all to Gall. Reil calls them Gaill’s demonstrations,
and wonders at such discoveries being made by one man. A medal had been
already struck to Gall at Berlin (Bischoff, p. xvi.) ; all the attacks for both the
Anatomy and Physiology were made upon Gall; and all the accounts of the
anatomy and physiology published by his pupils were given as of his discoveries,
without the mention of Dr. Spurzheim’s name, except once, when he is thus
spoken of as Gall’s assistant at lecture: — ‘ Gall unfolded the convolutions
without any difficulty by means of the fingers of the director Spurzheim.”
(Cranologie, ow Découvertes nouvelles du Docteur I. J. Gall, concernant le Cer-
veau, le Crane, et les Organes; ouvrage traduit de ? Allemand. Paris, 1807, p. 32.,
the original having appeared at Dresden in 1805.) We learn from this, which
curiously enough is the only notice of Dr. Spurzheim in the early history of Phre-
nology, how Gall and he demonstrated! ‘While at Vienna, we spoke of the
great leading points of our anatomical demonstration.” In 1805, at Berlin,
we repeated our anatomical demonstration.” ‘¢ Outlines of our anatomical and
physiological propositions were published during that spring by Professor Bis-
choff.” This is the work already quoted. Now, Bischoff speaks of them solely
as Gall’s, and does not once mention Dr. Spurzheim’s name, ‘“ At Dresden,
M. Bloéde published outlines of ows anatomical and physiological views.” I
have read Bloéde, in the work just referred to, and translated at Paris under the
title of Cranologie, —a part of which is called Décowvertes Anatomiques du
Docteur Gall, @aprés V Exposition du Docteur Bloéde, —and find only Gall men-
tioned, except in the quotation just made, where he is said to haye used the fingers
of his managing man Spurzheim to unfold the convolutions. The accuracy of
Bloéde’s work is vouched for on the ground of its being approved of by “ the
discoverer Gall.” (p. xv.) Dr. Spurzheim then goes on to say that Gall and he
continued to lecture and demonstrate the brain in Weimar, Jena, Gottingen,
Brunswick, Hamburgh, Keil, Copenhagen. Now, he never gave a lecture ; and
only obeyed Gall’s orders mechanically in silence, while Gall was demonstrating.
Dr. Spurzheim never then pretended to discoveries ; and yet all the great discoveries
were already made. Gall assured me that the discoveries, both anatomical and
physiological, made after he engaged Dr. Spurzheim as his assistant, were merely
slight modifications, — des nuances were the words he used; and the truth of this
is evident to those acquainted with the early literature of the new anatomy and
physiology of the brain. Dr. Spurzheim himself affords, in many parts, refutations


332 WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN.


would weigh several ounces. The ganglions and ganglionic
nerves can weigh but little comparatively. Dr. Macartney de-


of his unjust and absurd attempts to arrogate what is not hisdue. For instance,
he says (Anatomy of the Brain, p. 148.), “ Modern anatomists before Gall and
myself were divided in opinion on the subject of the decussation.” Yet at p. xi.
he says that, having completed his studies in 1804, he was associated with Gall,
‘‘and at this period Dr. Gall, in the Anatomy, spoke of the decussation of the
pyramidal bodies ; of their passage through the pons Varolii, of eleven layers of
longitudinal and transverse fibres in the pons, &c.”!! Yet at p. 5. Dr. Spurzheim
says the opinion that the white substance was fibrous is that ‘‘ which Dr. Gall and
I have espoused.” An instance of his short-sighted ambition is afforded at p. 95.
of his Anatomy, where he positively says, “ Before Dr. Gall and J began our
researches, all other anatomists were in the habit of cutting down the brain by
slices, &c. ;”? whereas, before Gall ever saw him, Gall had taught his new method
to thousands: Gall taught it to him among the rest, and engaged him as his pro-
sector. At p.178., he says, “ Until Dr. Gall and J published, it was the custom
to take merely mechanical views of these” (the commissures); whereas, in
Bloéde and Bischoff it appears that Gall taught all the true views of them before
he saw Dr.Spurzheim. At p. 110. he says, “* Dr. Galland J claim the merit of
having been the first to compare the relations between the development of dif-
ferent cerebral parts and peculiar functions.’’ When every where, even in the first
volume of the 4to. work, to which Gall, in the kindness of his heart, affixed
Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his own, in order, as he often said, to encourage
him, and because he thought that Dr. Spurzheim would carry on phrenology
after his death as he himself had done, Dr. Spurzheim, like all the world, ac-
knowledges Gall to have been the first discoverer of the functions of different
parts of the brain, and of course through observing development. At p. 115. he
claims this all for himself! though at p. xvi. of the preface to Gall’s 4to. work,
with his name added by Gall, this is all given to Gall. « J claim the merit of
having been the first to maintain that the analogy or differences of cerebral parts
in different classes ought to be determined by the combined aid of Anatomy
and Physiology ”’!! Dr. Spurzheim gives another striking refutation of his own
assumption. Gall had made and promulgated his discoveries, when Dr.Spurzheim,
as he himself admits, having finished his studies in 1804, joined Gall. (Anatomy
of the Brain. London, 1826. p. xi.) Yet, in his eagerness to be equal with
Gall, he unluckily writes, in his Examination, &c., “ I beg to observe that, in
the summer of 1805, we demonstrated to Reil the same leading points in the
anatomy of the brain which we still maintain!” He whose fingers only were
employed on the occasion! he who had joined Gall but a few months from the
class room! In truth, the new anatomy of the brain did not consist in this
little detail of discovery, or that, but in grand general views of structure; and this
was entirely Gall’s, and completed before Dr. Spurzheim knew any thing of the
matter, Possibly Dr. Spurzheim occasionally made a few little mechanical dis-
coveries, like the person who was Gall’s previous dissector, a M. Niklas; of
whom Gall says in his preface (4to. vol. i. p. xvi), “I taught M. Niklas my method


WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN. 333


clares he has ascertained the real nervous substance to be so incon-
siderable, that he thinks “ it is, perhaps, not assuming too much


of dissecting the brain ; and, thanks to his industry and address, he made such pro-
gress that he directed my attention to many mechanical points till then unknown.”
But Dr. Spurzheim, like him, worked under Gall: was ordered to dissect this and
that, and to ascertain what was the fact on this point or on that: and the shades of
discovery, as Gall terms them, made after he was engaged by Gall, must evidently
be ascribed to the working master-mind, and not to the fingers of him who only
obeyed, and received his knowledge all but perfect at first, and was very long before
he could be taught by Gall to dissect a brain decently according to Gall’s
method. Gall told me that he taught Dr. Fossati in a quarter of the time it cost
him to teach Dr. Spurzheim. Because M. Niklas worked and discovered me-
chanically, Dr, Spurzheim declares (Notes, {c., p- 61.) that the investigations
directed by Gall had merely mechanical views, and, referring to the last quota-
tion for his proof, he insinuates that Gall’s investigations were too mechanical:
whereas, Gall’s merit was in rejecting all mechanical views. Dr. Spurzheim’s
character is put by himself in the strongest light in the Notes (p. 60. sq.), by |
his quoting with triumph a passage from Gall, in which are the words, “ beaucoup
de personnes manifestent une tendence singuliére d’attribuer nos découvertes a
d’autres, par exemple, a Reil ; et M. Spurzheim a déja dans plusieurs endroits re-
vendiqué norre propriété.” Now, Dr.Spurzheim knew that Gall used the plural,
according to the habit of authors, for the singular: because, immediately before
this passage, in the large edition, Gall says, ‘* J have repeated, and ordered to be
repeated, hundreds of times, the researches upon the brain. Sometimes we
thought we had discovered something new ; but, by repeating the dissections,
we have always come back to owr old ideas, Therefore J have no reason to mo-
dify what J said in the first volume of this work.’’ He then, in both editions, in
order, he says, to set those right who ignorantly attribute the discoveries to others,
subjoins to this passage the declarations already quoted, of Reil and Loder,
respecting his anatomical discoveries, which they ascribe to Gall alone; and
finishes with a summary of all the anatomical and physiological discoveries,
speaking of them as his own entirely. (Gall, 4to. vol. iv. p. 377. sq. ; 8vo. t. vi.
p. 490.) In the volume and a half to which Gall affixed Dr. Spurzheim’s name
with his own, he always wrote in the plural ; in the rest, he from the first wrote
generally in the singular; and he refers in the singular to what he had said in
the first volume in the plural. (See 1. c. p. 378. supra; and vol. ii. p. 213.) I
give another striking instance of Dr. Spurzheim’s self-refutation, and the short-
sightedness for which he was remarked in Paris when under the influence of his
inordinate love of fame. Gall kindly affixed Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his
own, not only to his great work, but also to the memoir presented to the French
Institute. Yet Dr. Spurzheim acknowledges that the Commissioners received the
discoveries as Gall’s; for, in order to show that Reil must have known the
discoveries before writing, he quotes, in his Notes to the Foreign Quarterly
(p. 59.), the following words, with which they opened their report; — “The
anatomical doctrine of Gall, through the delivery of lectures by him in the chief
cities of Europe, and the numerous extracts published by his pupils, have be-


354 WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN,


to suppose that the whole nervous system, if sufficiently expanded,
would be found too tender to give any resistance to the touch,


come nearly as well known as though they had appeared in an authentic impres-
sion."’ In these Notes he says that he settled his anatomical account with Gall
in 1820, and that Gall never answered this and other claims. Gall certainly
never would have condescended so far. Indeed, Gall was perfectly ignorant of
the greater part that Dr. Spurzheim wrote. After reading some of Dr. Spurz-
heim’s first English work published on his arrival in England, Gall gave the
book with disgust, but half cut, to Dr. Fossati, and knew nothing more of Dr.
Spurzheim’s sayings and writings afterwards than what was pointed out to him:
and it was with the greatest difficulty that he could be prevailed upon to take any
notice, even for a moment, of what was pointed out to him. My friends Dr.
Fossati and Dr. Dancey, who were constantly with Gall, assure me of this, and
are astonished at Dr. Spurzheim. Indeed, Gall, in the preface to his third 4to.
volume, which contains all the anatomy, had, in 1818, given an answer to all
Dr. S.’s anatomical claims. He shows that Dr. S. had no more to do with the
volume, than to furnish the references. (p. xvii.) At the end of his 8vo. work,
Gall also disposes of these claims by summing up the anatomical discoveries as
his own. Inthe American edition of his Phrenology (vol. i. p. 12 ), Dr. S. grows
so ambitious that he no longer shares with Gall, but at once boldly asserts, “ all
anatomical discoveries made after 1804 are the result of my labours: and in
his Anatomy (p. xiv.), he madly says, as to Gall’s 4to. volume, “* My discoveries
form its principal object”! ! !

When Gall was entreated to do himself justice with Dr. Spurzheim, he always
mildly answered that enough had been published of his discoveries before Dr.
Spurzheim’s time for posterity to see Dr. Spurzheim’s folly; and that all the
world knew the great quarto work to be his, though he had been silly enough to
join Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his own. I fear that Dr. Spurzheim relied on
Gall’s dignified pride for escaping his deserts.

Yet among those who never saw Gall, and who have derived their knowledge
second-hand from Dr. Spurzheim’s works, and read slightly, or not at all, the
works of Gall, and especially those who, in addition to these disadvantages,
mixed much with Dr. Spurzheim, his pretensions are allowed. In France he was
nothing: his lectures little attended, while Gall’s were crowded; and he ne-
glected, while Gall had high practice and the highest consideration. But Gall’s
works have not been translated, while Dr. Spurzheim published again and again
in English, and spent much of his time in Great Britain, and died in America.
The result here and in America cannot be better shown than, first, in the following
ridiculous passage from “ an anatomical report on the skull of Dr. Spurzheim,
read before the Boston Phrenological Society, by Dr. N. B. Shurtleff, and
printed in the Boston Annals of Phrenology : —‘ Having been appointed a com-
mittee on the skull of our lamented friend Spurzheim, the anatomist, who, by dis-
secting the brain, first displayed to the eye its fibrous and ganglionary structure,
and demonstrated the direction and connection of its filaments,” &c.! But
the case is much worse, when I mention that this piece of folly and ignorance is


DURA MATER. 535


too transparent to be seen, and probably would entirely escape
the cognizance of all our senses.” 8


The nervous system is invested with peculiar coverings.

“ Besides the bony cranium, a threefold covering is afforded to
the brain*, viz. the dura and pia mater, and, between these two,
the tunzca arachnoidea. These coverings are termed meninges.

*« The dura mater y” belongs to the class of fibrous membranes,
and “ lines the inside of the cranium, like a periosteum, forming
various processes. By the falx it divides the hemispheres of the
cerebrum and cerebellum?; by the tentorium it supports the


ees


published in the last Number of the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal (June 1.
1836) without any remark. When I arrive at the subject of Phrenology, I shall
resume this task of doing justice to Gall.

* Dr. Sims has just published, in the 19th vol, of the Trans. of the Royal Med.-
Chir. Society, the most extensive averages of the weight of the brain. His average
weight of the adult brain, between 20 and 60 years of age, is from rather above
44 to rather above 46 ounces.

"], c. p. 450. sq.

* «¢ Kustachius, tab. xvii. xviii,

Haller, Icones Anat., fase. vi. tab. i. ii. iii.


ee ses


F. B. Osiander, in the Comment. Soc. Reg. Scient. Gotting., vol. xvi. p. 105.
tab. i. ii.

Detm. W. Soemmerring, De oculor. sect. horizontali, tab. i.”

¥ «J. Ladmiral, Icones dure matris in concava et convera superficie vise, Amst.
17385 tase. 1. i1., Ato; *

Sir Anthony Carlisle, on opening a woman who had died after amputation of
a foot, found no falx. The cerebrum was not divided into hemispheres. The
edge of the longitudinal sinus was received into a depression, about half an inch
deep, that existed along the middle of the superior part of the cerebrum. The
head had been unaffected, and the mental faculties perfect, as far as observation
was made during the woman’s stay in the Westminster H ospital. (Transactions
of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Chirurgical Knowledge, vol. i.
p- 212. sqq-)

I presented to the London Phrenological Society, the cast of the head of a
male idiot, aged eighteen years, that was given me by Dr, F ormby, of Liverpool,
and is only 16 inches in circumference, and 72 inches from ear to ear over the
vertex. The cerebrum weighed but 1 Ib. 730z. The hemispheres were united
as far back as the vertex, and no falx existed except for about two inches from the
anterior part of the tentorium.

a « Tn the skulls of some genera of mammalia, a remarkable lamina of bone
penetrates a duplicature of the tentorium and supports it. Cheselden (Anat. of
the Bones, c. 8.) supposes this bony tentorium to exist in Jere only ; but it is
found in the equine genus, the cercopithecus paniscus, the delphinus phocena,

AA


336 ARACHNOID.


posterior lobes of the cerebrum, and prevents their pressure upon
the subjacent cerebellum.


4


iS


i d Di

TA] f

i yg
l


an


Hla
: KG


Hi


1, Falx, 2. Tentorium. 3, 3. Superior longitudinal sinus. 4. Inferior longi-
tudinal sinus, and, 5. Venz Galeni; both opening into, 6. The straight sinus.
7. Posterior extremity of the superior longitudinal sinus. 8. A small portion
of the left lateral sinus. 9. The confluence of the sinuses, or Torcular Herophili.
10. Right lateral sinus. 11. Internal jugular vein.


“In its various duplicatures it contains and supports the venous
sinuses,” which receive blood from the veins of the brain, and
convey it to the internal jugular vein, “ and it prevents their
pressure.” It is prolonged in a tubular form throughout the
canal of the spine, and has openings for the various encephalo-
spinal nerves, and is prolonged a very short distance around the
greater part.

“ Next to the dura mater lies the arachnoid, so named from its
thinness.” It is a serous membrane, “ destitute of blood-vessels,
and extended, like the dura mater, merely over the substance of


orycteropus capensis, &c. Its use is uncertain ; that which is generally ascribed
to it (for instance, by Laur. Nihell, De Cerebro. Edin. 1780. p. 4.),—of pro-
tecting the cerebellum in those mammalia which leap very swiftly — is improbable,
because we find it in the bear and other animals of still slower motion, and not in
the ibex which moves with the greatest rapidity.”

> « Vieussens, Neurograph. wniversal., tab. xvii. fig. 1.

Duverney, @uvres anatom., vol. i. tab. iv.

Haller, Zcones Anat., fase. i. tab. vi.

Walter, De morbis peritonai et apoplexia. Berol. 1785. 4to. tab. iii. iy,

Vieq @ Azyr, Planches Anatomigques, xxxii. et xxxy.”’


ARACHNOID. 337


the brain, without following the course of its furrows and promi-
nences;” but it enters the third ventricle by an oval opening, dis-
covered by Bichat in the base of the telum choridianum, sur-
rounded by the vene Galeni, and leading from a canal called
avachnoidean between the corpora quadrigemina and pineal gland,
and it lines the third and afterwards the two lateral and fourth
ventricles. It is a close sac, thus affording, as the peritoneum
does to the abdominal viscera, a double covering to the whole
brain and spinal chord, and to the nerves before their departure
through the foramina of the dura mater, and lining the four ven-
tricles ; insulating the organs on which it lies, and affording them
great facility of movement ; and liable to all the morbid affections
of serous membranes. ¢

Between the pia mater and arachnoid of both the brain and
spinal chord, Dr. Magendie says he has discovered the existence,
during life, of a large quantity of clear and colourless fluid, pass-
ing from the surface of one organ to that of the other.¢ Cotugno®
had long ago asserted its existence in the cranial and spinal
cavities, after death, and its free communication, and accurately
described its qualities ; but, notwithstanding he gave excellent
reasons for believing its existence during life, he imagined the
space around the spinal chord, observed by him to be larger in
the emaciated and old, and the space which in these two descrip-
tions of subjects he found also around the brain, to be filled with
an aqueous vapour; he also believed its occasional mixture with
the fluid of the ventricles. Many deny at present that more than
vapour exists during life and health in any serous membrane. But
I certainly saw, as I formerly mentioned, a large quantity of clear
fluid pass from the spinal canal the instant that Dr. Magendie
opened it, in one of his barbarous experiments, which, I am
ashamed to say, I witnessed, and in which he began by coolly
cutting out a large round piece from the back of a beautiful little
puppy, as he would from an apple dumpling. Dr. Magendie
thinks he has proved the communication, not only of the fluids
of the spinal with that of the cranial cavity, but also of these with
that of the ventricles, by an opening at the point of the calamus
scriptorius of the fourth.f He conceives it to move from one


© Bichat, Traité des Membranes.

* Journal de Physiologie, t. v.

® Dissertatio de Ischiade Nervosa. Published in Sandefort’s Thesaurus.
* Journal de Physiologie, t. vii. p. 21.


AA 2


$38 ARACHNOID.


part to another, as they are severally compressed by sanguineous
turgescence during muscular efforts. He says he never observed
the fluid escape at the spot near the vene Galeni. There is no
doubt that he did not, nor by any other: for large serous accu-
mulations often exist in the head, and none in the spine. Most
persons have no doubt that the fluid is usually contained, not be-
tween the arachnoid and pia mater, but in the serous membrane —
the arachnoid. Because, Ist, the true anatomy of the parts shows
that the old opinion is wrong, — shows that the arachnoid is ‘a sac
like all other serous membranes, and covers the brain and lines
the dura mater ; that the ventricles are lined not with pia mater,
but with the arachnoid, under which the pia mater exists only as
subserous cellular membrane ; and that hydrocephalus is analo-
gous with dropsies of the pericardium, pleura, peritoneum, and
tunica vaginalis. Qdly, If the fluid was in the pia mater, it would
be under the arachnoid, and the arachnoid, whether of the surface
or of the ventricles, would be raised in proportion to its quantity,
so that we should find a membrane upon the surface of the fluid
both in the interior and exterior of the brain. ‘This is not the
case in common; and where it is, as in a case described by
Dr. Magendie and one by Dr. W. Heberden, presently to be quoted,
the close portion of the arachnoid lies conspicuously upon the
fluid. Iam therefore satisfied that Dr. Magendie’s account is
wrong, and that what he calls pia mater in the ventricles is the
arachnoid."

Dr. Magendie found the removal of the fluid to occasion imme-
diate dulness and immobility; but says that these disappeared as
soon as the fluid was replaced, and that its secretion took place very
rapidly. He believes that two ounces may exist in the ventricles
without disturbance, but that a larger quantity, whether secreted


& I may mention that in a child Isaw with hydro-rachitis the aqueous tumour
in the loins disappeared, and the head immediately enlarged with hydrocephalus,
This looked like any thing but communication.

h Fe appears to me ignorant of the true anatomy of these membranes, and to
confound the two, as was the case of old, till the Anatomical Society of Amster-
dam confirmed, in 1665, the doubts which were arising on the subject, and Van
Horne demonstrated both membranes distinctly to his pupils.

Ackerman contended that fluid always exists in the ventricles, and for the
purpose of maintaining a degree of pressure necessary to the functions of the
brain ; an increase or diminution of it arresting the cerebral functions. Sir
E. Home repeated the same opinions in the Ph. Trans. 1814, part ii. See
Dr. Spurzheim, Phrenol., Amer. ed. p. 45. sq-


PIA MATER. 339


or injected, for example, into the spinal cavity, causes more or
less apoplexy and palsy. Much must, however, depend upon the
quickness of the accumulation, as the powers of accommodation
are very great in living systems, and if the bones expand, very
many pints may exist without impediment to the functions of the
brain. Dr. W. Heberden knew a man who had been long deat
only, with the exception of vertigo and a temporary attach
of confusion, and who suddenly died; when not less than eight
ounces of fluid was found in the ventricles, and four on the brain
under the arachnoid.i Morgagni gives a similar case.‘ Still these
might have been instances of rapid effusion.

The blood-vessels of the brain are the two internal carotids
and the two vertebrals. They are twice bent at their entrance
into the cranium, to lessen the force of the blood ; for not only is
the organ delicate, but its arteries are thinner and weaker than
others of the same size. In some brutes the internal carotid
splits, for the same purpose, into a network of vessels, called rete
mirabile, which re-unite into a trunk. The veins of the brain
pour their blood obliquely into strong, winding sinuses, which
transmit it to the internal jugulars (Cut, p. 336.) ; and the pos-
sibility of its reflux mto the cerebral veins is thus lessened. The
cerebral arteries are said by Béclard to have no third, external
coat.

The pulpy substance has an immense number of blood-vessels ;
the fibrous, a smaller number. M. Raspail exhibits one blood-
vessel in the membranous investment of the median nerve, and
many in the coverings and septa of the ganglion of the sympa-
thetic, but none appeared to enter into the fibres. (Cut 2. p. 326.)

«The membrane, called pza mater by the ancients,” corresponds
with cellular membrane, ‘closely follows the cortical substance of
the brain!, and possesses innumerable blood-vessels which pene-
trate into the latter. Hence, if a portion of this membrane is
detached, we find the external surface very smooth, while the
internal is villous and resembles the roots of moss.’"™ It pene-
trates into the lateral ventricles at the semicircular fissure which
exists on each side between the corpus fimbriatum of the fornix
and thalamus opticus; and into the third ventricle, at the central
fissure which exists between the posterior extremity of the meso-


i Trans. of the Coll. of Phys., vol. v. k Ep. Anat., 4. 35.
'« Ruysch, Respons. ad ep. problemat. nonam. Amst. 1670. tab. x.”
™ «B, S. Albinus, Annot. Acad. 1, i. tab. ii. fig. 1—5.”

AAS


340 MOTION OF THE BRAIN.


lobe and the upper surface of the mesocephalon. These three
fissures, united, and establishing a communication between the ex-
ternal and internal parts of the brain, were named the great cere-
bral fissure by Bichat. It runs over the third ventricle, forming
with the arachnoid what is called the velum interpositum or telum
choridianum ; and the sides of this portion, extended and filled with
a plexus of vessels, form with them, in each lateral ventricle,
what is called the pleaus choroides, also, of course, covered by the
arachnoid.

The pia mater invests the spinal chord equally with the ence-
phalon, but is there paler and firmer. It also invests all the
nerves, and not only their chords and fibres, but their individual
fibrils and filaments.

Dr. Macartney finds the pia mater to consist of two portions,
one of which is exceedingly subtle and pervades the whole
encephalic mass, acting as a framework for the nervous substance.
Its delicacy allows the external portion to be readily separated
from it on the surface; and it forms, he says, so large a por-
tion of the mass, that the amount of nervous substance, as was
remarked above, is very small.»

If from deficiency of cranium the brain is seen, it is observed
to experience two motions —the one correspondent with the im-
pulse of blood into the arteries, the other correspondent with the
distension of the veins by expiration. It slightly pulsates at the
stroke of the left ventricle; rising during expiration, and sinking
again during inspiration ; and it sinks in proportion as inspiration
is desisted from the longer. °

It is found also in such cases to be more distended during the
waking state than during sleep P: — a circumstance showing that


" Report of the Third Meeting of the Brit. Scient. Assoc., p. 454.

° «'T, Dan. Schlichting first accurately described this striking phenomenon.
Commerc. litter. Noric. 1744. p. 409. sq., and more largely, Mém. présentées &
? Acad. des Sc. de Paris, t. i. p. 113.

Haller sagaciously discovered the cause of it by numerous dissections of
living animals. J. Dit. Walstorf, his pupil, Experimenta circa motum cerebri,
cerebelli, &c. Gotting. 1753.

Consult also, after F. de la Mure’s works, Lorry’s dissertations on the same
point, Mém. présentées, t. iii. p. 277. sq. 344. sq.

Also Portal on a similar motion observable in the spinal chord, Mém. sur Ics
Nature de plusieurs Maladies, t. ii. p. 81.”

* “T once enjoyed an opportunity of very distinctly observing this motion, and
making some experiments with respect to it, in a young man eighteen years old,


PULPY SUBSTANCE OF THE BRAIN. 341


active states of the organs they have more blood. Indeed, during
strong feelings and intellectual efforts the brain, in cases of de-
ficiency of bone, has been seen to enlarge, experiencing a turges-
cence which is common to all organs during their excitement. 4
In emotions, even that of grief, the head not only aches and feels
tight, but burns: hard study for many hours has the same effect.
The functions of the nervous system, like those of all other organs,
require a copious supply of arterial blood; and no solid can per-
form its living functions but by means of a fluid supplied to it.

Gall considers the pulpy substance of the nervous system as
the matrix or producer of the fibrous. It is so copiously supplied
with blood-vessels, that Ruysch, Schallhamner, Leuwenhoek,
Valisneri, Vieussens, Schwendenborg, and almost all the contem-
poraries of Haller, pronounced it a tissue of fine vessels; and
Walter and Ackerman merely a prolongation of finer and finer
blood-vessels, — an opinion that Boyer thought probable. Albinus
and Sommerring, however, showed by injection that a soft sub-
stance existed as well as the blood-vessels.t Now, Gall argues,
1. That all parts of living bodies, as is now universally allowed, are
gradually and successively developed — that their form and sub-
stance, as well as size, totally change from their origin to their
perfection —not, as too many had absurdly asserted when he
wrote, that all parts pre-existed of inappreciably minute size;
and he asks, how the head of the’snail reproduced after de-
capitation, how the transformation of stamina to petals, a work-
a ee ee ee ee
Five years before, he had fallen from an eminence and fractured the frontal bone
on the left side of the coronal suture, since which time there had been an im.
mense hiatus, covered by merely a soft cicatrix and the common integuments.
The hiatus formed a hollow, very deep during sleep, less so when he was awake ;
and varying according to the state of respiration, i. e. very deep if he retained
his breath ; much more shallow, and even converted into a swelling, by a long-
continued expiration. At the bottom of the hollow, I observed a pulsation syn-
chronous with the pulsation of the arterial system, such as deceived Petrioli,
Vandelli, and others, at one time the adversaries of Haller, who all foolishly
confounded it with that other remarkable motion which depends upon respiration.
— I may add, that this wound on the left side of the head had rendered the
vight arm and leg paralytic.”

2 In one such case, during the excitement of one set of organs, the collapse of
others was sufficient to produce a depression: and the anger of the person could
always be known by merely “ the holes which would appear in his head ” on the
coronal surface, where the bone was defective.—Ep, Phren. Journal, Sept.1835.

* Gall, |. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 235.


AA 4


$42 PULPY SUBSTANCE OF THE BRAIN.


ing to a queen bee, by modifications of external circumstances,
are consistent with the original existence of every part. Thus,
as it is clear that one part may produce another which did not
exist, that the fibrous portion of the brain may proceed from the
pulpy. 2. As all the fibres of nerves are seen to begin in pulpy
substance, and, the greater the mass of grey substance, the greater
number of fibres are seen to proceed from it; and as, whenever
in the brain or spinal chord an enlargement occurs in the fibrous
band, there is an accumulation of pulpy matter, that the pulpy
appears destined for the production and support of the fibrous *;
and this not only in regard to nerves, but to the encephalon and
spinal chord. For, whenever a portion of the fibrous part of the
brain increases, a quantity of pulpy substance is found at the
point of increase ; just as wherever a branch springs in a tree,
its origin is in a mass of soft substance, so that the diameter of
all the branches exceeds that of the stem, and they are not
divisions of it. Again, before fibres appear at all, the brain and
other nervous parts are altogether pulpy and greyish. For, though
Dr. Tiedemann asserts that the pulpy substance of the spinal
chord is not formed before the fibrous, Gall refutes him in the
most masterly manner, showing that he allows the chord to be at
first fluid, then “soft, reddish, and sprinkled with numerous small
vessels,” and that at length, in the course of the first two months,
or about the beginning of the fourth month, fibres are seen.
These are Tiedemann’s own words; and yet he fancies he opposes
Gall, who contends for the very same thing, saying, “ it is the
pulpy, gelatinous, non-fibrous substance sprinkled with innume-
rable blood-vessels, secreted the first by the pia mater, which
engenders, nourishes, and multiplies the nervous fibres.’’ Dr.
Tiedemann also objects that, if the swellings or ganglions of the
chord were found first to engender the rest, and the nerves cor-
responding with them, they should be found in the embryo; but
that they are not. Certainly this cannot be expected, replies Gall,
before the chord becomes consistent, or the period for the pro-
duction of nerves has arrived ; and when the great nerves of the
extremities begin to form, and not before, can we expect that the
pulpy substance which produces them will be observed.t Dr.Tiede-


* Lc. 4to. vol. i. p. 44. and p. 242.

t See Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 65. sqq. A masterly refutation, but apparently
unknown to English anatomists.

Dr. Bellingeri fancies that the pulpy substance is for sensation, the fibrous
for motion. I think it is Dr. Fowille who fancies that the pulpy is for the pecu-


COMPOSITION OF THE BRAIN. 343


mann actually says, “ Gall is right in asserting that in the adult
the parts of the chord most supplied with cortical substance are
those where the largest nerves are given off." He allows that
nervous fibres go off wherever there are ganglions ; that whenever
a nerve joins a ganglion, it is reinforced ; and that all nerves are
accompanied by more or less of this substance, through which
they acquire a successive increase, so as to become conical; and
that the soft substance is, at the ninth month, more abundant
where nerves arise, and still more abundant at the origin of the
great nerves of the extremities. Dr. Bellingeri allows the fact
of the pulpy far exceeding the fibrous in childhood *; and Mr.
Mayo allows that the origin of a nerve is always in part from fine
grey matter, and that the ascending fibres of the chorda oblon-
gata receive additions from the internal masses of grey matter,
“Cas from new organs.” y

Old anatomists were perfectly ignorant of the uses of the
various parts which they viewed so mechanically, and distin-
guished by such a collection of strange names. Gall views some
of them as organs of increase, others as organs of union, and
others as the bands of fibres which execute the nervous functions.
What are considered the parts of increase, and what of union,
must appear from the descriptions given.

Just as the extreme parts of nerves execute their chief func-
tion, as seen in the case of sight, smell, taste, hearing, touch; so,
probably, the extreme portions of the fibrous substance of the
brain execute its functions. This opinion is rendered the more
probable from the pains which I showed nature to have taken to
increase the surface of the cerebrum and cerebellum, so that the
fibrous substance may ultimately be spread out amidst the pulpy
to an immense extent.

The substance of the brain is said to be different from that of
all other animal textures. Vauquelin, in 1812, found, in 100 parts,


Water - - - 80°00 | Phosphorus aee ra OUEO
Albumen - - 7:00 | Muriate of soda, and
White fatty matter - 4°53 phosphate of lime,
Red ditto - - 0701 potas, and ‘mag- f° 15
Osmazome - - 1:12 nesia, with sulphur


liar nervous functions. But Dr. Marshall long ago gave strong reasons for
ascribing them to the fibrous. (I. c. p. 239. sqq: )

“ Anatomie du Cerveau, traduit par M. Jourdain, p- 135.

* De Medulla Spinali Nervisque, S. ii. c. vi.

* Outlines of Physiology, p. 241. 253. London, ed. 3,


344 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


M. Couerbe discovered a large quantity of cholesterine in the
brain; and asserts that in the brain of sound persons as much as
2 or 23 per cent. of phosphorus exists, but about half as much
in the brain of idiots, and nearly double in the brain of maniacs !
M. John finds firmer albumen and more fat in the fibrous than in
the pulpy substance.” The oblong and spinal chords, according
to Vauquelin, contain more fat, and less albumen, osmazome, and
water: the nerves much less fat, much more albumen, and more
fat analogous to adipocire. M. Raspail remarks that the invest-
ments of the nervous fibrils, chords, and trunks explain the pre-
dominance of albumen. He also reminds us that a nervous dries
to a horny substance without putrefying, whereas the brain putre-
fies in twenty-four hours.


Where feeling occurs in matter, mind exists. But the capa-
bility of feeling would be useless, were not volition united with it.
Feeling might exist without will, but could lead to nothing : and
means neither of obtaining or protracting pleasant sensations, nor
of escaping from painful ones, could be adopted. Volition could not
exist without feeling ; for we will through motives only. Neither
can the existence of feeling be known, but by the certain effects
of volition sensible to others. Now, feeling may be excited by
external things, or by changes within. In the former case, some
Scotch metaphysicians term it sensation, and, if an idea of the
external thing is also excited, perception: in the latter case, they
term it consciousness. When we smell, we have a sensation ; when
we see an object, we have a perception; when we have a wish, or
an idea, or an internal pain, we are conscious. But sensation and
consciousness are the same, except as to their immediate causes.
Before will is exerted, on the occurrence of feeling, a wish must
also be felt —a desire to escape from the feeling, or to increase
or prolong it: and, therefore, even in the lowest and most simple
cases, a faculty, if so it may be called, probably must be sup-
posed to exist wherever there are feeling and volition.

There are various feelings, and modifications of feelings. The
external world produces immediately as many as five kinds


* Journal de Chimie Médicale, Aodt, 1835.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 845


in the most complicated beings; so that man is said to have
five external senses — touch, taste, smell, hearing, and sight. The
word touch is used to signify both the power of sensation on the
contact of bodies, and also that general feeling which pervades
every part, and is able to produce endless varieties of sensations
from diversity of causes. If the external world, however, excites
merely sensations, the knowledge is very scanty, and the execution
of the will and the motives are as limited. But as we ascend in
the scale of animals, faculty after faculty is added: so that various
properties of the external world are learnt, —form is distinguished,
and symmetry, and distance ; the relation of colours, sounds, and
numbers; and a power is at the same time given for viewing, as a
whole, any object which excites these sensations and inner feelings,
— so many znternal senses, as some have named these powers.

As we continue to rise, powers still higher are given ;— the
power of viewing all things in connection, of comparing, contrast-
ing, inferring : and in some individuals these, to which the term in-
tellectual powers is especially given, are of great strength. At the
same time, motives are given in increased numbers. The lowest
animal has little more than a desire for food or life or an agree-
able sensation, and an aversion from uneasiness: but to some, a
desire of an act for the purpose of continuing the species; to
others, a desire to construct a habitation, and in a particular
manner; to some, a desire to attack and destroy, &c., is given, —
desires few or more and in various proportions. These are all
internal feeling, or so much consciousness. Now, any feeling may
not only occur, so that sensation, perception, or consciousness are
common attributes; but, when a feeling occurs which had oc-
curred before, the circumstance that it is the recurrence of a
feeling may be noticed. An odour may be recognised as one
smelt before; a desire, a thought, as one experienced before.
The philosopher may recognise a great thought as not new to
him ; and the lowest animal may probably be aware that a savour
is the same it experienced once before. This is called memory.
The impression may return in an obscure manner, without the
recurrence of the original cause: so that we feel we had it before,
— we remember having witnessed something. Feelings from even
external causes may recur without the recurrence of the external
cause. The impression is not so lively as when excited origin-
ally ; if we figure to ourselves a building which we have seen,
the feeling, though strong enough for thinking and discoursing


346 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


upon, is far short of that experienced with the aid of the external
senses. In diseased states of brain, the feeling, however, is as
strong as before; as well as where a large portion, but not the
whole, of the brain is torpid, or, in other words, a large number
of faculties are inactive, and not merely inactive, but roused to
full action with difficulty, as in dreaming. The insane and the
dreamer, from the powerful action of parts only of the brain, have
as strong impressions as though they were employing their ex-
ternal senses.

Any feeling or train of feelings may be thus renewed ; a string
of words be conceived, though perhaps, at the time, neither
heard, spoken, nor written, or even a train of thought. Whether
a former impression is directly excited from without, as it was
at first, and recognised ; or whether feelings of any kind are re-
excited from merely internal or indirect external causes of excite-
ment, and recognised ; or whether the impression of the former
occurrence of any feeling is renewed;—jin all these cases of
memory, or perhaps more properly, in regard to the two first
instances, recognition, the matter is precisely the same,

The mere recurrence of former impressions, without regard to
their recognition, is termed imagination or fancy: and innume-
rable combinations of past impressions may occur, in such form
and order as they did not occur before; and it is to this, strictly,
that the term imagination or fancy is generally applied.

Feelings thus re-excited, whether intellectual or moral, do ot
start up insulated, but draw forth one another in association —
just as they previously occurred in combination or in succession.
An odour will re-excite the idea of the place where such an
odour was vividly perceived; and all the circumstances and
occurrences of the place will present themselves to the mind in
succession or conjunction. It is thus that language spoken and
written is an instrument of connection. Any connection between
two feelings, of any kind whatever, serves this purpose ; and every
faculty may be thus excited; and the excitement of the very
propensities excites ideas connected with the propensity, and the
excitement of any one faculty may excite another.

While any feeling takes the lead, we are said to attend to it.
We can for a time keep it steadily vivid. This power is called
attention. The lowest animal can attend to its sensations, just as
the greatest philosopher to his profoundest thoughts. We cannot
call up a thought or feeling at pleasure ; but, by keeping vividly


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 347


before our mind any present feelings connected with it, it sooner
or later springs up through association, perhaps very compli-
cated: and in this way, by keeping up impressions connected with
certain propensities, we can excite even our propensities. The
other mode in which our will operates, is by causing muscular
contraction. We can will attention, and will muscular motion.

We are able to compare feelings of all kinds, and to infer one
thing from another. This is called judgment. The animal, with
but two external senses, taste and touch, judges of the quality of
what it tastes and touches,— whether the object is like that to
which he is accustomed. An animal with sight also judges if
the aspect of food or drink is like that to which it is accustomed.
With the faculty for the feeling of the relation of tones, it judges
of music; with that relating to numbers, it judges of them.

To draw large inferences, see the relation of many feelings, and
judge of cause and effect, seems a peculiar faculty; and, like all
the rest, may exist in various degrees of force.

All these powers, of course, tend to action; and the various
mere propensities are so many tendencies to action. Their im-
pulse is called znstznct* ; and their highest tendency to excite-
ment, passion. But instinct and passion are common to them
all. ;

These modes or different operations of faculties were considered
by old writers, and are still considered by those whose knowledge
is but the remains of the ignorance of former days, as fun-
damental faculties. Every faculty, when it acts, acts in the way
of one of them; so that they are nearly common to all our
faculties ; and, except attention, which is an act of volition, they
are all modes only of action. Gall, therefore, instead of dividing
them into perception, attention, memory, judgment, &c. as fun-
damental faculties; and viewing “ the Power of Taste, a genius
for Poetry, for Painting, for Music, for Mathematics,” &c. as
“more complicated powers or capacities, which are gradually
formed by particular habits of study or of business>;” regards
these last powers as distinct faculties, and perception, atten-
tion, memory, judgment, &c. merely as modes or varieties com-
mon to the action of each faculty. He contends that, when
we see a boy, brought up exactly like his brothers and sisters, dis-


® Some limit the term instinct to the natural tendency to an act, without any
knowledge of its purposes.
> Dugald Stewart, Quélines of Moral Philosophy, p. 10,


348 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


playing fine musical talents or an astonishing power of calcu-
lation, though in all other respects a child, his pre-eminence cannot
be explained by particular habits of study or of business, nor by
mere strength of judgment, memory, &c.:— That the boy has a
strong perception of melody, a strong memory of tunes, a strong
musical imagination, a strong musical judgment, or a strong per-
ception, memory, and judgment, of numbers; but may not be
clearer-headed or more attentive on any other point: while men of
the strongest sense may have no perception, memory, or judgment,
of tunes, or may calculate with extreme difficulty. It is the same
with regard to instinct. Writers consider instinct a general fa-
culty, while it is only the inherent disposition to activity possessed
by every faculty; and there are, therefore, as many instincts as
fundamental faculties. By instinct “ the spider spreads a web and
ensnares flies : the working bee constructs cells, but does not kill
flies to support itself; it takes care of the young, but does not
copulate. Many male animals copulate, but take no care of their
young: the cuckoo, both male and female, abandons the charge
of bringing up its young to other birds, although it is compelled
to copulation by a very ardent instinct. The castor builds a hut,
but neither sings nor hunts; the dog hunts, but does not build;
the butcher-bird sings, builds, and preys; the quail does not
mate, but copulates, takes care of its young, and migrates; the
partridge mates, copulates, and takes care of its young, but does
not migrate ; the wolf, fox, roebuck, and rabbit, marry, and take
care of their young conjointly with the female: the dog, stag, and
hare, copulate with the first female they meet, and never know
their offspring. The vigorous wolf, the artful and timid hare, do not
burrow like the courageous rabbit and the cunning fox. Rabbits
live in republics, and place sentinels, which is done by neither the
fox nor the hare. How can these various instincts exist in one
species of animals, and not in another? How can they be com-
bined so differently? If instinct were a single and general faculty,
every instinct should show itself, not only at once, but also in the
same degree; and yet while in the young animal many instincts act
with great force, others are still quite inactive: some instincts act
at one season, others at another. There is one season for propa-
gation, another for emigration; one season for living solitarily ;
another for assembling in companies, and for collecting provisions.
And how can we explain, on the supposition of a general instinct,
why the different instincts do not exist merely separate in dif-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 349


ferent species of animals, but that many of them are even con-
tradictory ?” ¢

For my own part, when I reflect upon the various talents and
dispositions of persons who are all placed in the same circum-
stances, — how unsuccessfully some apply, with the wimost perse-
verance, to a branch of study, in which another, under the same
instructors, or, perhaps, scarcely assisted at all, or even with every
impediment thrown in his way, reaches excellence with little
trouble, and, again, fails in one in which the first is, on the other
hand, swccessful,— how early various tempers are developed among
children of the same nursery, — how the best moral education is
often thrown away, while in the midst of the worst examples and
every incentive to vice a virtuous character is sometimes formed,
— how hereditary are peculiarities of talent and of character, —
how szmilar some persons are to each other in one point of
talent and character, and diss¢milar in another, — how positively
contradictory many points of the same character are found ;— how
exactly the same is true of all species of brutes4, and of all in-
dividuals among them, as far as their faculties are the same as
ours,— each species having its peculiar nature, and each indi-
vidual its peculiar character :— I confess myself unable to deny
that there is one innate faculty for numbers, another for colours,
a third for music, &c. &c., with a variety of distinct innate pro-
pensities; and that memory, judgment, &c. are but modes of
action common to the different faculties.

The faculties of whose existence Gall satisfied himself are:
1. The instinct of generation; 2. The love of offspring ; 3. The
disposition to friendship ; 4. Courage; 5. The instinct to destroy
life; 6. Cunning ; 7. The sentiment of property ; 8. Pride; 9. Va-
nity; 10. Circumspection ; 11. Sense of things, by which we take
cognisance of individual objects and occurrences ; 12. Sense of
locality or of the relations of space; 13. Sense of persons ;
14. Sense of words; 15. Sense of language, or philological talent ;
16. Sense of the relations of colours; 17. Sense of the relations
of tones; 18. Sense of the relations of numbers; 19. Sense of
construction ; 20. Comparative sagacity, by which we compare ;

© Gall, I. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 332. sqq-, 8vo. t. vi. p. 352. sqq.

d See the poet Cowper’s amusing account of the different characters of his
three hares. But all persons conversant with horses, dogs, cats, or any other
domestic brute, know that every individual among them is proportionally as dif-
ferent in its various abilities and dispositions, from others of its species, as every
human being is from other men.


350 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


21. Metaphysical sagacity, by which we examine into cause and
effect; 22. Wit; 23. Poetic talent; 24. Goodness, and moral
sense; 25. Faculty of imitation; disposition to have visions ;
26. Religious feeling ; 27. Firmness. He had been long inclined
to admit also a sense of order and a sense of time, and waited
only for proofs of their organs. |

Gall gives various other names to each faculty, more anxious
to express his view of the nature of each than to quibble for
appellations. &

For information respecting the precise nature of each faculty,
many of which may be ill understood from their designations, I
refer to the third and fourth volumes of Gall’s work, Anatomie du
Cerveau, and the third, fourth, and fifth volumes of his Fonctions
du Cerveau, — portions of the work which the most indolent will
find entertaining.

That the faculties enumerated are not modifications of each
other, or of any other, but distinct and primitive, Gall considers
proved by the circumstance of each having one or more of the
following conditions.

“ An instinct, inclination, sentiment, talent, deserves,” says he,
‘the denomination of fundamental, primitive, radical :

“J. When a quality or faculty (or its organ) is not manifested
nor developed, nor diminishes, at the same time with others.
Thus, the instinct of generation (with its organ) is generally
developed and manifested later than other inclinations. Thus,
the memory of names usually grows weak sooner than the other
faculties.

“2. When, in the same individual, a quality or faculty is more
or less active (and its corresponding cerebral part more or less


° Dr. Spurzheim gave to the majority of these faculties new names, which
he afterwards changed from time to time, some of which were long and uncouth,
and still destitute of the uniformity he aimed at, some new-coined words, and
some expressive of a doubtful, if not decidedly erroneous, view of the faculties ;
and to most of which Gall objected, as I confess I do. Dr. Vimont thus gives
his opinion of them : — “ Des expressions ridicules. J'ai vu avec plaisir que les
médecins les plus distingués en France n’ont jamais pu condescendre a recevoir les
mots secrétivité, merveillosité, &c. — langage prétentieux, de mauvais gout, et qui
figurerait 4 merveille dans la comédie des Précieuses Ridicules, ou des Femmes
Savantes.”” (T'raité de Phrénologie, 4to. Paris, t. ii. p. 105.) It would have
been much better to have followed the example of Gall, and rested contented
with a few names for each faculty, so as to show what was meant, and waited
till the science is so far advanced that an appropriate name cannot be difficult.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 351


developed) than the others. Thus, the greatest sculptors, painters,
designers, have sometimes not the least disposition to music ; the
greatest poets little talent for mathematics.

‘3. When a single quality or faculty is active, whilst the
others are paralysed (and only the corresponding organ deve-
loped). Thus, persons imbecile in every other respect, are often
violently impelled by physical love, or have a great talent for
imitation, &c. .

“4. When, all the other qualities and faculties being active
(and all the other organs sufficiently developed), one single quality
or faculty is inactive (and one single organ not developed). Thus,
certain individuals cannot comprehend that two and two make
four ; others detest music, or women.

“5. When, in mental diseases, one quality or faculty only suf-
fers, or one only is entire, Thus, one insane person is mad only
in regard to religion, to pride, &c.; another, although mad in
every respect, still gives lessons in music with great intelligence.

“6, When the same quality or faculty is quite differently ma-
nifested in the two sexes of the same species of animal (and the
organ is differently developed in the two). Thus, the love of off-
spring (with its organ) is more developed in the females of most
animals: thus, among singing birds, the male only sings (and has
the organ well developed),

“7. Lastly, when the same quality or faculty (and the same
organ) always exists in one species and is deficient in another.
Thus, many species of birds, the dog, the horse, &c., have no in-
clination (nor organ) for construction, though this is so strikingly
manifested in other kinds of birds, in the squirrel, in the beaver.
Thus, certain kinds of animals are predaceous, migrate, sing, take
care of their young, while other kinds are frugivorous, lead sta-
tionary lives, do not sing, abandon their offspring.” £


* 1. c. t. iii, p. 213. sqq. See also 4to. vol. iii. p. 81. These were Gall’s own
philosophic principles, resulting from a view of his discoveries, and employed by
him to test farther discoveries, Yet Dr. Spurzheim details them with no im-
portant difference as his own, and says, “ I have no hesitation to maintain that, in
pointing out the special or fundamental powers of the mind, my proceeding is
philosophical, founded on principles, &c. ;” whereas ‘ Gall did not determine
any of the organs in conformity with these views.” (Phrenolog., vol. i. p. 137.
American edition.) Gall began, of necessity, empirically; but these were the
general principles which he laid down after his discoveries and published in the
volumes which bear his name only. “I renounced all reasoning, and gave

BB


352 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Perception, memory, judgment, &c., are modes of action of
these distinct faculties. ‘‘ As often as there exists a fundamental
faculty, a particular and determinate intellectual power, there
necessarily exists likewise a perceptive faculty for objects related
to this faculty. As often as this faculty is active upon the objects
of its sphere, there is attention. As often as the idea or traces
which the impressions of objects have left in the brain are re-
newed, either by the presence or in the absence of these same
objects, there is remembrance, reminiscence, passive memory.
If this same renewal of received impressions takes place by an
act of reflection, by a voluntary act of the organs, there is active
memory. As often as an organ or a fundamental faculty compares
and judges the relations of analogous and dissimilar ideas, there
is comparison, there is judgment. A series of comparisons and
judgments constitutes reasoning. As often as an organ or a funda-
mental power creates, by its own inherent energy, without the
concurrence of the external world, objects relative to its func-
tions ; as often as the organ discovers, by its own activity, the
laws of the objects related to it in the external world, there is
zmagination, invention, genius.

“Whether, now, we consider perception, attention, memory,
reminiscence, recollection, comparison, judgment, reasoning,
imagination, invention, genius, either as gradations of different
degrees of the same faculty, or as peculiar modes of being of
this faculty, it still remains certain that all the fundamental
faculties which have been demonstrated are endowed, or may be
endowed, with perception, attention, memory, recollection, judg-
ment, imagination ; and that, consequently, it is they which ought
to be considered intellectual and fundamental faculties, and that
the pretended mental faculties of my predecessors are only com-
mon attributes. Here, then, is a perfectly new philosophy of
the intellectual faculties, founded upon the details of the natural
history of the different modifications of human intellect. The same
may be said of the appetitive faculties, or rather qualities.” ¢


myself up entirely to observation. In this way I discovered twenty-seven quali-
ties or faculties essentially distinct, which must all be reduced to fundamental
qualities or faculties. It was only after this discovery that I was enabled to
point out the characteristic conditions of the fundamental qualities or faculties.”
(4to. vol. iii. p. 81.) Then follow the seven characteristics.

® 1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 327. sqq., Svo. t. vie 405. sqq., t. iii. p. 131. sq.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 353


“When a person has the talent for music, poetry, construction,
judging of distance, &c., in only a weak degree, he will not have
avery decided inclination for those objects. If, on the other
hand, the organs of these fundamental forces are more energetic,
the person feels a pleasure in the exercise of their functions; he
has an inclination for these objects. When the action of these
organs is still more energetic, he feels a want to occupy himself
with them, Lastly, when the action of these organs prepon-
derates, the person is impelled towards these objects ; he finds
his happiness in thém, and feels disappointed, unhappy, when he
cannot follow his inclination; he has a passion for these objects.
Thus it is that certain individuals have a passion for music,
poetry, architecture, travelling,” &c.h

“ ¢ You shall not persuade me, however,’” Gall fancies it will
be said to him, “¢ that the faculties acknowledged by philosophers
as faculties of the soul, are chimeras. Who will dispute that
understanding, will, sensation, attention, comparison, judgment,
memory, imagination, desire, liberty, are not real operations of
the soul, or, if you please, of the brain?’” « Yes,” replies Gall,
“without doubt these faculties are real, but they are mere ab-
stractions, generalities, and inapplicable to a minute study of a
species, or of individuals. Every man, who is not imbecile, has
all these faculties. All men, however, have not the same intel-
lectual or moral character. We must discover faculties, the
various distribution of which determines the various species of
animals ; and the various proportions of which explain the varie-
ties among individuals. All bodies have weight, all have exten-
sion, all have impenetrability ; but all bodies are not gold or
copper, all are not any plant, or any animal. Of what use to the
naturalist would be the abstract and general notions of weight,
extension, and impenetrability? If we confined ourselves to
these abstractions, we should still be in the most profound igno-
rance of every branch of physics and natural history.

“This is exactly what has happened to philosophers with
their generalities. From the most ancient period down to the
present day, one has not made a single step farther than another
in the precise knowledge of the true nature of man, his inclin-
ations and his talents, or of the source of his motives and deter-
minations. Hence we have as many philosophies as sod-disant


* 1, c. dto. vol. iv. p. 828. sq., 8vo. t. vi. p- 408.
BB 2


354 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


philosophers: hence the vacillation and uncertainty of our insti-
tutions, especially of those which relate to education and criminal
legislation.” }

Gall does not pretend to have discovered the ultimate nature
of all the fundamental faculties which he has pointed out. The
poet’s faculty, for example, he regards as distinct and fundament-
al, because it has the conditions of a fundamental faculty above
enumerated; but what are the ordinary functions of that part of
the brain, which, when greatly developed, produces the poet, he
dares not determine.‘ “I have made it,” says he, “ an invariable
rule to advance nothing which I could not strictly prove, or at
least render very probable by very strong arguments: for this
reason, in regard to the qualities and faculties, the existence of
which I maintain, I have always confined myself to the degree of
activity in which I could discover them and observe their mani-
festation. I know it would have been more philosophical always
to refer to their fundamental forces the qualities or faculties
which I could detect in only their highest action: but I preferred
leaving something for those who came after me to do, rather
than give them an opportunity to disprove what I had prematurely
advanced.” !


i Lc. 8vo. ti. p. 49. sq. See also 4to. vol. iv. p. 318. sqq., and Svo. t. vi.
p. 392. sqq-

kl. c. 4to. vol.iv. p. 181., 8vo. t. v. p. 243.

1 1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 275, sq., 8vo. t. v. p. 407. Gall was of opinion that
there is a faculty for judging of time, and another of order. (I. c. 4to. vol. iv.
p. 61. sq., 138. sq., 8vo. t. iv. p. 466. sq., t. v. p. 153. sqq.) He held, that there
must be a faculty which determines the desire of a particular habitation (1..¢.
Ato. vol. ii, p. 314., 8vo. t. iv. p. 280.), and might be one which gives pleasure in
wonders ; but, like the faculties of time and order, he “ was always of opinion
that they should not be received into the list till the situation of their organs was
proved by a sufficiently large number of exact observations.” (1. c. 4to. vol. iii.
p- xxiv. sq.) Dr. Spurzheim and phrenologists in general admit all four. Dr.
Spurzheim splits Gali’s sense of Things into two: one for objects, and one for
occurrences, Gall conceives there is a cerebral organ for the desire of taking
food (I. c. 8vo. t. iv. p. 63.) ; and Dr. Hoppe of Copenhagen is generally thought
to have established it. (Phrenolog. Journ. Edin. No. 5. and 7.) Dr. S. assigns
its establishment to a person who never uttered a word to us upon the subject
till, many months after Dr. Hoppe’s first paper was published and six weeks after
the second paper had been read in the Edinburgh Society, he surprised us all in
the London Phrenological Society by reading a paper upon the point. Gall
originally fancied that there was a faculty of the love of life, and that he had dis-
covered its organ; but he afterwards thought he had been mistaken. (Cranologie,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 355


Neither does Gall pretend to have enumerated all the funda-
mental faculties of the mind. “ Probably,” says he, “those who


ou Découvertes nouvelles du Docteur Gall, traduit del’ Allemand: Paris, 1807, p.72.
Gall, 8vo. t.iv. p. 63. sq.) Dr. A. Combe, however, inthe Hd. Phr. Journ., 1826,
contended that the love of life was a distinct faculty, and mentioned the case of an
old lady who had long been remarkable for her love of life, and in whose brain
the only thing peculiar was an enormous convolution at the base of the middle
lobe. Dr. Spurzheim, without referring to Dr. A. Combe or any one else,
coolly says he thinks ‘it is highly probable that there is a peculiar instinct to
feel a love of life; and I look for its organ at the base of the brain, between the
posterior and middle lobes, inwardly of combativeness.” (Phrenology, ed. 1832,
vol. i. p. 142.) Dr. Vimont says (T'raité de Phrénologie, 1835, vol. ii. p. 165.),
that persons assured him that Dr. S., in his lectures at Paris, in 1830, arrogated
to himself the discovery of the organ. Dr. Vimont, however, is equally culpable
with Dr. S.; for he not only says that Dr. S. made no such discovery, but
‘that neither Gall nor Dr. S. speak of the faculty; and Mr. G. Combe only in
the third edition of his System of Phrenology, in 1830. Now, 1. Dr. Spurz-
heim did mention it in his edition of 1832, under the beautiful name vitative-
ness ; and Gall long before thought to disprove it. 2. In the passage which Dr.
Vimont refers to, in Mr. G. Combe’s work, the case seen by Dr. A. Combe is
fully detailed from the Ed. Phr. Journ., vol. iii. p. 467. sqq., published in 1826.
But, Dr. Vimont’s mention of it is in his second volume, published 1835,
p- 105. and 160. sqq. ; and he there says that he mentioned it in a memoir pre-
sented to the French Institute only in 1827,

Gall, in treating of attachment, gave strong reasons, in opposition to Dr. Spurz-
heim, for believing that there is a faculty for marriage. Dr. Vimont fancies that
he himself has established this; as well as, in certain brutes, a faculty which
he calls sens géométrique, inclining them, when moving in numbers, to arrange
themselves in a certain figure ; and one in men, whichhe terms sens du beau dans
les arts. Dr, Spurzheim conceived that there is a distinct faculty for judging of
weight or resistance, one for judging of size, as well as one of hope.* Gall was
opposed to all three. In Edinburgh they fancy there is a faculty for keeping
other faculties in simultaneous action towards one object, and they call it concen-
trativeness, Dr. Spurzheim argues against it through no fewer than ‘eleven
pages; and Gall considered it unfounded. Dr. Spurzheim says that a friend
of his, a M. De Tremmon of Paris, suggested the idea of an organ of which
agriculture is the result. (Phr., Am. ed. vol. i. p. 168.) Ani Irish gentleman,
who had just commenced the study of phrenology, announced the discovery of
seventy-four new faculties one night to the Phrenological Society of London.
It appears to me, however, that there must be a faculty which makes us wish to
communicate our ideas to others, and another which makes us love society.
Some persons can keep nothing for an instant. Now no want of secretiveness
(if there is such a faculty, though Gall more properly, as I imagine, con-


* Phrenology, or the Doctrine of the Mental Phenomena. By G. Spurzheim,
M.D, 2 vols. Boston, 1882. Editions of some of his works, with his latest eor-
rections, were printed there by Marsh, Capen, and Lyon, 1832-3.

Bae


356 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


follow me in the career which I have opened, will discover some
fundamental forces and some organs which have escaped my
researches.”

He doubts, however, whether so many will be discovered as
some apprehend. A modification of a faculty must not be mis-
taken for a faculty, nor the result of the combined action of
several faculties for a particular faculty. “If,” he says, “we
reflect on the number of possible combinations which may result
from the twenty-seven or thirty fundamental faculties or qualities,
from the reciprocal action of as many organs, we shall not be
surprised at the infinite number of shades of character among
mankind. How many different combinations result from the ten
ciphers, from the twenty-four letters. How many different coun-
tenances result from the different combination of the small number
of parts which compose the human face: how many shades of
colours and tones result from the small number of primitive
colours and fundamental tones.” ™ They, moreover, may be
variously modified in different animals.

This view of the mental faculties may be considered quite in-
dependently of the peculiar doctrines of Gall respecting the
cerebral organs of each faculty, and even quite independently of
the fact of the brain being the organ of the mind. It may be
examined precisely like the metaphysics of Locke, Reid, Stewart,
Brown, &c. ®


$$$ eee
siders that what Dr. S. names secretiveness is a disposition to artfulness and
stratagem) can explain it, There must be a positive propensity. The dis-
ciples of Dr. 8. must allow that the want of a disposition to conceal would
not impel a person to communicate ; as they maintain, in opposition to Gall,
that the deficiency of combativeness will not give fear, nor of any feeling its op-
posite. Again, some persons, not at all remarkable for attachment, cannot bear
to be alone; they have a propensity to society too strong to allow them to
be alone a moment, though, they have no regard for the person whose presence
may suffice them. Gall is decidedly of this opinion (1. c. 4to. vol. iii, p. 175.
Sq.) 8v0. t. iii, p. 492. sq.); and, having been been unable to localise the tend-
ency, is inclined to regard it as a modification of attachment. Solitariness and
silence are dreadful punishments.

™ 1. ¢, 4to. vol. iv. p. 275., 8vo. t. v. p. 406, sq. Bacon, De Dignit. et Aug.
Sc. l. vii. cap. ii. is striking on this point.

" It is remarkable that nearly every one of these faculties has been admitted
by one metaphysician or another. See Mr. G. Combe’s Letter in reply to Mr.
Jeffrey, the editor of the Edin. Review, reprinted in the Edin. Phrenol. Journal,
1827.

Notwithstanding, too, that memory, like judgment, attention, &c., was con-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. SAT


It, however, derives its great proofs from the fact of the in-
dividual faculties being, ceteris paribus, strong in proportion
to the development of particular parts of the brain, as we shall
presently see.

Every faculty was given us for a good purpose, and it is only
when one or more are excessive, or defective, or too much or too
little excited by external circumstances, or by disease, that error
occurs. The lower faculties given to brutes as well as to our-
selves are evidently to yield to those which are of a superior
nature and peculiar, or given in a higher degree and with peculiar
modifications, to man. Happiness is “ our being’s end and aim.”
Not individual, partial, temporary happiness, however intense ;
but the greatest and longest happiness of the greatest number.
Sound morality in individuals and nations, —. and in what, through
elective representation should be, at least virtually, identical with a
nation, — government, tends tothis. No act is virtuous that does
not lead to the greatest happiness of the individual and of the
greatest number of individuals: nor does any act lead to the
greatest happiness of the individual and of the greatest number,
that is not virtuous. The whole set of faculties, each allowed
to act, but the inferior in subordination to the superior, lead to
virtue; and this to happiness. ‘ All the faculties,” says Gall,
“are good, and necessary to human nature such as it should be
according to the laws of the Creator. But I am convinced that
too energetic an activity of certain faculties produces vicious in-
clinations — causes the primitive destination of propagation to
degenerate into libertinism, the sentiment of property into an
inclination for theft, circumspection into irresolution and a ten-
dency to suicide, self-love into insolence, disobedience, &c.’’°
To employ all our faculties so as to produce the largest amount
of individual and general happiness, therefore, is the law of our
nature ; and, like all the laws of nature, is intended to be obeyed.
When we attempt to act contrarily to any law of nature, evil
arises either to ourselves immediately or ultimately, to others


sidered a distinct and fundamental faculty, some writers taught that there were
three sorts of memory; one for facts (memoria realis), one for words (memoria
verbalis), and one for places (memoria localis). See Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. iy.
p. 14, sq., 8vo. t. iv. p. 380. Some, that there are four ; a memory for words,
another for places, a third for time, and another for cause and effect, or causality.
See Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 357. sq-, 8vo. t. ii, p. 353,

ol, ¢, 4to, vol. mi. ps xxx.


358 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


contemporaneous with us, or to our successors, be they our pro-
geny or not. To obey them is, therefore, our solemn duty.
Christianity teaches the very precepts which lead to the greatest
happiness: and, if any one disregard the authority of them as
taught by Christ, because he sees no proofs of Christ’s super-
human authority, he must remember that they are already esta-
blished in nature, and that Bishop Butler himself, in his Analogy,
declares that man, “ front his make, constitution, or nature, is, in
the strictest and most proper sense, a law to himself, — he hath
the rule of right within,” » and that Christianity, as regards its
moral precepts, is a republication “of natural religion in its
genuine simplicity,” and that “ moral precepts are precepts the
reason of which we see,” and “ arise out of the nature of the case
itself, prior to external command.” 4

So imperative are the natural moral laws, that a man is equally
bound to obey them and be virtuous, though he disbelieves not
only the divine authority of Scripture, but a future state. Indeed,
in proportion to the necessity of being influenced in our conduct
by the hope of future reward or the fear of future punishment
must be the deficiency of real virtue. Nay, a man would be
equally bound to obey the moral laws, though, notwithstanding
the evidence of universal design, he should, from the difficulties
of the subject, reason himself into a doubt of the personality of


P Sermon iii.

4 Analogy, P. ii. c. i. Melancthon says, “ Wherefore our decision is this,
that those precepts which learned men have committed to writing, translating
them from the common sense and common feeling of human nature, are to be
accounted as not less divine than those contained in the tables given to Moses ;
and that it could not be the intention of our Maker to supersede, by a law given
on a stone, that which is graven with his own finger on the table of the heart.”

Volney’s Loi Naturelle deserves reading; and that part of Dr. Spurzheim’s
Phrenology which relates to the moral constitution of man. Mr. Combe’s work
on the Constitution of Man is plain and forcible, and should be in every body’s
hands, as a guide to happiness and a protection from absurd and superstitious
notions. Through a phrenological benefaction, its price is very low.

Upon the subject of metaphysics or the science of mind, all our knowledge,
I think, may be found in Gall’s works, — Sur [Anatomie et Physiologie du
Systeme Nerveux, and his Fonctions du Cerveau ; in Dr. Spurzheim’s Phrenology,
in 2 vols.; and in the admirable Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind,
by Thomas Brown, M.D. Edinb. 1826, 1 yol. 8vo.

Dr. Thomas Brown is not only among the ablest metaphysical writers, but is
the latest, and his work approaches as near to phrenology as was possible without
the aid of Gall’s method of investigation.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 359


the great cause of creation. The wicked man who holds any of
these opinions, in the idea of being loosened from the bonds of
virtue, is as ignorant as he is wicked.

Bishop Butler, in his profound metaphysical sermons, preached
at the Rolls Chapel, and which all should study, proves that
the natural tendency of all our united faculties and feelings is
to virtue and the greatest happiness. *


* Serm. i. Upon the social nature of Man. Serm. ii. iii. Upon the natural
supremacy of conscience.
_ Some have, in the most bigoted manner, denied that there is any foundation
for virtue, but in revelation. ‘ I never took any pleasure in moral ethics,” says
Mr, Gilbert Wakefield (Memoirs of his own Life, vol. i. p. 512.), “ and would
not give one penny for all the morality in the world.” Yet, as the present
Dean of Peterborough, Dr. Turton, remarks (p. 222.), “ this gentleman wrote a
book of about 230 pages in defence of Christianity ; and the volume is almost
entirely confined to the internal evidences and moral excellence of the system.
It is not unpleasant to observe the natural feelings of people thus completely
overthrowing their theoretical positions. ‘ Natural religion,’ Dr. Hey observes,
‘is pre-supposed in revealed.’” Socinus even declared (Toulmin’s Memoirs
of Faustus Socinus, p. 216.) that no man could discover the truths of natural
religion, not even the being of God, by the light of nature ; “and that the first
notices of a Divine Being were derived from Revelation or immediate com-
munications from God.” Archbishop Magee held the same doctrine ; and Bishop
Horne and the greater defender of the Trinity, Mr. Jones, went further, by be-
lieving the Bible to contain a system of natural philosophy (“ as certain critics,”
equally absurd in regard to another book, “are used to say, hyperbolically,”’ that
if all sciences were lost, they might be found in Virgil, (Lord Bacon, Advance-
ment of Learning), and, by becoming disciples of a person named Hutchinson,
who thought that, by the “light which revelation afforded him, compared with his
own observations, he saw farther into the constitution of the universe, and the
operations carried on in it, than Sir Isaac Newton had done.” (Bishop Horne’s
Works, vol. i. p. 445.) “ Mr. Hutchinson looked upon natural religion as an
engine of the devil, in these latter days, for the overthrow of the Gospel; and
therefore boldly called it the religion of Satan or Antichrist.” The fancy
was, however, old. ‘¢ Paracelsus and some others,” says Lord Bacon (heyy
have pretended to find the truths of all natural philosophy in the Scriptures,
scandalising and traducing all other philosophy as heathenish and profane.”
«* But neither do they give honour to the Scriptures, as they suppose, but much
embase them.” ‘* The scope or purpose of the spirit of God is not to express
matters of nature in the Scriptures otherwise than in passage, and for appli-
cation to man’s capacity and to matters moral and diyine; and it is a true rule,
auctoris aliud agentis parva auctoritas ; for it were a strange conclusion, if a man
should use a similitude for ornament or illustration sake, borrowed from nature
or history, according to vulgar conceit, as of a basilisk, an unicorn, a centaur,
Briareus, an Hydra, or the like ; and that therefore he must needs be thought to
affirm the matter thereof positively to be true.”—The mind is a subject of natural


360 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


We will now consider the special functions of the different
parts of the nervous system.

The mind is evidently the property of the brain; and the
operations of the mind, whether relating to sensation, will, intel-
lect, or affections, are evidently the operations of the brain. In the
division of this work devoted to general physiology, I proved the
brain to be the organ of the mind, as much as the liver is the organ
of the secretion of bile; that what holds good of the function of
every other part, holds good of the function of the brain; and that
to ascribe the power of the brain to an immaterial imaginary some-
thing called a soul, isa mere hypothesis, the remains of unen-
lightened times, and not only unnecessary to the belief of a
future state through a divine revelation, but calculated to throw
discredit on such revelation, by making its annunciation of a
future state appear superfluous. §


science, and Lord Bacon’s remarks apply to it equally as to astronomical and
geological matters ; and I consider that a soul stands upon the same foundation
as a centaur or a Briareus.

* An old argument, which I thought too puerile to notice, and which was
disposed of by Gall (1. c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 119. sq.), has just been revived by Lord
Brougham to uphold the existence of something called soul distinct from matter.
(Paley’s Natural Theology, illustrated by Henry Lord Brougham. London, 1835.)
The body is said to be incessantly changing its constituent particles, so that no
part of it is the same after a certain lapse of time ; and yet we feel ourselves to
be mentally the same. Now, the change of the particles of the body may be
granted. But what then? Do not all the properties of all parts of the body
remain the same, as much as its mental character? are not the fresh particles so
assimilated to each part, that all we can see or feel of our bodies, and the
qualities of every part, remain the same, as much as all we observe of the
mind, throughout all the changes of particles? Is not a man held to be the
same bodily as well as mentally all the days of his life? If the face is marked
with the small-pox, do not the pits remain throughout life, though the particles
may have all changed ten times? If a nervous or dyspeptic affection exists here-
ditarily, does not the morbid functional peculiarity continue through all the
repeated changes of the particles? If a person acquires immunity from small-pox
by vaccination, or by having once passed through the disease, is he not in nearly
all instances safe against it, though he live long enough to change all his particles
again, and again, and again, What is true of all other organs and parts is true,
to just the same extent, of the brain, in regard to its substance and its qualities.

An assertion of Lord Brougham’s, that the mind does not decay with the body,
but acquires vigour while the body declines, is incorrect.“ It is equally cer-
tain,” says he, ‘that while the body is rapidly decaying, between 60 or 63 and
70, the mind suffers hardly any loss of strength in the generality of men: that
men continue to 75 or 76 in the possession of all their mental powers, while few


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 361


Ifit is clear that the brain is the organ of mind, it is extremely
probable that particular portions of it have different offices.


a


can boast of even their physical strength ; and instances are not wanting of per-
sons, who, between 80 and 90, and even older, when the body can hardly be said to
live, possess every faculty of the mind unimpaired.” (p. 120.) This statement is
perfectly opposite to sound observation. Gall published when between 60 and 70,
and in conyersation appeared in full possession of his intellect; nay, as to cere-
bellum and body at large, he declared that he never omitted matrimonial duties
for 24 hours. Madame Gall assured me, in regard to the whole man, ‘que le
docteur n’étoit pas épuisé ; que ses forces n’étoient pas diminuées!” But what
he wrote did not contain a single discovery or new view, and was merely the
offspring of his former labours and mental powers. He told me his mind’s
vigour was impaired, and his head somewhat diminished. A man’s judgment
may become greater near 60; not from greater strength, but from enlarged
experience and longer habit. But let him attempt what is not habitual with him,
or let him attempt originality, and, though he may not discover his decline, the
rest of the world will. The Archbishop begged to be informed when his
sermons showed his mind to be falling off; but was offended beyond forgiveness
when Gil Blas told him that his last homily “ne paroit pas tout-d-fait de
la force des précédents.” “ Mon esprit, grace au Ciel,” replied the indignant
old man, ‘n’a rien encore perdu de sa vigeur.” When old men work at some-
thing original, or pursue a course of public intellectual effort, their falling off
is manifest, and we discover that the phrase ‘ retained their faculties to the last,’ is
vague and incorrect, just as I formerly remarked it to be when applied to persons
near dissolution. I am not aware of any great discoveries or original productions
by men who had attained the age of 60; but, should any instances of full mental
vigour in old men be adduced, they would only be exceptions, just like octoge-
narian fathers, or persons who we see continually in the papers lived to 90 or 100
and walked so many miles daily to within a week of their death for I know not how
many years. An eminent agriculturist has been begetting a family at past 70.*
Yet who would fix upon a man of 70 as a postman, or to ensure an heir? Are
not elderly men found to fall off from their full and palmy condition of mind,
till they all acquire the title of old women? There may be varieties in the
period of general decline, as there are of full development ; and there may be
varieties in the decline of different organs in the same system. Will not the
stomachs of some old men receive and digest food as well as those of young ones?
But decline arrives; and those who use such arguments should show that the


* Every Sunday newspaper records the death of some wonderful old poor person,
and I take this by chance from the Morning Chronicle of the 30th of last November.
“The veteran Lord Lynedoch has been visiting at Holkham; and we are happy
to understand that, notwithstanding his advanced age (we believe the venerable
General to be in his ninety-second or ninety-third year) he enjoys the diversion
of shooting, and sees well enough to killa hare. Mr. Coke (the agriculturist I
alluded to) enjoys and directs the battues with the same health and energy he has
done for many years,”


362 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Numerous old writers had assigned situations for the faculties,
but in the most fanciful manner ; and, from regarding as distinct


een Ss
mind does not require sleep, is not weakened by over-exertion of the brain or
any other part, by want of food, by cold, &c., and is not affected by narcotics
and stimulants. Those who wish to show the mind independent of the brain in
one point, must show it in all.

In reply to the argument for an immaterial something’ from the consciousness
of personality, I reminded my readers formerly that the fly must be as con-
scious of its individual being — its personality — as the philosopher about whose
head it buzzes, If he must be believed to have an immaterial and immortal
soul on this account, so must the fiy, and so must the smallest microscopic
creature. Nay, if an animal is of such a nature that it will re-acquire bodily per-
fection or can live when divided into two or more, its mind can do the same:, so
that a planaria’s consciousness may be made into two or ten if we please (see supra,
p- 254.)— each new animal made from sections having its sense of personality,
and therefore its pretension to an immaterial principle, as much as the original
and as much as a philosopher; and simply because its sensorial nervous system,
though divided, fully thrives. Our own minds, and those of all other animals,
are known to us only as powers generated merely by matter, through being of a
certain composition and placed under certain circumstances, possessing or acquir-
ing the property of changing and developing, till at length brain results, with
its mental properties ; and, as the respective parts of this brain are farther im-
proved in texture and developed, so increased and fresh faculties appear. The
properties of every other organ come in the same way.

Lord Brougham (p.102. sqq.) censures former writers for not using an argu-
ment which, unfortunately for their characters as observers of nature, was used
by Drs. Barrow (7th Sermon on the Creed), Bentley (Sermon ii.), Clarke (On the
Being and Attributes of God, Prop. viii.), Reid (Essays on the Powers of the
Human Mind, vol. i. p. 97.), Beattie (Dissertations, chap. i. sect. i.). A parti-
cular combination of matter, he asserts, cannot give birth to what we call mind,
because this would be “ an assertion altogether peculiar and unexampled,” of
which “ we have no other instance ;” because “* we know of no case in which
the combination of certain elements produces something quite different, not
only from each of the simple ingredients, but also different from the whole
compound,” —‘ both the organised body and something different from it
and not having one of its properties —neither dimensions, nor weight, nor co-
lour, nor form.” (p. 102. sqq.) — To think,” says Dr. Barrow, in anguish,
“a gross body may be ground and pounded into rationality, a slow body may
be thumped and driven into passion, a rough body may be filed and polished
into a faculty of discovering and resenting things ; that a cluster of pretty thin
round atoms (as Democritus, forsooth, conceited), that a well-mixed combin-
ation of elements (as Empedocles fancied), that a harmonious contemperation
(or crasis) of humours (as Galen, dreaming, it seems, upon his drugs and his
potions, would persuade us) ; that an implement made up of I know not what fine
springs, and wheels, and such mechanic knacks (as some of our modern wizards
have been busy in devising), should, without more to do, become the subject of


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 863


faculties what are merely modes of action of faculties to which they
were altogether strangers, their assertions on the subject were


so rare capacities and endowments, the author of actions so worthy and works so
wonderful, &c. &c. — how senseless and absurd conceits are these! How can
we, without great indignation and regret, entertain such suppositions?” As a
son of Galen, I would reply to Barrow (“ dreaming, it seems, upon his” dusty
folios of divinity in his study, instead of looking abroad through nature) and to
Lord Brougham, — 1. That the brain, matter though it be, is seen, in positive
fact, to have these capacities and endowments — that it has them in proportion as
it is better organised and has a greater bulk of its respective portions — that the
mental phenomena are disturbed by all the means, applied to the brain, that dis-
turb the functions of other organs when applied to them: 2. That there is an
insensible transition of mental qualities from the lowest brutes through the
cleverest, and through human beings of the dullest apprehension and feelings
(many of whom are far below most brutes) to the highest among us; and that
the mental properties of the lowest are neither “ dimensions, nor weight, nor
colour, nor form,” any more than the mental properties of ourselves, and must
therefore arise from something more than matter, or our high capacities may be
merely properties of matter. What faculty or degree of faculty that appears in
the scale of animals is the first sign of soul? Nay, the properties of simple
life, such as vegetables have in common with us, are neither “ dimensions, nor
weight, nor colour, nor form,” — they cannot be produced by “ grinding, pound-
ing, thumping, driving, filing; polishing, by springs, wheels, and such mechanic
knacks.” They, I suppose, are not now ascribed to a soul, though they once
were, and ought to be still by such believers in souls.

The vital properties of a cabbage, I presume, are allowed to result from a
well-mixed combination of elements ; and if such a combination produces such
a result, other combinations may and do produce results still higher. What in
common with extension, impenetrability, and inertness, have heat, electricity, mag-
netism ? yet matter placed under certain circumstances displays these properties ;
and a change of circumstances changes them. Biniodide of mercury is yellow;
but reduce its temperature to a certain point, nay, only touch it, and instantly it
‘becomes red, Soft iron and nickel have magnetic properties at a certain tem-
perature, but suddenly lose them at a higher, and nickel at a less elevation than
iron. Soft iron connected with a magnet, or encircled by a coil of copper wire
and connected with a galvanic battery, becomes magnetic, but no longer than the
connection lasts.

What property of dimension, weight, &c. is that possessed by mercury, iron,
and so many other elements, of variously affecting living natures, both corporeally
and mentally? A few elements combined in various proportions acquire various
such properties, and, in some, properties of the most deadly kind. Prussic acid is
only certain proportions of carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen — all which, in other
proportions and combinations, are essential elements of our bodies. The living
matter of vegetables and animals is common matter arranged and compounded
as in no other instances, and which, properly circumstanced as to temperature, &c.,


364 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


necessarily groundless and ridiculous. Burton, for example, in his
compilation, says, “ Inner senses are three in number, so called


sangria EO CP LT
gives rise to the phenomenon of life. When living matter arranges itself, accord-


jng to its properties, into that peculiar combination which we call nervous, other
peculiar phenomena appear ; and if its vital powers arrange it into that compo-
sition and organ called brain, and this is properly circumstanced, mind appears.
In truth, no combination of elements and arrangement of matter thus combined
occurs in inanimate substances as we find in vegetables ; no such combination
of elements and such organisation in vegetables as we find in brutes ; and no
such combination and organisation in the other organs of brutes as we find in
the brain, and the brain of no brute is equal in the development of its various
parts to the human brain. The vital and mental phenomena are unexampled
in the inanimate world — result from no combination or organisation there,
simply because no such combination and organisation occur in the inanimate
world. Combine and organise inanimate matter by supplying seeds and young
plants with proper inanimate matter, and every vegetable may be generated
from one or two, in indefinite abundance, as long as matter is supplied and ne-
cessary circumstances attainable ; and you give living properties to matter pre-
viously inanimate. You may do this equally with animals, and thus multiply
minds; you may do it equally with human animals, and thus multiply human
minds indefinitely — gencrate souls! Nay, you may generate what quality of
mind you please, just as you may generate the properties of a rose, or of a lily
if you prefer them, by propagating from a rose or lily, thus converting inanimate
matter into roses or lilies; and just as you can propagate the intellectual and
moral qualities of the intelligent and affectionate dog, or the musical qualities of
the bulfinch, if you prefer them, by propagating dogs or bulfinches, thus con-
verting inanimate matter into dogs and bulfinches. You may generate not only
human faculties, but any variety of them you please, as much as you can varieties
of body, by propagating and feeding different varieties of human beings,—by con-
verting common matter into human beings, and human beings of whatever sort is
preferred. Propagate from cretins in Switzerland, and you have idiotism ; from
sagacious parents, and you have intelligence ; from parents endowed with a
specific talent, you produce this talent, be it musical or any other; from violent,
vicious, half mad parents, and you beget a curse to mankind, in ferocity, de-
pravity, or eccentricity ; from mad parents, you produce madness; from the
gentle, and benevolent, and affectionate, you generate gentleness and Jove. With
but one parent so marked, you may often succeed in generating his or her quali-
ties; and when, with two alike, you fail, the failures are not more frequent,
nor caused by other circumstances, than failures of transmission of corporeal re-
semblances, or of the transmission of the mental qualities of brutes or of the
properties of vegetables. Strange souls, to be thus under our command as
to numbers and qualities! So far from there being, as Lord Brougham says,
no case in which the combination of certain elements produces something quite
different, the world is incessantly filled with such cases ; all the vegetable and
animal creation are examples of inanimate matter incessantly combined into the
production of new qualities totally different from those previously possessed.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 865


because they be within the brain-pan, as common sense, phantasie,
and memory.” Of ‘common sense,” “the forepart of the brain is


It is asserted by Lord Brougham, who positively says that we have a ‘¢ per-
petual sense that we are thinking,” “ quite independent of all material objects,”
(p. 56.) that the circumstance of the existence of matter is only an hypothesis,
and that materialists grossly and dogmatically assume that matter exists.
Now, we do not assume — we know, that matter exists. From certain sens-
ations, we believe inevitably, intuitively, by the laws of God, that what we
term matter exists. He allows, indeed, “ that we believe in the existence of
matter, because we cannot help it.”” (p. 241.) This is enough. As to our minds,
we observe that no mind exists in nature but as a property or power of matter.
We never see mind. We certainly learn the existence of matter by the property
of our brain called mind: but that is no reason for saying that the power called
mind exists alone. If it were felt by ourselves to exist, though we had no know-
ledge of matter around us, it would only show that we felt personality without
knowing the cause of it, — without knowing that we had brains. It would show
our ignorance only. The elephant, and whale, and the smallest insect, with their
sense of personality as real as ours, know nothing of their brains; yet we know
that their mind belongs toa brain. If even we were ignorant of the external world,
we should know there is something more than an immaterial soul without dimen-
sions. For, though we could live for a time without our external senses, we could
not live a few minutes without breathing. We should, as usual, internal y feel our
personality in that part of space where our head is. We should also internally feel
the uneasiness arising from want of breath at a distance from this—in the part of
space where our lungs are. We should be compelled to will a motion to remove this
uneasy sensation. All this must inform us of matter. Nay, could we live without
breath, —mere heads, since the head might ache in different parts, we should have
internal evidence of extension. When Lord Brougham reminds us that we
learn the existence of matter only by our minds, he should remember that we are
not conscious of our existence till matter makes an impression upon us. The
existence of mind as a property of peculiarly arranged and circumstanced matter
was fully proved before, and therefore these considerations, like every other fact,
harmonise with the account; and the doctrine of the existence of mind, inde-
pendently of matter, indicates a want of modern knowledge and involves us in
endless absurdity. Its studied display usually proceeds in our profession from
rank hypocrisy and malice, as though a materialist may not be a devout Chris-
tian, and these pharisees say aloud, “I thank thee, Lord, that I am not as other
men are — even as this materialist.” I agree with the early Christians and Mr.
Carmichael (dn Essay on such Physical Considerations as are connected with Man’s
ultimate Destination, §c., by Andrew Carmichael, M.R.I. A, Dublin, 1830. ), that,
as all nature is one whole, all other created beings are also organised. They
and we are in but one spot at a time, and can move from one spot to another:
what does so, cannot be else than matter and a property of matter. I consider
this alone a proof that we possess no such imaginary thing as an immaterial soul.
A masterly exposure of Lord Brougham’s strange misstatements and sophisms on
the subject of materialism will be found in Observations on the Discourse of Na-


866 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


his organ or seat ;” of “phantasie or imagination, which some


call estimative or cogitative,” “his organ is the middle cell of the
Sie aoe SS a a ee
tural Theology by Henry Lord Brougham; by Thomas Wallace, Esq. LL.D.
one of his Majesty’s Councillors in Ireland. London, 1835. An equally able
and very learned exposure of the innumerable literary errors of this unfortunate
book is contained in a work which must delight every man of education, and
from which I have gained much information, — Natural Theology considered with
Reference to Lord Brougham’s Discourse on that Subject; by Thomas Turton,
D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge, and Dean
of Peterborough. Cambridge, 1836. The Creator is a distinct being, to whom
there is nothing “simile aut secundum,” whose essence is incommunicable ;
and no created being has His attributes, though we speak of the Divine Mind.
He is every where — has always existed — will always exist—and orders and
sustains all things. His nature is past finding out; and, therefore, to attempt to
conceive His nature, or to speak of Him except as speaking of His works and
Jaws, is vain — and to think the highest created beings even approach His nature
is absurd. Inthe words of Mr. Carmichael, —‘“ There is no spirit in the uni-
verse but His incommunicable essence.”

“If Lord Brougham is deeply in error when he calls, as he does, the insensible
change of particles during life an entire destruction of the body,”—* the body’s
death” and “ dissolution,” though organisation and life have not experienced the in-
termission of a moment, he is equally wrong when he derives a proof of the existence
of something immaterial from the,invariableness of our consciousness of identity.
Not only does our memory often fail us, so that we cannot say whether we did or
said certain things which others know was the fact ; not only are we continually de-
ceived in dreams, as having said and done what never was the fact, so that, as Mr.
Wallace remarks, we frequently exclaim,’ Did I really do so and so, or did T only
dream it ?” but insane people daily believe themselves to be others ; and, after vio-
lent affections of the brain, people not unfrequently forget who they are, and believe
themselves to be other persons. (See Gall, 1], c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 122. sqq.) Nay, cases
occur in which a man has the consciousness of two persons. As the brain, like all
other organs of animal life, is double, and the operations of the two halves of the
brain proceed like one, just as the double impressions on the eyes and ears are
known only as one, so one side of the brain is sometimes diseased or injured to even
a great amount, without impairment of the mind. But iftheir action is rendered
discordant — not the action of one arrested, but thrown out of harmony with the
other — or if they act alternately, we have the phenomena of two states of con-
sciousness. ‘* One of Gall’s friends, a physician,” says Dr. Spurzheim,” often
complained that he could not think with the left side of his head ; the right side was
one inch higher than the left. Gall attended a gentleman who for three years heard
peasants insulting him on his left side. He commonly discerned his derange-
ment, and rectified his error; but if he took a little too much wine, or had a fit
of fever, he always imagined there were voices abusing him. Tiedemann men-
tions a certain Moor who was alienated on one side of his brain, and observed


his madness with the other.
« All monomaniacs have a complicated consciousness. I saw in Dublin a
lunatic who fancied himself the Duke of Wellington, He thought to have com-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. : 367


brain ;” and of memory, “his seat and organ, the back part of the
brain.”* This was the account of the faculties given by Arabian


manded in Spain, and to have gained the battle of Waterloo! yet at the same
time he was a clever and excellent servant, did his service at table and in the
house with great propriety. I saw him handing round at a table, where there
was a large party, every thing with perfect order and decency, so that no guest
could suspect his aberration.

‘* There are other sorts of remarkable cases which prove that consciousness is
not always single. Mr. Combe (System of Phrenology, p. 108.) quotes from the
Medical Repository, the case of a Miss R., in the United States, who naturally
possessed a very good constitution, and arrived at adult age without having it
impaired by disease. She possessed an excellent capacity, and enjoyed fair
opportunities to acquire knowledge. Besides the domestic arts and social attain-
ments, she had improved her mind by reading and conversation, and was versed
in penmanship. Her memory was capacious, and stored with a copious stock of
ideas. Unexpectedly, and without any forewarning, she fell into a profound
sleep, which continued several hours beyond the ordinary term. On waking she
was discovered to have lost every trait of acquired knowledge. Her memory was a
tabula rasa. Ali vestiges both of words and things were obliterated and gone.
It was found necessary for her to learn every thing again. She even acquired,
by new efforts, the art of spelling, reading, writing, and calculating, and gra-
dually became acquainted with the persons and objects around, like a being for
the first time brought into the world. In these exercises she made considerable
proficiency. But after a few months another fit of somnolency invaded her. On
rousing from it, she found herself restored to the state she was before the first
paroxysm, but was wholly ignorant of every event and occurrence that had be-
fallen her afterwards. ‘The former condition of her existence she called the old
state, and the latter the new state ; and she is as unconscious of her double cha-
racter as two distinct persons are of their respective natures. During four years
and upwards, she had undergone periodical transitions from one of these states
to another. The alterations were always consequent upon a long and sound
sleep. In her old state she possessed all her original knowledge ; in her new
state, only what she acquired since. If a gentleman or lady be introduced to
her in the old state, or vice versd, and so of all other matters, to know them.
satisfactorily, she must learn them in both stafes. In the old state she pos-
sesses fine powers of penmanship, while in the new she writes a poor awkward
hand ; having not had time or means to become expert. In January, 1816,
both the lady and her family were able to conduct affairs without embarrassment,
By quickly knowing whether she is in the old or new state, they regulate their
intercourse, and govern themselves accordingly. The Rev. Timothy Alden of
Meadville has drawn up a history of this curious case.

«¢ I know the history of a noble family where a son had similar fits, accom-


SSS eee


* Anatomy of Melancholy, P. 1. S.1. Mem. 2. Subs, 7,
cc


368 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


authors, as Gall remarks", and repeated, with little variation, by
the European writers of the middle ages. In the 13th century,


ee ——__nae


panied by a special memory; so that consciousness was double, one for the
ordinary state, and the other for the fits.

« Dr. Devan read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh,.in February, 1822, the
history of a case, observed by Dr. Dyer of Aberdeen, in a girl, 16 years old,
which lasted from 2d March to 11th June, 1815. ‘The first symptom was an un-
common propensity to fall asleep in the evenings. This was followed by the
habit of talking in her sleep on those occasions. One evening she fell asleep in
this manner; imagining herself an episcopal clergyman, she went through the
ceremony of baptising three children, and gave an appropriate prayer. Her
mistress shook her by the shoulders, on which she awoke, and appeared uncon-
scious of every thing, except that she had fallen asleep, of which she showed her-
self ashamed. She sometimes dressed herself and the children while in this
state, or, as Miss L. called it, ‘ dead asleep ;’
such a manner as to show that she understood the question; but the answers


answered questions put to her in


were often, though not always, incongruous. One day in this state she sat at
breakfast, with perfect correctness, with her eyes shut. She afterwards awoke
with the child on her knees, and wondered how she got on her clothes. Some-
times the cold air awakened her, at other times she was seized with the affection
whilst walking out with the children. She sang a hymn delightfully in this
state ; and, from a comparison which Dr. Dyer had an opportunity of making,
it appeared incomparably better done than she could accomplish when awake.
In the mean time a still more singular and interesting symptom began to make
its appearance. ‘The circumstances which occurred during the paroxysm were
completely forgotten by her when the paroxysms were over, but were perfectly
remarked during subsequent paroxysms. Her mistress said, that when in this
stupor, on subsequent occasions, she told her what was said to her on the evening
when she baptised the children. A depraved fellow servant, understanding that
she wholly forget every transaction that occurred during the fit, clandestinely
introduced a young man into the house, who treated her with the utmost rude-
ness, whilst her fellow servant stopped her mouth with the bed-clothes, and
otherwise overpowered a vigorous resistance which was made by her even during
the influence of her complaint. Next day she had not the slightest recollec-
tion even of that transaction ; nor did any person interested in her welfare know
of it for several days, till she was in one of her paroxysms, when she related the
whole fact to her mother. Next Sunday she was taken to church by her mistress
while the paroxysm was on her. She shed tears during the sermon, particularly
during the account given of the execution of three young men at Edinburgh,
who had described, in their dying declarations, the dangerous steps with which


« 4to. vol. ii, p. 358., Svo. t. ii, p. 353. See Avicenna, 1. i. sect. 1. doctr.
6. cap. v. p. 25.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 369


a head divided into regions according to these opinions was de-
signed by Albert the Great, Bishop of Ratisbon*; and another
was published by Petrus Montagnana, in 1491.y One was pub-
lished at Venice, in 1562, by Ludovico Dolce, a Venetian, in a
work upon strengthening and preserving memory; and another
at Bologna, in 1670, in a work styled Apologia Fisonomica, by


their career of vice and infamy took its commencement. When she returned
home, she recovered in a quarter of an hour, was quite amazed at the questions
put to her about the church sermon, and denied that she had been to any such
such place; but next night, on being taken ill, she mentioned that she had been
at church, repeated the words of the text, and, in Dr. Dyer’s hearing, gave an
accurate account of the tragical narrative of the three young men, by which her
feelings had been so powerfully affected. “

«« The same phenomena present themselves when in the state of somnambulism
produced by animal magnetism. It has been repeatedly observed that some
magnetised persons acquire a new consciousness and memory during their mag-
netic sleep. When this state has subsided, all that passed in it is obliterated,
and the recollection of the ordinary state is restored. If the magnetic sleep is
recalled again, the memory of the circumstances which occurred in that state is
restored, so that the individuals may be said to live in a state of divided or double
consciousness.” (Dr. Spurzheim, Phren. Am. ed. p. 78. sqq.) See Gall on Per-
sonality (moi), 8vo. t. ii. p. 401. sqq.

x In the Tesorretto of Brunetto Latini, the preceptor of Dante, published in
that century, the doctrine is taught in rhyme : —


Nel capo son tre celle,

Ed io dird di quelle,
Davanii € lo intelletto

E la forza d’ apprendere
Quello che puote intendere.
In mezzo 6 la ragione

E la discrezione

Che scherne buono e male.
E lo terno e l’iguale
Dirietro sta con gloria

La valente memoria,

Che ricordo e retiene
Quello ch’ in essa viene.


Y Gall, 4to. vol. ii. p. 358. sq., 8vo. t. ii. p. 354. sq., where as many his-
torical details are given as the greatest detractor from Gall’s originality could
wish.

A friend presented me with this book: — Dialogo di M. Ludovico Dolce,
Nel quale si ragiona del modo di accrescere e conservare la memoria. In Venetia.

a


370 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Ghiradelli Bolognonese. In the British Museum I have seen a
chart of the universe and the elements of all sciences, and in
it a large head so delineated is conspicuous. It was pub-
lished at Rome so late as 1632, and, what is singular, engraved
at Antwerp by one Theodore Galleus, and the head is really a
good family likeness of Dr. Gall, who, however, was born at
Tiefenbrunn in Suabia, between Stuttgard and the Rhine, March 9.
1758. @


* Notice Historique sur le Docteur Gall,
par M. Fossati, M.D. Journal de la So-
ciété Phrénologique de Paris, t. i. 1832.
It is remarkable that Aristotle, in his
Physiognomy, though he gives a number of
ridiculous signs of character from the face OQjfactus
and numerous parts of the body, gives
three only from the cranium; but that


these are in strict accordance with the (“Ms —


phrenology of ‘Gall, who admitted of no
deduction of intellectual or moral charac-
ter from the developments of the face,
but from those of the cranium only.*
“‘ Those who have .a:large head, are sa-
gacious—are like dogs; those who have
a small head, are stupid — are like asses; Head given hy Dolce, 1562. It is
those who have a conical head, have no copied into the Edin. Phrenolog.
shame — are like birds with curved claws.” Journ. vol. ii. No. 7.


Meydany of iy nEpariv EXovTES, alcOnrinol> dvadéperas Ext rode ubvace of 3 feixpay,
avatoOnrat’ dvapéperas Ent rods bvoug. of Tag HEparas pokol, dvaidel'ss avapéperat Emi rove
yoperldvuxac.— De Physiognomid, cap. vi.

It is no less remarkable that one of each of these points is spoke
of the three greatest poets.

Milton distinguishes man from Eve and all the other beings in Eden, above
whom he was intended to rule through the force of intellect,
forehead :


n of by each


by his spacious


“ His fair large front and eye sublime declare
Absolute rule.” Paradise Lost, b. iv.


SS eeeeeeeSSSSSSSshsesesesessssSSSsesSeseFs


* |. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 234. sqq., Sve. t. v. p. 429, sqq- He of course allows
pathognomy, or the art of judging of the state of the feelings by the expression of
the countenance in action, to be real; and he mentions a number of curious facts
illustrative of the coincidence of pathognomy with the seat of the organs. His
original genius is very conspicuous on this subject.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. $71


It is, however, more than probable that the different parts of
the brain have different offices. Its faculties are so various, that
it is impossible to imagine them possessed by the same portion.
The faculty for melody is perfectly different from the love of
offspring. If to suppose all parts of the brain are organs for all
faculties is difficult, the difficulty appears greater on reflecting
that in that case the whole brain would be concerned in every act
and feeling, or, if the whole brain is not thus constantly at work at
all things, that different parts would perform the very same offices
at different times, each part working in every kind of mental act
and feeling in its turn. Neither does the brain perform merely
one thing, asthe whole liver performs the secretion of merely one
fluid —bile; nor is its structure the same throughout, like that of
the liver.

The best authors hold that its various parts have various
offices », and Gall proves that they have.


Shakspeare makes Caliban say —
‘¢ T will have none on ’t: we shall lose our time,
And all be turned to barnacles, or to apes
With foreheads villainous low.” Tempest, Act iv. sc. 1.
Homer gives the basest fellow who went to Troy, a conical head —a miserable
development of the seat of the moral sentiments :. —
Oepcirng eee
+. aloysoros 3€ avip bard "IAsoy HAGE.
Dobdg Env KEpaAry.
Ilias, B.


6 « The brain is a very complicated organ,”


says Bonnet, “or rather ar
assemblage of very different organs.” (Palingénésie, t. i. p. 334.) Tissot contends.
that every perception has different fibres. ((uvres, t. iii. p. 33.) Cuvier says,
that ‘ certain parts of the brain in all classes of animals are large or small ac~
cording to certain qualities of the animals.” (Anatomie Comparée, t. ii.) Sém-
merring trusts that we shall one day find the particular seats of the different
orders of ideas. ‘Let the timid, therefore, take courage,” says Dr. Georget,
in his admirable work upon the nervous system, ‘and, after the example of such
high authorities, fear not to commit the unpardonable crime of innovation, of
passing for cranioscopists, by admitting the plurality of the faculties and mental
organs of the brain, or at least by daring to examine the subject.” (De la Phy-
siologie du Systeme Nerveur, et specialement du Cerveau, t. i. p. 126.) Gall’s suc-
cessful reply to some very unjust observations made in this work, will be found
in his 8vo edit. t.v. p. 488. sqq. Dr. Vimont repeats these, apparently in
ignorance that Gall had fully replied in his small work; and censures Gall
for having incorrectly said that Bonnet considered every cerebral fibre as having
a distinet function. Now Bonnet’s words really are, — “I thus consider every


cas


372 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


If the old course, recommended by Mr. Dugald Stewart, of
investigating the mind by attending to the subjects of our own
consciousness, had been persevered in, the science of mird
would have remained stationary for ever.¢ Our powers and
feelings are distributed in such various degrees, and the external
circumstances which have acted upon them are so various, that
every man, judging from himself only, would draw up a different
account of the human mind; as different from the attempts of
all others, as the representations of the human face and head
would be, if every painter were to execute his own likeness only.
The account would be as inaccurate as if an individual were to
determine the bodily powers and susceptibilities of the operation
of agents by his own. Unquestionably much must be learned by
observing the workings of our minds, and much can be learned


sensible fibre as a very little organ with its own functions.” ‘ The brain contains
a prodigious number of organs infinitely small, appropriated to sentiment and
thought.”

© Although Mr. Dugald Stewart declares that in his own inquiries he has
‘aimed at nothing more than to ascertain, in the first place, the laws of our con-
stitution, as far as they can be discovered by attention to the subjects ef our own
consciousness ;” (Zssays, Preliminary Dissertation, p. 2.) that the whole of a
philosopher’s life, if he spends it to any purpose, is one continued series of expe-
riments on his own faculties and powers ;” (p- 40.) and that “the structure of
the mind (whatever collateral aids may be derived from observing the varieties of
genius in our fellow creatures) is accessible to those only who ean retire into the
deepest recesses of their own internal frame ; ”” yet he adds, “even to those, pre-
senting, along with the generic attributes of the race, many of the specifie peculi-
arities of the individual,” (Elements, vol. ii. p. 513.) and has really the following
passages in the forty-second and forty-third pages of the Essays. — “ To counter-
balance the advantages which this science of mind lies under, in consequence
of its slender stock of experiments, made directly and intentionally on the minds
of our fellow creatures, human life exhibits to our observation a boundless variety,
both of intellectual and moral. phenomena, by a diligent study of which we may
ascertain almost every point that we could wish to investigate, if we had expe-
yiments at our command.” ‘Savage society, and all the different modes of
civilisation ; the different eallings of individuals, whether liberal er mechanical ;
the prejudiced clown, the factitious man of fashion ; the varying phases of cha-
racter, from infancy to old age ; the prodigies effected by human art, in all the
objects around. us, laws, government, commerce, religion ; but above all, the
records of thought preserved in those volumes which fill our libraries ; — what are
they but experiments, by which nature illustrates, for our instruction, on her own
grand scale, the varied range of many intellectual faculties, and: the omnipotence


of education in fashioning the mind.” |


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 373


in no other way; just as we may learn much of the external form
of the human body by looking at ourselves, and cannot learn
what are the feelings of hunger and thirst, heat and cold, except
from our own consciousness. But it is only by extensive ob-
servation of others, of different sexes, ages, races, education,
occupations, and habits, in addition to the study of ourselves,
that this knowledge is to be acquired. Nor would much pro-
gress have been made without the discovery — that strength of
individual talent and disposition was associated with proportionate
development of particular portions of the brain. By this re-
mark, confirmed by the opposite observation of deficient deve-
lopment of the same portions of the brain being accompanied by
deficiency of talent or disposition, the existence of particular
faculties was firmly established; and indeed Gall discovered them
by observing persons conspicuous in some mental points to have
certain portions of the head extremely large. I did but allude
to craniology while detailing Gall’s account of the mind, because
the arrangement may be perfectly accurate, although eraniology
be false; nor when speaking of the brain as the organ of the
mind, because that fact also is independent of Gall’s system.
But, if the account of the mind, the use of the brain, and the
development of the brain, generally observed by that of the cra-
nium — by craniology, be now viewed together, they will all be
seen mutually and beautifully to confirm each other.

Much ignorant invective, but no argument, has been written
against the doctrine ; nor a single fact adduced in opposition to
it. We are presented with a simple statement — that constant
strength of certain parts of the mind is accompanied by strong
development of certain parts of the brain, and, consequently, of
the skull, except in disease and old age ; and deficient development
of certain parts of the brain, and, consequently, of the skull, accom-
panied by deficient strength of certain parts of the mind. The truth
must be ascertained, not by speculating, quibbling, and abusing, not
by giving improper way to the lower feelings of our nature, but by
observing whether this is the case; and every one has it in his power
to make the necessary observations. Those who pretend to have
facts to offer in objection, must first be so well acquainted with cra-
niology as to be able to judge accurately of the development which
they adduce, and have carefully ascertained the character and
exact talents of the individual whom they fancy to be an exception.
Yet accounts the most absurd, and the most remote from truth in

ce 4


374 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


these particulars, are uttered and printed every day, even by those
who assume the character of scientifie men. Inquirers, however,
must not expect always to find the converse of the statement
verified, — to find strength of development always attended by
strength of certain parts of the mind; nor deficiency of the mani-
festations of certain parts of the mind always attended by deficient
development. Because the development of the head may arise
from other causes than brain, or the quality of tle brain may not
be healthy; and, on the other hand, deficiency of the manifest-
ations of a part of the mind may arise from mere want of excite-
ment, or from disease. The head may be large, generally or
locally, from fluid, morbid growth of bone, &c.; or the brain,
though the cause of the size, may be of bad quality from original
fault of structure, from subsequent disease, or from old age. But
the existence of disease is generally known, and old age must be
evident. Again, defective manifestation of a part of the mind
from mere want of excitement rarely occurs except in regard to
the intellectual powers; for external circumstances almost always
exist around sufficient for the play of the feelings. Thus, although
any phrenologist may always without fear assert positively of the
head from constant positive exhibitions of the mind, and always
fearlessly assert negatively of the mind from negative exhibitions
of the head; he would not assert respecting the mind from
positive exhibitions of the head, nor respecting the head from
negative exhibitions of the mind, without certaiu provisions, viz.
that the size of the head depends upon healthy brain, and the
deficiency of mind arises from no want of excitement, or from
disease. Yet, in the far greater number of instances, the de-
velopment of the head agrees with the mind. In the greater
number of those in which it does not, the probability of the want
of agreement is evident; and in the rest, the phrenologist cannot
be wrong, because he will never assert from positive develop-
ment of the head, nor from negative manifestation of the mind.
Even in unsoundness of mind, the character generally agrees
with the development; the parts of the mind that may remain
sound, generally manifest themselves according to the develop-
ment of the head; and those faculties which are diseased, are
usually excited in proportion to the development of the cor-
responding parts of the head.’


4 Let the antiphrenologist get over the diagnosis of Gall in his visit to some
Prussian prisons (I. ¢. 4to. vol. i¥. p. 369, sqq-» Sve. t vi. p. 476. sqq-), and of


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 375


The exact situation of the organs can be learnt from delineations
or marked heads only. I shall therefore confine myself to Gall’s
general remarks. Ist. The organs of the faculties or qualities
common to man and brutes, are placed in parts of the brain com-
mon to man and brutes, —at the inferior-posterior, the posterior-
inferior, and inferior-anterior parts of the brain ; v. c. of the instinct
of propagation, the love of offspring, the instinct of self-defence,
of appropriating, of stratagem, &c. 2dly. Those which belong
to man exclusively, and form the barrier between man and brutes,
are placed in parts of the brain not possessed by brutes, viz. the
anterior-superior and superior-anterior of the front: v. c. of com-
parative sagacity, causality, wit, poetic talent, and the disposition
to religious feelings. 3dly. The more indispensable a quality, or
faculty, the nearer are its organs placed to the base of the brain,
or median line. The first and most indispensable — the instinct
of propagation — lies nearest the base; that of the love of offspring
follows. The organ of the sense of localities is more indispensa-
ble than that of the sense of tones or numbers; accordingly the
former is situated nearer the median line than the two latter.
4thly. The organs of fundamental qualities and faculties which
mutually assist each other, are placed near to each other; v.c.
the love of propagation and of offspring, of self-defence and the
instinct to destroy life, of tones and numbers. 5thly. The organs
of analogous fundamental qualities and faculties are equally
placed near each other: v.c. the organs of the relations of places,
colours, tones, and numbers are placed in the same line, as well
as the organs of the superior faculties, and the organs of the in-
ferior propensities.¢

Although the arrangement of the organs is so beautiful, we
must not imagine that Gall mapped out the head at pleasure,
according to preconceived notions. He discovered one organ
after another, just as it might happen, and marked down its situ-
ation and size upon the cranium; and after all left several spots
bee anes 2A Jeg RS 1 DAS ARN ted ak hte pte
Mr. Combe, in his visit to the Richmond Lunatic Asylum, Dublin, and the pri-
sons and lunatic asylums of Newcastle. (Dr. Combe On Mental Derangement :


and Ed. Phr. Journal, No. xlvi.) On Idiotism with no defect of development,
see Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 50.

* Gall, 1. c, 4to. vol. iii, p. 78. sq., and 8vo. t. iii. p. 208, sqq- So much
less have the writings of Gall than those of Dr. Spurzheim been studied in Edin-
burgh, that Mr. Scott published these two last principles as his own; and they
thus stand, with great praise, in Mr. Combe’s System of Phrenology, p. 534. sqq,


~


Foc 5


376 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


blank, which others have filled with faculties corresponding with
those around. ‘The organs are represented, in the engraved heads
which he published, as so many prominences ; because each is just
as it showed itself to him in single instances where it was extra-
ordinarily developed. This habit of representation for distinctness
and fidelity of form and size, and that of speaking of individual
parts as prominent, gave origin to the vulgar notion of bumps, and
those ignorant views which still disgust us in persons who should
know better. Often one organ became known to him situated
very remotely from the organ last discovered. The set of organs
discovered by him turned out as it is, and a strong argument is
thus afforded of the truth of his system, He viewed a thousand
times what he had remarked, before he was aware of the great
general truths just mentioned.

“All must be struck,” says he, “with the profound wisdom
which shines forth in the arrangement and successive order of
the organs. This connection is, in my eyes, one of the most
important proofs of the truth of my discoveries. I defy those who
attribute my determination of the fundamental faculties and of
the seat of their organs to caprice or arbitrary choice, to possess
a tenth part of the talent necessary for the most obscure presenti-
ment of this beautiful arrangement ; once discovered, it displays
the hand of God, whom we cannot cease to adore with wonder
increasing as his works become more disclosed to our eyes.’


f lic. 8vo. t. iii. p. 210. sq. See also 4to. vol.iii, p.80. Mr. Combe
(l. c. p. 536.) presents these beautiful remarks as Mr. Scott’s, with no other
mention of Gall than that the system must thus be the work of nature, and not
“of Drs. Gall and Spurzheim.” Dr. S. divided all the faculties, after the
ancients, into effective and intellectual; and the former again into propensities
and sentiments ; the latter into perceptive and reflective. (lc. p.131.) For
this he has been said to have “infused philosophy and system into the facts
brought to light by observation,” (Ed. Phr. Journ. vol. v.)— to possess a
power of arrangement which throws light upon every subject.” (Star of Bruns-
wick, quoted in his Biography, published at Boston, p. 99.) Gall, again,
was declared to have no such powers of systematising. What is the truth?
Gall disliked artificial systematic division and subdivision, and that justly. His
very order of examining is as great a classification as nature will admit. His
order was, ‘‘as much as possible, that which the Author of nature observes in the
gradual perfectionnement of animals.” (1. c. 4to. t. iii. p. vi.) Beyond the order
which he followed in his writings, nothing could be done; and, as Mr. G.
Combe truly says (Preliminary Dissertation to the Phr. Journal, p- 25.), “as soon
as observation had brought to light the great body of facts, and the functions of


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 377


Gall followed this natural order of the faculties. “ I conform
to the order which exists in considering the inclinations or inferior


the faculties had been contemplated with a philosophic eye, a system of phi-
losophy of the human mind presented itself almost spontaneously to view.”
Gall saw nothing satisfactory in Dr. S.’s classification. ‘¢ The most natural
and philosophical order,” says Gall, ‘must be that which nature has observed
in the successive arrangement of the cerebral parts. But M. Spurzheim
begins by establishing new divisions of the faculties of the mind.” ‘ The
philosophical spirit of M. Spurzheim shines in divisions, subdivisions, sub-
subdivisions, &c.; and this is what he calls infusing more philosophy into the
physiology of the brain, than I had the ambition of introducing. By these
divisions he has imposed on himself a constraint which totally inverts the
gradual succession of the organs. He is forced to jump from one region
of the brain to another; from the disposition to theft, to destruction; from this
to construction; from circumspection, to benevolence; from benevolence, by
a great effort, to veneration; from supernaturality (he is using Spurzheim’s
terms), he comes to the external surface part of the forehead, thence to imitation ;
from imitation, to the external senses! Then he retires to the brain towards the
frontal region — there again he treats every thing péle-méle, all in a manner op-
posite to nature ; —a perfect monstrosity, which one would believe to be invented
with the design of rendering the study impossible. The propensities and
sentiments, and often the intellectual faculties, are so confounded together,
that it is hardly possible to discover the characteristic signs which distinguish
one from another. What more reason is there to place constructiveness among
the propensities, than melody, benevolence, and imitation? Are not amative-
ness, philoprogenitiveness, inhabitiveness, attachment, courage, as much sen-
timents as self-love, love of approbation, veneration, &c.? In what sense are
perseverence, circumspection, imitation, sentiments? With what propriety does
he exclude imitation, wit, ideality or poetry, circumspection, secretiveness,
constructiveness, from the intellectual faculties?” * Wit and imitation were
originally placed by Dr. S. among the intellectual faculties, and then removed
to the sentiments in later editions. The Feelings were divided into superior
and inferior, and those common to brutes and man and those peculiar to man ;
and imitation was ranged with the superior and peculiar to man! but, no sooner
has he done this, than he admits imitation to exist among many tribes of brutes !
(Phr. Am, ed. vol. i. p. 257.) Wit, the organ of which is amidst the intellectual, he
dislodges for mirthfulness, which he calls a superior sentiment peculiar to man, and
given to “ render him merry and gay” |! — to be “ as gay as a lark,’’ however, I sup-
pose, and “merry as a kitten.” He forgets that mirthfulness always implies noise ;”
‘¢ Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the cricket on the hearth.”
His opinions on this faculty appear to me most extraordinary. In one of his
works (Essai Philosophique), he classed benevolence with those peculiar to man;


* lic. 4to. vol. iii, p. xxvi. sqq. Dr. Vimont also exposes the faults of
Dr. S.’s classification, (l.c, ts tis p» 06. sqq-)


378 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


qualities; then those which have more and more nobleness ; and
end with the highest sentiment — that which leads us to reverence


the Divinity.” g

ees ee ae
in another allows it to brutes (Phr. Am. ed.) ; and, having subdivided sentiments
into superior and inferior and finished the inferior, saying he has “ gone over
the affective faculties which are common to men and animals,” he begins with
the superior, and says the first (benevolence) “ cannot be entirely denied” to
brutes. (p. 222.) He arranges the five external senses with the intellectual
faculties ; —‘ the triumph of his new arrangement,” as Gall severely terms it.
Dr. §.’s classification had been devised and published ten years before by Bischoff.
Yes; Dr. S., in all his works and editions, gives his arrangement without a
hint that any one had classed the faculties before ; whereas in the work already
quoted (Exposition de la Doctrine de Gall, traduite de la seconde édition d’AL
lemand, 1806.), Bischoff’s division into three orders will be found, —the first
containing the propensities and sentiments; the second, the perceptive facul-
ties; and the third, the intellectual. Three faculties are in the second class,
and one in the third, which Dr. S. puts in others; but he himself shifted some
occasionally, and the difference is insignificant; and Dr. S.’s invariable silence
as to this arrangement, while his own forms a conspicuous part of nearly all
his books, is a fact in complete harmony with the rest of his conduct. « I con-
ceive it possible to divide them” (the faculties), says Dr. S., ‘‘ and to establish a
new classification ;”” “and E established a new division of the mental operations.”
(Phren. Amer. edit. vol. i. p. 129. sq.) In his first London edition, he most
imnocently says, “ TI am now led to think that the objects which are still to be
added to our large work must assume a more scientific arrangement, and be
considered in a more philosophic manner than Dr. Gall has been aecustomed to
do in his lectures.” (p. vii.) Then follows his most trifling variety of Bischoff’s
arrangement, to which he no where alludes, though he proves his acquaintance
with the book in his notes to the Foreign Quarterly, p. 62. The following is Gall’s
opinion of classification : — Every one may arrange the moral qualities and in-
tellectual faculties according to his own views of them. They may be divided
into sentiments, propensities, talents, intellectual faculties ; — pride, for example,
and vanity, would be sentiments; the instinct of propagation, the love of off-
spring, propensities ; music, mechanics, would be talents ; comparative sagacity
would belong to the intellectual faculties. But there is frequently embarrass-
ment in rigorously fixing the bounds of each division. The intellectual faculties
and talents, when their organs are very active, manifest themselves with desire,
propensity, and passion ; the sentiments and propensities have also their judg-
ment, their taste, their imagination, their memory and recollection. Fhe
division into qualities and faculties common to man and brutes, and faculties
and qualities peculiar to man, is, I confess, of great value in a philosophic point
of view; but,” “ when the most eareful observer dares not decide where the
faculties of the brute cease, and those of man begin, this division cannot be cor-


sidered satisfactory. The best division, in my opinion, is into fundamental qua-
ice ee, 6 Se eee
6 1, ¢, 8vo. t. iii, p. 224. ; also, 4to, vol. iii, p. 85,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 379


If Gall’s is the only satisfactory account of the mental facul-
ties, and to me it certainly appears so, this alone is a proof of


lities or faculties, and general attributes of these qualities and faculties. In this
division, the fruits of the labours of my predecessors are preserved, and, while
we avail ourselves of them, we establish the true theory of the primitive and fun-
damental instincts, qualities, and faculties of man and brutes.” (1. c. 4to. t. iv.
p- 344. sq., 8vo. vol. vi. p. 433. sq.)

Dr. Spurzheim, in his fondness for changing his names, his arrangement, and
his numbering of the organs, introduced confusion without advancing knowledge.
To prove his speculative spirit, I may mention that, instead of giving the origin
of any of his asserted discoveries, as Gall did, and adding a host of examples,
he tells us, in regard to the organ of inhabitiveness, only that a gentleman much
attached to his house had a particular spot of his head hotter than any other: and
in regard to the organs of hope, marvellousness, conscientiousness, size, weight,
order, time, he neither tells how he discovered them, nor adduces a single proof.
Gall was too much of a philosopher to wish others to examine a mere assertion.

But, in regard to all the organs discovered by Gall, except that of colour,
Dr. S. gives the circumstances which led to the discovery, and a certain number
of individual facts; though but a very small number of those related by Gall.
«¢ He has changed the names,” says Gall, “ but treated the organs according to
my principles ; yet in so hasty and feeble a manner, that this part of my doctrine
would be deplorable, if it were not established on a better foundation.” (1. c. 4to.
vol, iii. Preface ; a part which every body should read, for its exposure and de-
molition of Dr. S.’s unjust and weak attempts.) His own alleged discoveries may
be real; but the remarkable circumstance I have mentioned tends to create a
suspicion that he reasoned himself into a belief of certain faculties, and gave
them localities according to their nature; having learnt from Gall where “ ner-
ceptive ” and where “ reflective faculties,” where “ sentiments” and where “ pro-
pensities,” to use his own language, reside. Localisation, after Gall’s discoveries,
was easy, especially as Gall had not mapped out the whole head, but left blanks
where he possessed no facts.

He changed even the situation and extent of organs in his last plate. The space
allotted by him to marvellousness was originally between wit, imitation, hope,
and ideality; now it is more then twice its former size, and placed between
these four and veneration. Covetiyeness was placed by Gall, and admitted by
Dr. Spurzheim, before cunning and under ideality; now it is over cunning,
and between ideality and cautiousness. Ideality in his first edition was chiefly
above covetiveness and before circumspection; now it is above constructive-
ness, and a large organ stands between it and covetiveness. Yet he declares,
that, “ though marked busts or plates may be numbered differently, the places of
the respective organs, once considered as established, have never been altered.”
(Par. Amer. ed. vol. i. p. 136.) If he is right as to the new situation of
the organ of covetiveness, all the observations which led Gall to its discovery,
and originally convinced Dr, S., fall to the ground. Dr. S., in the Notes
(p. 62.), says, ‘‘ that he has been occupied for three years with showing the
regularity of the cerebral portions, and with specifying the individual organs


380 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


the truth of his organology. For such an account could not have
resulted from imagination; and observation, unaided by reference


a ee TE ae


and their boundaries ;” “ an additional discovery, of which Dr. Gall died in
ignorance.” Yet Gall, in both his works, refers to the individual convo-
lutions which he regards as the organs of the individual faculties. Dr. S., in
these Notes (p. 63.), then says “that it was he himself who directed phrenologists
to attend to the individual regions of the head, in reference to the three lobes of
the brain, and to the three regions of the animal propensities, the human senti-
ments (among which he puts some not exclusively human), and intellectual
faculties (but he admits the five senses among these), rather than to the protuber-
ances and depressions, to which Dr. Gall attached himself almost exclusively.”
Now Gall over and over again speaks of the development of regions (1. ¢, 4to.
vol. iii, p. 85., 8vo. t. iii. p. 221. sqq-; 4to. vol. ii. p. 400. sq., 8vo. t. ii
p. 423. sqq- 3 4to. vol. iv. p. 13. sq-, 8vo. t. iv. p. 378. ; 4to. vol. iv. p. 161. sq.,
8vo. t. Vv. p. 191. sqq- ), and expressly advises that the size of the whole head should
be first observed ; then that of the frontal, occipital, lateral, and sincipital regions ;
and lastly the subdivisions of these regions ; and “it will be soon found,”’ says he,
‘that the best developed organs do not form any of the bumps of the antiphreno-
logical buffoons, nor prominences like an egg or your fist.” (1. c. 8vo. t. ili.
p- 221. sqq-)

Dr. S. also says (Notes, p- 63.), that Gall mostly confined himself to the com-
parison of talents, character, and certain modes of acting, with individual cerebral
portions ;” and I have heard it often asserted that we owe to Dr. S. only our
knowledge of the mutual influence of organs. But Gall insisted strongly upon
this, though he left the endless working out of the self-evident effects of the
varied proportions of organs to us all. (l.c. 4to. vol. iii, p. 192., 8vo. t. iv.
p- 243.; 4to. vol. iii, p. 298. sq., Svo. t. iv. p. 253. sq.; 4to. vol. iv.
p- 256. sq., 8v0. t. v. p. 374. Sq-, 8vo. t. ii. p. 318. sq.) So, in regard to mania,
the substance of all that Dr. S. has written upon it may be found in Gall.
(I. c. 4to. vol. ii. iii. iv., 8vo. t. i, p. 370. sq., and t. i. li, ili. iv. v. passim.)

He illustrated and applied Gall’s philosophy on the subject of morals, educa-
tion, &c.; but, when he is satisfactory, I see nothing more than is to be found,
expressed far more concisely, powerfully, and elegantly in the writings of Gall.

The merit of Dr. Spurzheim was that of an able and persevering pupil of Gall.
It is possible that, having worked under Gall’s direction so long, after he left his
great master he discovered a mechanical anatomical point or two—though I know
not that he did. It is possible that he discovered the organs of three faculties,
which Gall believed to exist — time, and order, and conscientiousness. He had,
however, only to look for the spaces left vacant by Gall among the organs of the
perceptive faculties to locate time and order; and he no doubt remembered,
as all Gall’s acquaintance do, that Gall always said that the organ of time
would be found close to that of tune, and had actually left a space there.
It is possible, that he established a few more faculties and their organs —
weight, size, and hope. But I am not yet certain of the two former. Hope
I do not believe to be a primitive faculty. I believe, with Gall, that every


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. $81


to development, never produced much that is satisfactory in me-
taphysics. It was in fact derived from studying the organisation.


faculty desires its gratification, and that its prospect of this, or hope, is regulated
by the degree of circumspection and of the intellectual faculties.* He of course
had only to place conscientiousness and hope in the spaces left vacant by Gall
among the moral sentiments. In regard to marvellousness, Gall had assigned
that part of the brain to the disposition to see visions ; but regarded these as
only an excess of activity of some fundamental power, and had often discussed
with Dr. S. the possibility of a faculty for wonder; though he refrained from
publishing mere speculations. (1. c. 4to. t. iii. p. xxiv., 8vo. vol. v. p. 345.) Then,
as to the organ of inhabitiveness, we must remember that Gall left the space va-
cant and pointed out that animals inclined to inhabit high places had the part
immediately above it large ; —that Gall taught the existence of a faculty inclining
to particular habitation, and placed that faculty in the region where Dr. Spurzheim
has fixed his organ ofinhabitiveness. If Dr. S. is correct, he has cleared up what
Gall considered unsettled. But Dr. S. could not consider himself certain, as in
his last edition he begged phrenologists to make observations on the point ; and
the Edinburgh phrenologists actually give to that part the faculty of what they
call concentrativeness — the faculty of “ maintaining two or more powers in
simultaneous and combined activity, so that they may be directed towards one ob-
ject.” (Dr. S. Phr. Amer. ed. vol. i. p. 169.) They attempt to reconcile matters
by seeing no inconsistency in both views. To this Dr. S. cannot agree, and he
satirically says, that, with all possible deference to Mr. Combe’s acuteness and
greater development of the organ of concentrativeness, he cannot believe the in-
clination to inhabit a particular spot, and the power of keeping two or more facul-
ties in simultaneous action, to bethe same. The publication of such speculations,
such deviations from rigid observation— from true inductive philosophy — it
was that distressed Gall in both Dr. §. and some Edinburgh phrenologists.

Dr. S. differed from Gall on certain points regarding the various faculties which
he admitted; but I confess that, so far from improvements, I think that his
opinions in general are unsatisfactory or incorrect, and exhibit subtlety rather
than depth, and an immeasurably less powerful and philosophic mind than that


* « Most authors confound the affections with the passions. By passion I
mean the highest degree of voluntary or involuntary activity of any fundamental
force. Every passion implies a particular organ; but this organ produces the
passion of its function, only when at the maximum of its activity. It is different
with the affections. In the passions, the organs are active, exalted in their fun-
damental function; in the affections, on the contrary, the organs are passive,
modified, seized in a particular manner, agreeable or disagreeable. Shame, fear,
anguish, sorrow, despair, jealousy, anger, joy, ecstasy, &c., are involuntary sens-
ations, passive seizures, either of our nervous system, of one organ, or of the
whole of the brain. There consequently can be no peculiar organ for joy, for
sorrow, for despair or discouragement, for hope, nor for any affection whatever.”’
(Gall, 1. e. 8vo, t. vi. p. 431. sq-)


382 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


He never once allowed himself to speculate, having early learnt
the fallacy of @ priori reasoning ; but abandoned himself entirely
to observation.

Gall discovered each organ and its faculty either by meeting
with individuals very remarkable for the latter, so that he was
led to examine-their heads; or by noticing a peculiarity of form-
ation in the head which induced him to ascertain their talents
and character. He did not examine remarkable persons accord-
ing to the views entertained of the faculties by metaphysicians ;
but according to points in which the world at large pronounced
them remarkable, — accordingly as they were courageous, avari-
cious, kind-hearted, or excelled as poets, mimics, linguists,
philosophers. He would never have made his discoveries, had he
not met with persons remarkable in these respects. Sometimes
the relation between the remarkable faculty or quality and the
local development was tolerably obvious, but generally he had to
make numerous observations before he found himself right. After
having found two individuals remarkable in the same point of
character, and cast their heads, he sometimes examined the casts
daily for months before he could discover the precise spot in which
they agreed. The discovery being now made, a good organologist
will give judgments upon character which must astonish, and in-
contestably prove the truth of phrenology ; but the difficulty of
making the discovery when all was utter darkness must have
been extreme. The indefatigable industry of Gall, during the
whole of a long life, constantly observing all persons he met with,
and searching after all who were in any mental respect remark-


of Gall. Dr. Lélut has just published a work which he calls Qu’est ce gue la Phré-
nologie 2? and says that Gall’s psychological doctrine is ‘ souvent heureusement cor-
rigée, mais quelquefois aussi gdtée par Spurzheim et par la phrénologie.” (p. 398.)
Yet he mentions ten points of deterioration by Dr. S., and but four of improve-
ment, and among these four, two appear to me improvements only because Dr.
Lélut is in error as to Gall’s opinions.

n « T had innumerable difficulties to overcome : as long as a quality or faculty,
or even its organ, was not discovered, I was in the deepest ignorance. I never
had the slightest idea of what I should at length discover, nor where I should
find the organ. A large number of facts was requisite to put me in their way.
How often have I not been obliged to reject, after years, what had appeared to
me well established! Often I was tempted to give up all inquiries of this nature,
and to declare, with my predecessors, that it is impossible to discover the traces of
the operations of the soul.” (1. c. 4to, vol. iii. p. 77.sq. See also 8yo. t. iii,
p- 206. sqq.)


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 383


able, travelling as he did to most of the prisons, mad-houses, and
hospitals of the Continent ; examining the habits and heads of
brutes innumerable for comparison; and engaging M. Niklas,
Dr. Spurzheim, and others, for a pecuniary consideration, to work
under him and examine points for him, in the way of reading,
dissecting, casting, moulding, and observing living persons,
is astonishing‘; and the success and importance of his re-
searches will, I am satisfied, ensure him a place among the great-
est names of the human race, although, like every other great
discoverer and benefactor, he has been loaded with ridicule
and abuse.! His great anatomical discoveries were derided, and,
when this was possible no longer, given falsely to his predecessors,
or contemporaries, or have been given even to later writers.
Some have been announced by others, lately, as new, and are even
contended for by different individuals. Few anatomists and phy-
siologists have any idea of the errors as to facts and of the poverty
of argument displayed by Cuvier, Tiedemann, Pinel, Esquirol,


K ]. c. 8vo, t. iii. p. 137. sqq. 172. sq. 206. sq.

1 Mr. (now Lord) Jeffrey, ina violent article in his Edinburgh Review for 1815,
after glancing at an English work by Dr. Spurzheim, wrote off-hand an article
against it, and declared ‘the whole doctrines, anatomical, physiological, and phy-
siognomical, to be a piece of thorough quackery from beginning to end,” —‘‘there
being nothing so impossible but mountebanks will undertake, nothing so in-
credible but they will affirm,’ — ‘‘that to enter on a particular refutation, would
be to insult the understanding of readers,” as Gall’s opinion “on the functions
in general of man, and on his intellectual faculties in particular, are a collection
of mere absurdities, without truth, connection, or consistency; an incoherent
rhapsody, which nothing could have induced any man to have presented to the
public under a pretence of instructing them, but absolute insanity, gross igno-
rance, or matchless assurance.’’ ‘* Such is the trash,” he continued, “ the des-
picable trumpery, which men, calling themselves scientific inquirers, have the
impudence gravely to present to physiologists of the nineteenth century as speci~
mens of reasoning and induction.” — A clergyman, afterwards chaplain to a
Royal Hospital, and now a dignitary, at the same time wrote an article ina
less violent strain in the Quarterly Review, in which he styled phrenology ‘‘ sheer
nonsense, and Dr. Spurzheim a fool.” (No. xxv.) A year before they had called
Gall “ an ignorant and interested quack ;’’ and Blackwood’s Magazine, in April,
1817, foretold that “phrenology would be forgotten as soon as Dr. Spurzheim
left Edinburgh :” just as, when Der Freischutz was first played in London, the
Literary Gazette, which, like so many other learned periodicals, has always spurned
phrenology, pronounced that, if the Germans were delighted with such music,
they must be more easily satisfied than Englishmen ; that it was “ extremely
ineffective ;” and they “much doubted if there be a single air in it likely to
become popular.” (July 24. 1824. No. 392.)


DD


384: MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Richerand, Carus, Rudolphi, Serres, &c., and would be amply re-
paid for the trouble of reading their exposure by Gall in various
parts of his works, especially in his sixth octavo volume. Who-
ever knew him must have admired his profundity and candour,
and the extent and variety of his knowledge, and been delighted
with his perfect integrity and true philosophy of character, and
the gentleness and elegance of his manners. ™


™ Nothing could demonstrate more the unsuspecting and kind nature of Gall
than his affixing the name of Dr. Spurzheim with his own to his great work.
He was the discoverer, and first published on his discoveries in 1798. He first lec-
tured in 1796, when 40 years ofage ; Dr. S. being but 20 and a student. He con-
tinued to lecture on his discoveries till 1802, when the absurdity of Austria forbade
all lectures in Vienna without permission. Gall knew the measure was levelled
at himself; and, scorning to ask permission, left Vienna. Dr. S., who was
tutor in the family of a nobleman attended by Gall, after having finished his
medical studies, had become one of Gall’s pupils, and was the only one among
them all who was willing to leave Vienna with him. Gall saw his good intel-
lectual development and his firmness, and engaged him as his secretary, dis-
sector, &c. Though we all know how beautifully Dr. S. dissected the brain,
Gall assured me that he was very long in teaching Dr. S. to dissect it; and
that Dr. S.’s clumsiness cost him no little in broken casts, models, &c. Dr. S.
thus worked hard at phrenology: but he worked under Gall’s direction, and
Gall smiled at the idea that two persons, the one twenty years older than
the other, and the entire discoverer of a subject on which he had laboured for
thirty years, and paying the other for his labour, could work at the same points,
unless the one were directed by the other, — not at different branches of the
same subject ; and especially he smiled at Dr. S.’s having made discoveries,
except as far as he found things which he was directed by Gall to ascertain, The
whole work was Gall’s. Every line, he informed me, was his sole composition.
The very style shows this. The work is clear, flowing, full, at once rigidly phi-
losophical and rich with profound thoughts and glowing illustrations. I never
take it up without finding something fresh, and feeling that I am with one of that
band of mighty minds to which Bacon, Milton, Shakspeare, &c. belonged. It speaks
for itself and is totally different from Dr. S.’s ; and yet in the preface, p. xlii, he
was so good to Dr. S. as to mention the very composition and diction in the plural
number, though self-evidently referrible in all cases to no more than one person,
He conceived that all Europe knew him as the author of the discoveries ; and he
wished to be of serviceto Dr. S., who had shown good abilities and been in-
dustrious ; and who, being twenty years younger, would, he hoped, prosecute and
spread the science after his death. They were coming shortly to England
together, when, one day, Dr. S. said he himself was going alone to England ;
and he actually left Gall in a week, it turning out that he had been learning
English with this view in Gall’s house, without Gall’s knowledge, for six months.
Gall, therefore, affixed Dr. S.’s name no longer with his own in the title-
page: but the work went on, as when Dr. S. was with Gall. The second,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 385


Whoever acquires sufficient knowledge of the subject to make
observations for himself will soon find the shape of the skull to


oo


third, and fourth volumes were completed, in the same style, with the name of
Gall only; and what had been printed in the joint names of Gall and Dr. S.
was undistinguishable from the rest, was evidently the production of the same
genius, and remained the sole property of Gall, and the disappearance of Dr.
S.’s name from it proved that it was none of his. In the remaining parts with
only Gall’s name, was done all that had been promised in the first volume
which bore both names. Gall, in the rest of his work, always referred to the
former parts, which bore Dr. S.’s name also, as solely his own. — “ Tout
ce que j’ai dit dans le premier volume,” &c. ‘ Dans le premier volume
de cet ouvrage, j'ai exposé l’anatomie,” &c. ‘Dans le second volume j'ai
abordé le but principal de mes recherches.” (4to. vol. ii. p. 251., iii. p. xv.)
In his preface to the 8vo edition he says, ‘ It is three years since the publication
of my great work on the anatomy and physiology of the brain was finished
(4 vols. fol. and 4 vols. 4to.), now to be had of the author, and at N. Maze’s,
bookseller, No. 4. Git-le-cceur Street. He then informs his readers, that, though
he had thought it necessary to publish a work worthy of the object, he had
been requested on all sides to publish an edition of it which might be within
the means of every body. At p. 73. he refers to the first volume “ de mon
grand ouvrage,” and so in numerous other parts (ii. 432., v. 502., vi. 165.,
iii. 70.). He then recapitulates all the anatomy of the large work, and all the
physiology, as his own, without thinking of mentioning Dr. S.’s name any
more than Dr. Magendie’s. (I. c. t. vi. p. 497. sqq.) On this Dr. S. never
ventured to remark. Gall thenceforth generally used the words I and my,
except when Dr. S. had witnessed any thing with him. For Dr. S., being
engaged to travel with him, after he had brought his science to such
fulness that he determined to lecture upon it in various countries, neces-
sarily, he says, made ‘‘une grande partie de mes observations en commun
avec moi.”” (8vo. t. i. p. vii.) Even in the preface to the first volume,
he spoke of all the discoveries, anatomical and physiological, as having long
been made; but that, rather than yield to a desire of fame, he had preferred
allowing others to publish them, and presenting a work to the public which should
be supported by ‘ more abundant observations and more positive results ;”” — a
remark agreeing with his assertion to me, that, after he had engaged Dr. S., he
only collected more facts in illustration of his discoveries and made additions
which were mere shades of knowledge. Dr. Georget, in his book referred to
p. 371. supra, published in Paris soon after the appearance of the great work,
speaks of it as Gall’s, and addresses his remarks to Gall. (Gall, 8vo. t. v. p. 448.
sqq:) I formerly exhibited Dr. S.’s injustice to Gall in regard to anatomy ; he is
equally unjust in regard to physiology. While he is obliged to detail Gall’s
discoveries and acknowledge him the founder, he inconsistently says, Gall
has the great merit of having begun our phrenological discoveries.” “ He had
pointed out many relations which exist between various talents and characters of
man and instincts of animals, and certain cerebral parts, before T was so happy
as to become acquainted with him.’’ (Notes to the article in the Foreign Quar-
DD 2


386 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


be as various as character and countenance, and will have hourly
amusement both in remarking the relation between intellectual


terly, p. 60.) Gall had only begun! he had begun our researches! he had pointed
out many relations! Here is enough, again, to stamp Dr. S.’s character for
shortsightedness and effrontery, through his insane ambition. “ Plusiewrs relations!
vingt-sept facultés!” says Dr. Vimont: “ Ce mot quelques ne me paroit pas seule-
ment une injustice; c’est une maladresse ; car il resulte des faits avaneés dans le
corps de l’ouvrage de Spurzheim que Gall avoit déja découvert, par la voie expé-
rimentale, le nombre de facultés que je viens de citer. La prétention done de
Spurzheim au titre de fondateur nous paroit tout-d-fait injuste.” (1. c. vol. ii.
p- 53.)

Although Madame Gall, being well acquainted with all the affair, freely, like
a good wife, bestowed upon Dr. S. the titles of jésuite, ingrat, perfide, vo-
leur, Gall was always dignified and calm, and on these occasions usually
said to her, ‘‘laissons cela.” He considered himself basely treated, but
trusted to posterity for justice. He always contented himself with saying,
if others mentioned S.’s conduct, ‘ C’est un mauvais homme!” even on
his death-bed, when, after much difficulty, he was prevailed upon to consent
to see Dr. S., though his wife prevented the interview. When he mentioned,
in the middle of the second volume, that he united Dr. S.’s name with his
own no longer, he entered into no particulars. He afterwards yielded to
. the wish of his friends to take notice of Dr. S.’s publishing, like so many other
of his auditors, a very incomplete account of his doctrines (un traité trés-in-
complet de ma doctrine), and “ pretending in many places to have introduced
views much more philosophical than those of the original author, who, ac-
cording to the expressions of Dr. S.’s friends in the journals, had left his child in
its cradle,” (4to. vol. iii. p. xvi.) He then accused Dr. S. of having copied
246 pages of his quarto work into his own 8vo of 361 pages. ‘ He will affirm,”
says Gall, “ that he had a right to do so, because he worked with me at the first
volume and the sections on innate dispositions. But he knows that his occupation
was to furnish merely the literary notices. He should, at least, have mentioned
the sources of his riches. He had not the same right over my sections on the
organ of the soul and the plurality of organs. Others have already accused
him of plagiarism: it is, at any rate, very ingenious to make books with scissars.”
Yet such was Gall’s philosophy that he told me that, although Dr. S.’s con-
duct had been such as to determine him never to see Dr. S. again, he was far
more vexed at the speculative turn which Dr. S. gave to phrenology, — more vexed
that, while he himself had adhered closely to observation, Dr. S. had introduced
conjecture and inference from too few observations. Gall lamented to me this
turn in the Edinburgh phrenologists ; and so, strange to say, did Dr. S. Having
once expressed his opinion of Dr. S.’s conduct, he was too dignified ever to re-
vert to the subject in the rest of the work, and merely refuted him here and there
on points in which Dr. S, had broached new and erroneous opinions. Dr. S. in
his Essai Philosophique, in 1820, attempted a defence, but with so much mis-
statement, sophistry, and rudeness, and withal weakness, that Gall, though he


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 387


and moral character, sexual, national, and individual, and cranial
form and size, and in tracing the resemblance of children to their


published his six 8vo volumes, one by one, afterwards, never condescended to
notice it, satisfied that his own writings rendered any specific refutation super-
fluous, and always convinced that such matters right themselves with posterity.
He spoke of all his own discoveries, as I mentioned in the last page, without
feeling it necessary to allude to Dr. Spurzheim’s absurd claims. I always felt
certain that Dr. S. was an unhappy man, though I could not tell why before I
studied the works of Gall and had the unspeakable happiness and advantage
of knowing him personally. Every sentence in Gall’s works is his own; and
every thing in Dr. S.’s writings, which is also in Gall’s, belongs to Gall.

I mention all this from my veneration for Dr. Gall, and my anxiety to see
justice done him, Very few in this country have studied Gall. I am not ac-
quainted with six persons whose native tongue is English, even among writers
and lecturers on phrenology, who have not learned phrenology second-hand
from Dr. S., or third-hand from Mr. Combe’s writings, since these are in
English, and comparatively short, while Gall’s are in French, and of great extent,
That the injustice done to Gall is such as to demand the pains I have taken, is
proved by the custom among phrenological writers in the English language of
speaking of the system of Gall and Spurzheim, of the founders of phrenology (for
instance, Ed. Phr. Journ. No. iv. p. 628., No. v. p. 98. 110., No. vi. p- 186.) and
the habit of such writers of quoting from Dr. S.’s works, passages which were
written by Gall and are taken from his works. (Mr. Combe, Phrenology, p. 100.,
also p. 3. 5. and 44.) Nay, many of Dr. S.’s friends used always to declare that
Gall had not given the philosophy of phrenology, but merely collected facts.
At a public dinner given to Dr. S., Mr. Combe unintentionally disparaged
Gall by declaring that Dr. Spurzheim had infused philosophy and system into the
facts brought to light by observation. * Oh! shade of Gall! Had Mr. Combe
studied every line of Gall’s two works again and again, and hung over them at
midnight as I have, and conversed with Gall as I did again and again, I am
sure he is so conscientious that he would not have written thus! — that all the


* Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, vol. y. He then called Dr. Spurzheim Gall’s
“rivalin genius.” In his Phrenology (p. 53.), he says that Dr. S. formed “ the
truths brought to light by their joint observations, into a beautiful and interesting
system of mental philosophy.’’. Gall’s works are said, in the Journal, No. vi.
p- 188., to be “more like acollection of wnconnected facts ;” while Dr. S. has given
them “more the character of a science” “ by a more systematic and philosophic ar-
rangement.” Mr. Carmichael’s feelings towards his friend Dr. Spurzheim do him
credit, but have rendered him, like Dr. S.’s other friend,—Mr. Chenevix, guilty of
great misstatement and great injustice towards Gall, in his Memoir of the Life and
Philosophy of Spurzheim. Dublin, 1833. See p. 4. sqq. 9. sq. 51. He says
that Gall examined the brain “ according to the old school and with mere me-
chanical views” till Dr. S. joined him!!

DD 3s


488 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


parents in the latter respect, as well as in talent and disposition ;
and he will not merely find incessant amusement, but feel himself


philosophy was Dr. Spurzheim’s! In one part (Phrenology, p. 666.) he says
that Dr. Spurzheim ‘is second in fortune rather than in merit to Dr. Gall!”
“‘ that we owe much of its excellence and interest to this gifted individual; he
has enriched it with the most valuable anatomical discoveries; ascertained the
functions of several highly important organs ; shed over it the lights of a refined
and analytic philosophy, and pointed out the most important field of its appli-
cation:” ‘with profound gratitude and respect, therefore, I acknowledge
myself indebted,” not to Gall, but “to Dr. Spurzheim, for the greatest gift which
it was possible for one individual to confer on another, — a knowledge of the true
philosophy of man.” In the Ed. Phr. Journ. No. vi. p. 186., the editors “ are
almost inclined to doubt whether they are right in assigning Dr. S. a place
second to any.” (l.c.p. 666.) M. Chenevix, in the Foreign Quarterly (p.9.), among
other incorrect statements, says that the old method of dissecting the brain appear-
ing faulty, ‘ Drs. Gall and Spurzheim were induced to invent some other mode.”
In America, where phrenology has been hitherto learned solely from Dr. S.’s
book, and from: himself personally, they are still more extravagant. ‘* The
labours of Dr. Spurzheim as an anatomist have produced a reform in the study
of the nervous system which will for ever sustain him in the first rank of his
profession. To be convinced of this, we have only to examine the state of
knowledge in relation to the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the brain
and spinal marrow, before he devoted himself to the investigation of those most
important branches of science.” (Gall had therefore done nothing!) ‘ That
Spurzheim was superior to Gall as an anatomist, we believe all admit!” They
then quote an assertion of Dr. S., that Gall once said to him, in 1805, “let
us prosecute our original plan honestly ; you, Spurzheim, as an anatomist, and I
as a physiologist.”’ If there was any truth in this, it could only have amounted to
some kind encouragement of Gall to the young man ; for Gall had then made all
his important discoveries, and Dr.S. had only just finished his studies, just begun
to learn to dissect the brain, and been engaged by Gall as his assistant. Hear the
same writer again, ‘* To express a preference is not to decide the question; and
when we evince our partiality for Spurzheim as a philosopher, we merely give
an individual opinion. His views, in our estimation, are more philosophic than
those of Gall; more consistent, and more practical. Spurzheim carefully studied
all the parts of the science with reference to each other, and aimed at a perfect
whole. Gall did not do so much.” —(Phr. in connection with the Study of Phy-
siognomy, to whichis prefixed a Biography of the Author, by Nahum Capen. 1833.
Nay, Dr. S.’s English friends at one time treated Gall’s name with contempt,
to elevate Dr. S.. When Dr. S. lectured here, I heard his friends declare that
his doctrines were worth their weight in gold —that he was the philosopher :
whereas when I went to Paris, and conversed with Gall, I heard from his lips
all the philosophy for which Dr. S. had gained credit in England ; — I imme-
diately saw the difference between the great original and the pupil. Those who
are well acquainted with Gall’s writings, and knew both him and Dr. S. in


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 389


possessed of a power in his intercourse with men and books
relating to the human character, to which those unacquainted with
phrenology are perfect strangers.


Paris, enter into my feelings on this subject; and Dr. Fossati lately printed a
letter published by Gall to a M. Retzius, in 1798, in which he laid down the
plan of his work. Because Dr. Fossati complained that too many put Dr. S.
on apar with, or even above, Gall, the Edin. Phren. Journ. No. xlvi. p. 506.
reproved Dr. Fossati for this “twaddle.” But Dr. Fossati spoke the truth.
Gall is, indeed, called the original; but, in the next breath, we hear of the
founders, or the system of Gall and Spurzheim. See Ed, Phr. Journ. as quoted
in the last page, and various other writings. Yet, although the Ed. Phr. Journ.
calls Dr. S. the founder of phrenology with Gall, Dr. S. does not venture such a
dangerous length, but on all occasions acknowledges, what all Europe knows,
—that Gall is the sole founder. He only reduces Gall’s discoveries as low as
possible. It tells very much against Dr. S., that all those who were intimate
with him have been more or less unjust towards Gall, and some have spoken
contemptuously of Gall, in regard to both his intellect and moral feelings, con-
trasting him with Dr. S. One London phrenologist declared that Gall’s
forehead was only for collecting facts, while Dr. S.’s was for philosophy. <A
great Edinburgh phrenologist referred me to the inferiority of Gall’s organ of
conscientiousness. Now, in truth, Dr. S.’s forehead is far less full and square than
Gall’s, and his whole coronal surface together, indicating the high moral feelings,
equally inferior to that of Gall. The intellectual and high moral part of Gall’s
head are magnificent, and those of Dr. S. will bear no comparison with them. His
firmness, self-esteem, and courage also are so large that we see at once how he
was enabled to rear phrenology, and present it steadily to the world for so many
years, standing alone and braving the contempt and attacks of the learned and
unlearned. It is greatly to be lamented that Gall’s 8vo work is not translated ;
and I am certain that the legacy left by a Scotch gentleman to aid phrenology
could not have been laid out to half the advantage in any other way than in pub-
lishing a cheap translation of it. Pure as were the motives of the gentlemen
intrusted to fulfil the wishes of the spirited bequeather, in publishing works
of their own, I am convinced that they would have done far better in publishing
the writings of the founder before any thing else, —writings so eloquent and
convincing, and so divested of speculation, so overwhelming in proofs, that their
translation would have formed the surest foundations for a universal conviction of
the truth of phrenology. The injustice I complain of in phrenologists arises, I
am certain, solely from their not having studied Gall as they have Dr. S., and from
many not having read a syllable of Gall. When my reading was confined to
Dr. S.’s books, and I was acquainted with him only, I committed the very same
injustice to Gall which I now most earnestly and respectfully entreat phrenolo-
gists to commit no longer.


Dp 4


§90 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


I shall here present some views of the organs according to
Gall. The references will be found supra, page 349. sq.


my \
. x " ~
\ i ih


Ai


\(


ail
Ail \\\


AN,


\


\\ Ki Nil


ex


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


bil \\y
wap
| bt \\ \\


391]


\\
\\
HY \\


The following are from Dr. Vimont, and show all the organs
admitted by both Dr. Spurzheim and himself.


Conservation.
Alimentation,
Destruction.


- Cunning.


Courage.


. Choice of places,


Concentration. :


. Attachment for life, or marriage.


Attachment.


. Reproduction.


Attachment to the produce of con-
ception,


. Property.


Circumspection.
Perception of substance or objects.
Configuration.


. Size.

. Distance.

. Geometrical sense.
. Resistance.

. Localities.

- Numbers.


22. Order.

23. Time.

24. Language.

25. Colouring.

26. Eventuality.

27. Talent of construction.
28. Musical talent.

29. Talent of imitation.
30. Comparison.


. Causality.

. Discrimination.

. Vanity.

. Self-esteem.

. Firmness, perseverance.
. Conscience.

. Veneration.


Hope.


. Benevolence.

. Sentiment of the marvellous.

. Poetical sentiment.

. Sentiment of the beautiful in arts,


392 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


393


NERVOUS SYSTEM.


THE


\
PGS


MS


i iy |
An Ane


‘Wh
\\


|


\\


394 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


—_—


paren pies ee
4 —_— / 4
y 2 \ ; -—>
Mr f ea SN
a ye | \,
| Maal aN er — Si
lax , “_ SS 7)
| 4 \ " l., \
for [| / KN SS
y . 1 N
_— big Fae maf? ht
/ on } - ry pee |
‘ 2 \ A 4
r


Hani


mn ail Hii


oe \ 9 IM) a
<e etl wie ‘it


As an intellectual contrast, I present the head of Gall and of a
Dutch adult idiot, whose skull is delineated by him, and is in the
National Museum at Amsterdam, where I have seen it.


As a moral contrast, I present
Pope Alexander VI.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 395


Should any one doubt his acquaintance with the real talents
and character of those friends whose heads he can select for ob-


naa TEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEREEEREEEEEEnEenEeneee nn oo


I must here subjoin some remarks from Gall on the reception which has been
given to phrenology.

“© The followers of the different schools of philosophy among the Greeks,
accused each other of impiety and perjury. The people, in their turn, detested
the philosophers, and accused those who investigated principles, with presump-
tuously encroaching upon the rights of the deity. The novelty of the opinions
of Pythagoras caused his banishment from Athens; those of Anaxagoras threw
him into prison; the Abderites treated Democritus as a madman, because he
dissected dead bodies to discover the cause of insanity ; and Socrates, for demon-
strating the unity of God, was condemned to drink hemlock,

‘¢ The same scandal had been renewed at all times and in all nations. Many of
those who distinguished themselves in the fourteenth century by their knowledge
of natural things, were put to death as magicians. Galileo, for proving the
earth’s motion, was imprisoned at the age of seventy. Those who first main-
tained the influence of climate upon the intellectual character of nations were
suspected of materialism. ; '

“ Universally, nature treats new truths and their discoverers, in a singular, but
uniform manner. With what indignation and animosity have not the greatest
benefits been rejected? For instance, potatoes, Peruvian bark, vaccination, &c. As
soon as Varolius made his anatomical discoveries, he was decried by Sylvius as
the most infamous and ignorant madman. Vesanum, litterarwm imperitissimum,
arrogantissimum, calumniatorem maledicentissimum, rerum omnium ignarissimum,
transfugam, impium, ingratum, monstrum ignorantie, impietatis evemplar perni-
ciosissimum, quod pestilentiali halitu Huropam venenat, &c. Varolius was reproached
with dazzling his auditor by a seductive eloquence, and artificially effecting the
prolongation of the optic nerves as far as the thalami. Harvey, for maintaining
the circulation of the blood, was treated as a visionary; and depravity went so
far as to attempt his ruin with James and Charles the First. When it was no
longer possible to shorten the optic nerve, or arrest the course of the blood in its
vessels, the honour of these discoveries was all at once given to Hippocrates.
The physical truths announced by Linneus, Buffon, the pious philosopher Bon-
net, by George Le Roy, were represented as impieties likely to ruin religion
and morality. Even the virtuous and generous Lavater was treated as a fatalist
and materialist. Every where do fatalism and materialism, placed before the
sanctuary of truth, make the world retire. Every where do those, upon whose
judgment the public relies, not merely ascribe to the author of a discovery the
absurdities of their own prejudices, but even renounce established truths if con-
trary to their purposes, and revive ancient errors, if calculated to ruin the man
who is in their way,

“« This is a faithful picture of what has happened to me. I have, therefore, some
reason to be proud of having experienced the same lot as men to whom the world
is indebted for so great a mass of knowledge. It seems that nature has subjected
all truths to persecution, in order to establish them the more firmly ; for he who
can snatch one from her, always presents a front of brass to the darts hurled


396 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


servation, he has only to study the heads of some celebrated men
now living, or the authentic casts of the departed, of whose talents


against him, and has always force enough to defend and establish it. History
shows us that all the efforts and sophisms which are directed against a truth once
drawn from darkness, fall like dust blown by the winds against a rock.

“ The instance of Aristotle and Descartes should be particularly quoted, when
we wish to display the influence of prejudice upon the good or bad fortune of
new doctrines. The opponents of Aristotle burnt his books; afterwards, the
books of Ramus, who had written against Aristotle, were burnt, and the oppo-
nents of the philosopher of Stagira declared heretics ; and it was even forbidden
by law to dispute his doctrines, under pain of being sent to the galleys. Now
there is no longer any discussion about the philosophy of Aristotle. Descartes
was persecuted because he taught the innateness of ideas, and the University of
Paris burnt his books. He had written the most sublime thoughts upon the
existence of God; Voét, his enemy, accused him of atheism. Afterwards, this
same university declares itself in favour of innate ideas; and when Locke and
Condillae attacked innate ideas, the cry of materialism and fatalism resounded
on all sides.

‘‘ Thus, the same opinions have at one time been regarded as dangerous because
they were new, and at another as useful because they were ancient. We must,
therefore, pity mankind, and conclude that the opinions of contemporaries as to
the truth or error, and dangerous or innocent tendencies, of a doctrine, are very
suspicious, and that the author of a discovery should be anxious only to ascertain
whether he has really discovered a truth or not. A truth once discovered, will
make its way, and not fail to produce good effects. ‘ Reason,’ says Ancillon,
after Bonnet, ‘knows no useless nor dangerous truths. What is, is.’ This is
indisputable, and is the only answer to be made to those who, putting all things
in subordination to men’s wants, ask, What is the use of that? and to those who,
always yielding to fear, ask, What may that lead to? Jesus, the son of Sirach,
had already said, ‘ we ought not to ask what is the use of that: for the use will
have its reward in time.’ ”’ *

When delivering the Lumleyan lectures, and asserting the importance of per-
cussion and auscultation, for the first time, before the College of Physicians, in
1829, I reminded the College, “that the greatest discoveries had generally been
at first ridiculed, and their authors, no less than all the truest benefactors of the
human race, despised and rejected of men.


‘ Romulus, et Liber Pater, et cum Castore Pollux ;

Dum terras hominumque colunt genus, aspera bella

Componunt, agros assignant, oppida condunt,

Ploravére suis non respondere favorem,

Speratum meritis.’”’ Hor. Ep. 1, lib. ii.


*l.c. 8vo, t. i. p. 221. sqq., 4to, t. iv. p. 75. sqq., where alone the sentence
“a truth once discovered,” is found; but where the third and fourth paragraphs
are not.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, $97


or disposition no one can have the slightest doubt, and he will
find the coincidence, within the limitations which I mentioned,
astonishing and invariable.


Neen nnn UEEeEEnIEEEEEnnEU nnn ESEREEEEEREREEEEEERREEEEEEEEEEEeT


I then mentioned the fate of Harvey (v. supra, p. 194. sq.)*, and the original
rejection of the discovery of the lacteals (v. suprd, p. 140. sqq.), and con-
tinued : —

«‘ Let us remember that Sydenham, whose memory we also honour, was, by
many of his contemporaries, whose names, whatever bustle they made during
their existence, have never once been mentioned since their death, called a quack
and a murderer.t

«‘ Let us remember, that, if the illustrious father of modern philosophy was not
vilified and imprisoned, like Galileo, for announcing truth, he was represented by
Cecil to Elizabeth, when she thought of making him her solicitor-general, ‘as a
man of mere speculation, —as one wholly given up to philosophical inquiries,
new indeed and amusing, but fanciful and unsound, and therefore more likely to
distract her affairs, than to serve her carefully and with proper judgment.’

‘In ancient times, Horace saw his odes despised because they were new. The
public, he said,


‘ Nisi que terris semota, suisque
Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit et odit ;
Est vetus atque probus centum qui perficit annos,’
But, like the illustrious Gall, Laennec is no more,
‘ Extinctus amabitur idem.’

‘In the words of Professor Playfair, notwithstanding the splendour of New-
ton’s discoveries ; the beauty, the simplicity, the grandeur of the system they un-
folded, and the demonstrative evidence by which that system was supported ;”
“the Cartesian system of vortices kept its ground for more than thirty years after
the publication of these discoveries,” “and actually the Newtonian philosophy
first entered the University of Cambridge under the protection of the Cartesian,”
by a stratagem of Dr. Samuel Clark, who quietly explained the views of New-
ton, without any appearance of argument or controversy, in the form of notes
to a new translation which he published of the French Cartesian work, long
established as the text-book by the tutors of the University.

‘Dr. Chalmers, speaking of the first reception of the Newtonian philosophy,
says, ‘ Authority scowled upon it, and taste was disgusted by it, and fashion was


* T might have added the words of the Edinburgh Review, No. xciv.: “ The
discoverer of the circulation of the blood suffers no diminution of his reputation
in our day, from the incredulity with which his doctrine was received by some,
the effrontery with which it was claimed by others, or the knavery with which it
was ascribed to former physiologists.”’

+ Here I might have added that, though Sydenham resided in Pall Mall, he
was never employed by the Court; yet the names of the Court physicians of his
day are now no more known than the names of the Court footmen.


398 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


If these are facts, all objections on the score of. fatalism
and materialism are unworthy of attention. Because no rational


ashamed of it.’””” (My Lumleyan Lectures on the Diseases of the Heart, referred
to supra, p. 174.)

Father Pardies wrote against the experiments and what he was pleased to call the
hypotheses of Newton, —the very words of uninformed antiphrenologists. Such
great astronomers and mathematicians as Cassini and Maraldi were calculating
the paths of comets on the most imaginary and unfounded hypotheses, long after
Halley had constructed tables on the principles of Newton, in which the motions
of all comets that ever had appeared or could appear might be easily deduced ;
and Voltaire remarks that, though Newton lived nearly forty years after the pub-
lication of his Principia, he had not twenty followers out of England at the time
of his death. Some great philosophers died in perfect ignorance of them.

The introduction of Greek was originally opposed with violence at Oxford,
though now it is taught there as one of the most important things that a well
educated man can know.

The music of Gall’s countryman, Handel, though it has enraptured the English
for a century, is now only beginning to be appreciated in Germany.

Even I have lived long enough to see things at once rejected with scorn, which
are now all but universally adopted. When Laennec first published his great
work, I procured a stethoscope and investigated his statements. Although the
facts of percussion, as detailed by Avenbrugger above half a century ago, must of
physical necessity exist, I had always been taught, by the first teacher of medicine
in London, at Guy’s Hospital, Dr. James Curry, that they were fallacies, and
they were dismissed in three minutes as unworthy of the slightest attention.
Education, therefore, tended to make me sceptical. But I soon found that
Avenbrugger had been disgracefully neglected in this country ; and that Laennec,
like Avenbrugger, had opened to us a new and extensive scene in disease, to
which, though it had always existed, we were blind — that we had eyes and saw
not —or really, to drop metaphor, that we had ears and heard not. For a length
of time I found some at St. Thomas’s treat percussion and auscultation with
ridicule ; some with absolute indignation; and others, for years, treated it with
silent contempt ; who all, I am happy to say, now practise both. I was there-
fore in the habit of studying them in the wards alone, and at hours when I
expected to be unobserved. When I at length advocated and taught them in the
school, one of my colleagues, I heard, pronounced it nonsense or worse in his
lecture ; and at the College of Physicians I heard a senior fellow, in a Croonian
lecture, denounce the folly of carrying a piece of wood (some called the
stethoscope inutile lignum) into sick chambers and making observations, to the
destruction of all philosophical and dignified views, such as become men whose
minds have been enlarged by the education which Oxford and Cambridge afford.
When another fellow of the College was asked his opinion of auscultation in the
wards of his hospital, he at once, as I was informed by the gentleman who
asked the question, condemned it as nonsense ; and when told ‘* that Elliotson
assured his friends that he had a high opinion of it and made his diagnosis of
affections of the chest with infinitely more accuracy by its means,” he replied, —


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 399


or religious person believes that one truth can contradict an-
other; or that a truth can lead to any thing but good. But, in


‘¢ Oh! it’s just the thing for Elliotson to rave about! ’’ Yet good sense and truth
have prevailed. This physician is now addressed as one who had the candour
to examine auscultation at an early period, when others despised it, and who
materially assisted to spread its adoption. Even Dr. Spurzheim was as un-
philosophical on this point, as others were in regard to phrenology. On seeing a
stethoscope one day upon my table, he said—<‘ Ah! do you use that hocus
pocus?” And on my replying that it was highly important to employ the ear,
he added, ‘“ You learn nothing by it; and if you do, you cannot treat diseases
the better.” Both which remarks were incorrect, and showed an unhappy state
of mind. An old physician, on seeing me use the stethoscope, began our con-
sultation by informing the practitioner, whom he had never seen before, and
myself, that he ‘‘ never made use of these French fooleries,” Yet ignerance of
percussion and auscultation is now considered a sufficient proof that a man knows
but half his profession, and Laennec’s name has become imperishable ; and I am
happy in looking back upon the assistance I rendered to the establishment of ause
cultation and percussion in this country by making the numerous physicians’
pupils of St. Thomas’s Hospital ear-witnesses of facts which others in vain at-
tempted to bring into contempt.

For years after I published my work on Prussic Acid, in 1820, referred to
supra, p. 223., very few persons would employ it; and_I was not only ill spoken
of for recommending what was useless, but till very lately condemned for using
dangerous poisons. Not three years ago, a practitioner, whom I had never
seen or even heard of, urged this in an argument with a nobleman to prevent me
from being consulted in the case of his lady. While the last edition of the
Pharmacopeia was preparing, in 1824, the committee drew up a Latin formula
for its preparation: but when they presented their sketch of the new list to the
College, they begged to withdraw the formula for prussic acid, because they had
received so many letters from fellows against its utility and safety. It was
consequently not admitted ; and it was said in a medical journal, ten years ago,
to be no longer employed by the profession. Yet it is now employed universally
and daily by good practitioners of all ranks, for some pectoral complaints, for
which it had been recommended on the Continent, but chiefly for stomach affec-
tions, in which I had discovered its great utility; and all my statements of its
properties are established. And, although for my knowledge of its properties in
regard to the stomach I was indebted to no one, I was compelled to show a
second time how accident first made me acquainted with its power over the
stomach, and how I was led on step by step to investigate and discover its great
virtues in affections of this organ. (See the Lancet, Feb. 24. 1827, p. 671. sqq-)

Three months after I had first published (in the Transactions of the Med. and
Chir. Society, for 1823, vol. xii.) a full report upon Quinine (the first that appeared
in this country), I heard, at a meeting of the College of Physicians, an hospital
fellow on one side of me, ask another hospital fellow, who is now in high practice,
what he thought of this Quinine, The reply across me was, ‘* Nothing ; the yery


400 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


reality, phrenology gives no additional support to such views.
It leaves all questions of fatalism and materialism where it found


NS BE LA eit Ue, Ne AOS RE ee eo
name of it will not be known in a twelvemonth!” Yet Quinine is now as much
used as rhubarb, though neither it nor Prussic Acid is in the Pharmacopeeia ; and
all my statements are established.

In 1824, I published my discovery of the almost specific power of carbonate
of iron in cases of general chorea before the adult period; and for pointing
out (1. ¢. vol. xiii. 1827.) that Carbonate of Iron, when it failed in ordinary
doses, might be given without the least unpleasant effect in doses ten times
larger, I was considered little less than a fool, and acquired a permanent reputa-
tion for giving all medicines under all circumstances in enormous doses; though
I am one of the most cautious practitioners, and always begin, in chronic cases,
with small doses of medicine, increasing them by slow degrees according to the
necessity ; and never, from my earliest days of practice or teaching, have wished
to give one grain or one drop more than proves requisite. At the same time,
I certainly do not regard quantity as I proceed, but steadily augment my
doses till the complaint begins to yield, or some effect of the medicine begins
to appear. No practice is more irrational than to discontinue a medicine simply
because it does nothing, or before you have step by step augmented the dose till
some circumstance manifests that the medicine is not inactive. Difference of
quantity and difference of continuance must be demanded in different cases. I
did not feel myself justified in recommending large doses of iron as more efficient
than small. But farther experience proved to me the superior power of large
doses of carbonate of iron in obstinate cases; and in 1827 (l. c. vol. xiii.), I
stated this, and have proved it to the crowds of students at the North London
Hospital again and again. The possibility of giving the large doses of the
medicine ordinarily is now no longer doubted. I next announced the power of
large quantities of Carbonate of Iron over Tetanus (1. c. vol. xv. 1829.), and this
has been confirmed. (Lond. Med. Gazette, Sept. 14. 1833.) A gentleman from the
West Indies told me he had great success with it. But no one else gives it a
trial, and old means which have failed again and again are absurdly repeated.

When I displayed the utility of sulphate of copper in chronic diarrheea, in 1827
(1. ec. vol. xiii.), some contended that the opium combined with it effected all the
good, although I had so proceeded as to prove how much was owing to the salt.
T now possess heaps of letters expressing the realisation of my statements from
practitioners of various parts. :

In 1830, I proved the occurrence of glanders in the human subject, not-
withstanding its possibility was denied. (1. c. vol. xvi.) I was smiled at for
my credulity. Yet extracts from my papers and copies of my engravings
have now a place in Dr. Rayer’s work upon the Diseases of the Skin, to
which no other is comparable; and, in noticing some foreign cases just
published, the editors of the Brit. and For. Med. Review, for July, say the occur.
rence is no longer a novelty. (p. 241.) After my first paper appeared, the
lecturer on veterinary medicine in the University of London, to whom I had
given a copy, did not condescend to notice it; and, making a passing ob-
servation upon the belief of the occurrence of the disease in the human subject,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 401


them. Every thing in nature is subjected to laws which must be
obeyed. ‘The nature of every thing is destined. A stone is des-


was perfectly silent in regard to my facts, and considered such an opinion
as the result of inaccurate observation, referring to some one else, not to me.
(Lancet, No. 436.) After my second paper was published, (1. c. vol. xviii. 1833. )
in which I gave another case, he could no longer profess a doubt; but, in ad-
mitting the fact, now said that it had “long been suspected, or rather painfully
known.” (Veterinarian, March, 1833.)

For having discovered the extraordinary power of Creosote in arresting vomit-
ing, unconnected with inflammatory or structural disease of the stomach, in an
immense majority of cases (1. c. vol. xix. 1835.), I am now going through a
course of sneers and attacks. Some, who cannot have, and others who evidently
have not, employed it according to my directions, nor to one twentieth of the
extent, assert that they have not found it so useful as I have, and put it on
a par with medicines as inferior to it as lettuce to morphine; and the reviewers,
who are lauded as respectable above all others, untruly say that I call it never
failing; whereas I pointed out two forms of vomiting in which it is useless
and even injurious, and mention that where it seems proper it occasionally fails,
and that it so disgusts some persons that the stomach will not bear it; and,
though, after a laborious and rigid examination of its effects for a twelvemonth
in a large practice, I have pointed out various diseases and forms of disease in
which it is useful, I really have pronounced against it in a still greater number
of diseases and opposed writers who eulogised it absurdly. I shall always con-
gratulate myself upon my good fortune in discovering the extraordinary power
of creosote over nausea and vomiting and to enable the stomach to bear medicines
which disagree with it; and all I stated in regard to it is confirmed by still farther
hourly experience up to this very day, and will stand firmly, notwithstanding the
assertion of Drs. Forbes and Conolly, who untruly make me have “ unlimited
confidence” in creosote and call it ‘‘ never failing,” and who assert that ‘in other
and equally judicious hands it has fallen very far short of the virtues ascribed
to it” by me, “and that it more frequently fails” in cases in which I say I have
found it successful. To crown all, they make a lecturer, who confirms a
candid remark of mine, be confirmed by me. (July, p. 170. 200.) The tes-
timony of hundreds of my pupils and patients is happily against them, *


* Except the narrative of a case of rupture of the stomach (1. ¢. vol. xiii.),
and one of rupture of a pregnant Fallopian tube (I. c. vol. xiii.), my only other
paper in the Transactions is on Fatty Discharges from the Alimentary Canal and
Urinary Passage (vol. xvii. 1833.). In it I collected a great many instances,
and deduced several general facts as to the disease. 1. That the fat might
be discharged solid or liquid, or both. 2. That the disease might be tem-
porary, or permanent, or even fatal. 93. That there might be organic, or merely
functional disease. 4. That the organic disease might be in the i ntestines, liver,
or pancreas, 5. That fatty discharge might take place from the alimentary and
urinary organs at the same time, Yet this paper was called a mere collection
of cases,


EE 2


4.02 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


tined not to feel; a fish is destined to swim, and a vulture to be
a bird of prey ; man is destined to be —


What I experienced during many years for my humble and conscientious efforts
to propagate the advancement of whatever, by zealous and dispassionate observ-
ation I knew, within my own experience, to be true and useful, distressed me
greatly, till I rose in spite of it in my profession. I am aware of the injuries I still
suffer from the bad feeling of those who are not so devoted to the profession as
myself and yet envy me. But I now smile at it, and forgive all ; and shall firmly
persevere, never withholding my aid to useful truths nor shrinking from conduct
which I consider my duty.—From this narration I trust that young men will never
be deterred from an industrious and conscientious course, but be prepared to
expect all that I have experienced, and remember the advice of the Sibyl to
Eneas, “‘ Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.” We thus find the fate of
the little to be the same as of the great, if they humbly take these for their guide.

But the most notorious modern illustration of the aversion to improvement is
the history of lighting with gas. When I was a student, I recollect often going
from the Borough Hospitals in the evening to see Pall Mall, which only, of all the
streets of London, was so lighted. For many years a person named Winser,
and a company which he established, lighted that single street, I believe gratui-
tously. This was a bright spot in London, for comparative darkness prevailed
in every other street. For many years, the general adoption of the plan was con-
sidered impracticable and therefore absurd. At length, another street was lighted
— and another — and another —and now that the poor man is dead, all London is
become Pall Mall, with one exception. Year after year have I amused myself with
watching the progress of illumination, and comparing it with the history of the
progress of great truths in physical, moral, and political science. Yet not even
is it at this moment universally adopted, any more than many obvious truths.
Darkness is still cherished in that very spot of London, where the greatest riches
and the highest rank, both transmitted hereditarily in the longest succession,
ought to have secured, with Oxford and Cambridge education and every ad-
vantage of mental cultivation, from generation to generation, the highest know-
ledge and discernment. No house in Grosvenor Square has any other than
the greasy, dull oil lamps, notwithstanding all the streets opening into it and even
the centre of the square which the parish lights, are brilliantly illuminated with
gas. I have taken foreigners into Grosvenor Square to exhibit this morai phe-
nomenon.

These are all remarkable facts in the history of human nature ; and make me
quite indifferent to the opinions of people, whether in my own profession or
not, upon the subject of phrenology. Yet its progress has of late been most

satisfactory. When I wrote advocating phrenology, in 1817 *, the year of my


* Annals of Medicine and Surgery, vol. ii. March 1817. I believe I was the
first reviewer who defended phrenology in Great Britain. I subsequently wrote
areyiew of the Ld, Phr. Trans, and of the first Number of the Ed, Phr. Journ.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. AOS


“¢ Not prone

And brute as other creatures, but endued
With sanctity of reason, and to erect

His stature, and upright, with front serene,
Govern the rest, self-knowing.” ™


The very expression ‘“ human nature” implies certain innate
faculties and dispositions, generally ; the circumstance of peculiar


appointment to St. Thomas’s Hospital, I did not know six phrenologists in
England ; and, when I founded the Phrenological Society of London, there was
none in England or abroad. They now exist in many parts of Scotland, where
the first Phrenological Society was established; in many parts of England,
in Ireland, America, Denmark, and Paris, where, however, no one existed till
Gall’s career was finished, — 24 societies in all. In Paris the most distinguished
in our profession are phrenologists. To the everlasting honour of Edinburgh,
not only was the first Phrenological Society established there, but the first
Phrenological Journal ; and a treatise on the science by Mr. Combe has passed
through three editions, and made its hundreds of converts: 14,0CO copies of
his phrenological works have been sold. (Statistics of Phrenology, by H. C.
Watson. London, 1836.) On the stand made by Mr. Combe and his circle
in Edinburgh, the seat of a hostile celebrated Review, of a University, and
of great religious bigotry, too much praise on the score of intellect and moral
principle cannot be bestowed. Thousands of well-informed persons in this
country are now phrenologists, —a very large number in my own profession.
Though the Pope put Gall’s works into the Index Expurgatorius, phrenological
treatises have lately been permitted in the states of his Holiness, as well as by
Austria in Milan and Pavia. Phrenological language is of daily use with
our best writers and teachers; though they too often fear to declare their con-
viction. Ihave never known an individual write or speak against phrenology,


in Dr. Johnson’s Med. Chr. Review ; and have read in the London Phrenological
Society a paper on Imitation, reported in the Lancet, 1827, No. 190. —on an
Idiot, 1. c. 1826, No. 169. —on the Head of the Incendiary Smithers, lies 1882;
No. 486.—ditto Thurtel, — ditto Pallet, Hd. Phr. Journ. vol. 1.—an Answer to
Mr. Jerdan and Dr. Ryan, Lancet, No. 430. —to Dr. Kidd, 1. c. 1834, No. 547.
—to the Rev. Mr. Taylor, ]. c. 1834, No. 548. — to Mr. Godwin, |. c. 1834,
No. 482. — ditto to Dr. Pritchard, ditto to Dr. Burrows, but not reported, —
ditto to Dr. Bostock, — ditto to Dr. Magendie, Ed. Phr. Journ. vol. v. In the
Lancet for 1829, No. 304. and 1831, No. 400. will be found reported some
curious pathological illustrations of Phrenology from my patients in St. Thomas’s
Hospital. In the Ed, Phr. Journ. vol. iv. also will be found a phrenological ex-
periment, and in the Lancet, No. 642. another, both communicated by me pre-
viously to the London Phrenological Society.
Oe eee eee
» Parad. Lost, vil.


EE 3


404 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


degrees of disposition and talents being hereditary, and of each
age having its distinctive character, are quite as favourable as


aI errr ste th erat EB oe ee nd
without betraying a total misconception of it, or an ignorance of the facts of which
he spoke. Some opposers are both ignorant and malicious.

Let us all, therefore, follow Gall’s advice ; and when, by careful investigation,
we have satisfied ourselves of a truth, let us not be angry, but let us, remember-
ing the words of Locke, — that few people have any solid reasons for the ‘“ doc-
trines they keep such a stir about” (Hum. Underst, iy. 21.), pity mankind and
totally disregard the opinions of those who have not bestowed the same atten-
tion as ourselves or yield to malevolent passions, be they little, like the swarm,
or men of real distinction.

Till Gall established himself in Paris and rose into a very fine and high prac-
tice (he was physician to many ambassadors), he kept himself very poor from
spending upon his phrenological pursuits all he gained, after absolutely necessary
expenses. And although he lived then in the most private manner, with the com~
forts indeed of a handsome lodging, a carriage, and a garden witha smal] house
in the suburbs, he had saved so little, that, had his illness been protracted, his
friends in a few months must have supported him. In his combination of intellect
and moral sentiments, I doubt if any other human being surpassed him; and
the frontal and sincipital regions of his head were magnificent. His cerebellum
was very large, and he was twice married; and although, after separating from
his first wife he had a mistress, I believe he was a model of fidelity, and married
again immediately that his first wife died. His noble independence of mind
cannot be better shown than in his account of self-esteem in which he evidently
pourtrays himself, — a passage which I have ever in my thoughts. ‘ There is a
certain number of men endowed with such strength of mind and nobleness of
soul, thoroughly sensible of their own worth, and so passionately fond of inde-
pendence, that they resist every external influence calculated to subject them.
They endeavour, as much as possible, to establish themselves in countries where
there is the most liberty ; they follow a pursuit which renders them independent,
which exempts them from the favours and the caprices of the great. Dominion
over their inferiors, which would lead on to slavery under an absolute master, to
them would be insupportable. Honours and distinctions intended for merit,
when lavished on men of no pretensions, are in their eyes only degradations. If
they prosper, it is through their own exertions. Like the oak, they sustain
themselves ; and, for whatever they are, they consent to be indebted to no one.
This is a pride which has not degenerated into haughtiness ; which is often the
companion of great virtues, is the enemy of all baseness, and the support of
courage in adversity.” (l.c, 4to. vol. iii, p. 299., Svo. t. iv. p. 254.) «I
am the most modest, the most humble of men, when I behold around
me the immensity of things which I am condemned not to understand, and
which, nevertheless, are connected with the objects of a medical observer and
practitioner. But when the discovery of the structure and functions of
the brain is spoken of, I believe myself, with imperturbable confidence, to
be above all my predecessors, above all my cotemporaries. Yes; I am the first
who has established the physiological principles on which the structure and


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4:05


phrenology to the belief of fatalism. But each has his own precise
talents and disposition by nature ; on some circumstances or other


functions of the brain must be studied; I am the first who has broken down the
barrier opposed by superstition and ignorance, for thousands of years, to the
progress of the physiology of the nervous system; the first who conceived the
idea of distinguishing the general attributes from the true qualities and funda-
mental faculties ; the first who determined the instincts, the inclinations, the sen-
timents, and the talents which are connected with certain cerebral parts. J am
the first who had the courage, the patience, and the perseverance to examine and
fix the relations which exist between the energy of the moral qualities and of
the intellectual faculties, and the various development of the parts of the brain.
I am the first who has extended these researches to the whole brute kingdom,
who has studied thousands of animals, as to their most striking instincts, inclin-
ations, and faculties, and the configuration of their brain, both in individuals and
species. I am the first who discovered and pointed out the means of discovering
the seat of each instinct, sentiment, and intellectual faculty. I am the first who
discovered these seats, and demonstrated them by numerous physiological and
pathological facts, and by an infinity of researches into the comparative anatomy
and physiology of all species of animals.”

« Yes; once more, I am the first and the only one to whom the physiology of
the brain owes its existence; I have discovered it without the assistance of any
man. This the history of each of my discoveries proves. It is the same with the
physiology of the brain as with its structure, To pick out what might by chance
be found dispersed in authors, would have required more cleverness than to
detect the mysteries of nature by observation. I began, continued, and com-
pleted all my discoveries, without any previous learning ; and if, at a later period,
I compiled quotations, it was rather to mark the point of my departure, than
to strengthen my ideas by those of my predecessors and cotemporaries.” (1. c, 8vo.
t. v. p. 519. sq. 522. sq.)

In his preface to the third quarto volume, published in 1818, and the sixth
octavo, published in 1825, he says, “ The foundation of this doctrine being laid, it
must be as immovable as the materials, — the facts, of which it is constructed.
But I am far from believing the edifice complete: neither the life nor the fortune
of one man would be sufficient for this vast project. Up to this present moment
I have been left to my own resources. An immense concourse of the most favour-
able circumstances would be required to raise this study to the height which
it is capable of attaining. There would be required a complete collection of the
crania of brutes, not only of different species, but also of individuals in which
qualities or faculties strongly pronounced had been observed. There would be
required a complete collection of the brains of brutes, modelled in wax after
nature, to multiply the means of comparison. There would be required a num-
ber of crania, or at least of casts, of men and women distinguished by some
quality or faculty; finally there would be required a more extensive knowledge
of natural history than we have at present, with respect to instances of industrious
aptitudes, qualities, and faculties ; in a word, with respect to the internal economy


of the brute creation.”
ER 4


4.06 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


they must depend; and, if these are discovered, the case does
but remain the same as before.° Yet, whatever may be our innate


————— anna


Dr. Vimont of Caen has carried on the researches into the phrenology of
brutes with extraordinary perseverance, and produced a most magnificent work.
Attracted, in 1818, by the prize offered by the French Institute to the author
of the best memoir upon the anatomy of the brain in the four classes of verte-
brated animals, he began researches into the subject, without any reference to
phrenology, for he had not read Gall, and had seen him spoken of in books
and heard of him only as a charlatan: however, he thought it incumbent upon
him to read Gall’s work among others. “ Hardly,” says he, ‘‘ had I begun to
read it, when I found that I had to do with one of those extraordinary men
whom dark envy endeavours to exclude from the rank to which their genius calls
them, and against whom it employs the arms of the coward and the hypocrite.
High cerebral capacity, profound penetration, good sense, varied information,
were the qualities which struck me as distinguishing Gall. The indifference
which I first felt for his writings, therefore, soon gave way to the most profound
veneration.” (Introduction, p. 14.)

In 1827, Dr. Vimont presented to the Institute a memoir containing a frag-
ment of the researches on which he had then spent so many years, together with
2500 heads of brutes of various classes, orders, genera, and species. Among
these, 1500 had belonged to brutes with whose habits he had been individually
well acquainted before they died, or were killed: 400 wax representations of
the brain, modelled after nature, and an atlas of more than 300 figures of the
brain and cranium, executed with the strictest accuracy of dimensions, also ac-
companied the memoir. The work in which he now sets forth his observations
has an atlas of 120 exquisite plates, containing above 600 figures. ‘The accuracy
of dimensions is said to surpass any thing before attempted in anatomy ; and, if
the immense mass of proofs of phrenology from the human head, and the facts
pointed out by Gall, in brutes, were not sufficient to convince the most preju-
diced, the additional multitude amassed by Dr. Vimont will overwhelm them.

These are the great merits of the work : I would willingly pass over its faults ;
but antiphrenologists will point them out, and therefore it is as well at once to
express my regret at the self-conceit which pervades it. The author has given
what he terms English as well as French explanations of the plates, but,
from not availing himself of the assistance of some one possessing a better
knowledge of our language, his blunders are irresistibly ludicrous. He
brings Gall’s knowledge and labours as low as possible, in order to elevate
his own, and commits great injustice. (Vol. i. p. 15. (Not aware that Gall had


° All know that sexual desires are so connected with the genital organs as
generally to commence when these become mature, and be prevented by their
removal during childhood ; but the world does not, therefore, decline to punish
ravishers and adulterers. The circumstances are precisely the same with all the
cerebral organs of propensity.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4:07


propensities and powers, we know how much various circum-
stances influence the development of faculties and the strength


_ ee en enn nn eee


answered Tiedemann, in l. c. 8vo. t. iv. p. 42.) 36. sq. 165. 212. 219, 220,
vol. ii. p. 217.) He is unjust towards Dr. A. Combe and Mr. W. Scott, in vol. ii.
p. 165. 196. sq. He stands at an immeasurable distance below Gall in intellect :
and, though I believe him to have’ collected far more facts and contributed far
more to the solidity of the science than Dr. Spurzheim, his intellectual powers
have not Dr. S.’s strength. Nothing can be weaker than some of his remarks
on vitativeness (vol. ii. p. 160. sqq.), concentrativeness (vol.il. p, 212. sqq.
also compared with p.407.), and on alimentativeness (p. 173. sq.), on material-
ism (vol. i. p. $2. sq. compare with p. 223. and vol. ii, p.50.), and on mar-
vellousness (vol. ii. p. 427. sqq.). There are instances of bad taste, incorrect
information, and carelessness, which vex me in so important a work. He agrees
with Dr. S., in considering Gall’s sense of persons as a sense of form, and yet
all his facts and reasoning relate to persons. He adopts all the faculties alleged
to be discovered by Dr. S. and others, and even adds three of his own — the
sense of distance, of beauty in the arts, and the disposition of flocks or swarms
to arrange themselves in regular figures. His remarks against Dr. S.’s views
on acquisitiveness, secretiveness, cautiousness, eventuality, mirthfulness, and
ideality, to use Dr. S.’s terms, are really good, and such as I have always
made. He, in several instances, is just towards Gall, where others have
been unjust. (See vol. ii. p. $93. 459.) And, although he rectifies Gall’s lo-
calisation of most of the organs in brutes, and this with rude remarks, he
once does him ample justice. (Vol. ii. p. 262.) ‘If Gall has not treated the
phrenology of brutes as he might have done, he will always have the merit of
having put his successors in the right road. This celebrated man, in developing
his philosophical ideas by the aid of comparative anatomy and physiology, has
left an immense distance between himself and Spurzheim, and all phrenologists
who have not, like the latter, followed in his path. Time, which gives every man
his proper place, while it will show us the imperfections of his works, will in-
evitably do justice to the extent of his views.” He makes a few rectifications
of the situations of organs in man; but his merit is that of having given to
phrenology an immense mass of additional proofs from brutes, and observed and
communicated his facts with, as it would appear, the minutest accuracy. No one
can pretend to a perfect knowledge of comparative anatomy and physiology,
without a knowledge of his labours, and to impress their importance upon my
readers, I shall quote a long passage.

«In animals of the lower classes, to begin with fish and reptiles, the number
of cerebral faculties is small; their acts generally of short duration: all have a
spinal chord. In the apparatus of the senses they have, externally, a multitude
of shades of form and structure calculated to facilitate their actions. The
most prominent cerebral faculties are conservation, alimentation, and reproduc-
tion. If there are any perceptive faculties, they are, except in some species,
very limited.

«‘ What a difference, in this respect, between them and birds! Tow must


408 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


of dispositions, and we feel as if we were free agents: we seem
to move our right hand or our left, and to sit still or walk, exactly
as we choose; and we possess reason and conscience to guide


our conduct.
Yet, notwithstanding this feeling of freedom, “all theory is,”
certainly, as Dr. Johnson said, “against the freedom of the


will.”

The truth is, that we act necessarily according to the strongest
motive; our liberty consisting, as Voltaire says in his charming
article on Liberty 4, in the power of doing what our will requires
of absolute necessity. Johnson, therefore, added correctly,


Renee a EE eS Oe


we be struck with admiration on observing that, with the more energetie and
complicated actions of birds, the cerebral system becomes more ample! Is it
not still more surprising to see the combination and energy of the faculties
perfectly coincide with the wants of the species? How can we, on the other
hand, refuse to be convinced of phrenclogy, when it proves to us, by the in-
spection of many thousands of skulls, that if birds, whatever be their class, order,
genus, or species, or even their peculiar habits, have a faculty in common, for
example that of migration or recognising places, their skulls will always re-
semble one another at one point; and, as this truth applies to all the faculties
discovered by observation, to deny the existence of these facts is to deny that the
eye is the external apparatus of sight, the ear of hearing, the nose of smelling,
&c.

« In quadrupeds and quadrumana, in which the cerebral operations, generally
considered, are moré numerous and present a more continued action than in birds,
we find the cerebral system more developed. Some organs, which were but
rudimentary in the two first classes, are very prominent ; and the acts dependent
upon them, being more energetic, confirm the general law of nature, — the re-
lation between the extent and force of the acts of the nervous system with its
volume or development.” “ Full and perfect reliance may be placed on my
observations; for they are the result of a scrupulous and conscientious examin-
ation of many thousand skulls of brutes, and ‘the dissection of their brains, sub-
sequent to the study of their most striking manners and habits.”

P Boswell’s Life of Johnson, vol. iii, p. 294.

Consult Gall on Materialism, Fatalism, and Moral Liberty, 1.c. 4to. vol.ii. from
p- 79. to 132. ; and on Reason, Will, and Free Will, vol.iv. p.340. sqq. ; and on
Free Will and Liberty, 8vo. t. i. p. 228. sqq., and t. vi. p. 427. sqq., especially
on Illusory Liberty and Moral Liberty. All these writers, however, were antici-
pated in “4 Philosophical Enquiry concerning Human Liberty, by Anthony
Collins. London.” Collins again owes his views to “4 Treatise of Libertie and
Necessitie, wherein all Controversie concerning Predestination, Election, Free Will,
Grace, Mercy, Reprobation, &c. is fully decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobs.
London, 1654.”


1 Dictionnaire Philosophique.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. . 4.09


« All experience is for it.’ And on another occasion said, “‘ We
know that we are free, and there is an end on’t.”*

Motives depend upon original organisation, sometimes modified
by physical influence, internal or external; and upon external
moral influence upon our mental organs.

The being who has the most faculties, the greatest equipoise
of his faculties, and the most knowledge, has the greatest range
of liberty.’ If a person acts wickedly or absurdly from hearing
necessity advocated, it is because certain motives become extin-
guished in him and his range contracted. It results that we should
educate, and give as many and as good motives as possible ; and,
when we punish, we should punish, not from presuming we have
a right to condemn, but for the purpose of giving additional mo-
tives to good conduct, where there has clearly not been enough
of them As the strength of individual inclinations and the faci-
lity of yielding to them are greatly increased by habit, in order
that those of a lower class should not acquire undue force, nor

«« Upstart passions catch the government


From reason, and to servitude reduce
Man, till then free,”’ *


the necessity for education to consist not of mere precepts and
sermons, but of good actions, is apparent. One good act may be
more improving than the precept read or heard twenty times.


Tee vol. 0. p. 74.

® Voltaire, in the article referred to, makes B., the person who is ignorant of
the subject, say, “ Mon chien de chasse est aussi libre que moi; il a nécessaire-
ment la volonté de courir quand il voit un liévre, et le pouvoir de courir s’il
n’a pas mal aux jambes. Je n’ai donc rien au-dessus de mon chien: vous me
réduisez a |’état des bétes.

To which his better informed friend, 4., replies, ‘* Voila les pauvres sophismes
des pauyres sophistes qui vous ont instruit. Vous voila bien malade d’étre libre
comme yotre chien. Ne mangez-yous pas, ne propagez-vous pas comme lui, a
Pattitude prés? WVoudriez-vous avoir l’odorat autrement que par le nez ? Pour-
quoi voudriez-vous avoir la liberté autrement que votre chien ?

B. “ Mais jai une ame qui raisonne beaucoup, et mon chien ne raisonne
gueres. Il n’a presque que des idées simples; et moi, j’ai mille idées méta-
physiques.

A. Eh bien, vous étes mille fois plus libre que lui ; c’est-A-dire, vous avez mille
fois plus de pouvoir de penser que lui; mais vous n’étes pas libre autrement
que lui.”

* See Bishop Butler’s remarks on the mischief of the doctrine, dnalogy, p. 1.
chap. vi.

" Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. ii, p. 100, 5; Svo, t i. P» 289., te Vir p. 488.

* Parad. Lost, xii.


4.10 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


The objections on the ground of materialism are not more
applicable to phrenology than to the doctrine now universally
admitted, —that the brain is the organ of the mind; and they have
been answered.

Those who have so little soul as always to ask what is the good
of any discovery in nature, may be told that phrenology may be
of much service in confirming some moral views which good
sense may previously have suggested. Humility and benevolence
are two leading duties. If we detect the signs of intellectual
deficiency and vice in our own heads, we may learn to think
humbly of ourselves; and, being put in possession of true self-
knowledge, endeavour to strengthen what is too weak and repress
what is too strong. If we detect the signs of great talents and
virtues in the heads of others, we may love them the more as
superior and highly favoured beings: whereas, if we detect the
signs of great virtues and talents in our own heads, we may learn
to give no praise to ourselves, but be thankful for the gift ; and, if
we detect the signs of vice and intellectual deficiency in others, we
may learn to pity rather than to censure. Not revenge, but ex-
ample, is the professed, and should be the sole, object of our legal
punishments ;— example to the culprit himself and others, or, if the
punishment is capital, to others only ; and therefore frauds, which,
from being very easily committed, may become very detrimental
to society, are punished more severely than those which, ceteris
paribus, from being difficult of perpetration, can scarcely from their
frequency become dangerous. Were moral demerit regarded,
the fraud easily committed would, ceteris paribus, be punished
the most lightly. A vicious man must be restrained, as a wild
beast ¥, for the good of others, though, for aught we know, his
faults may, like the acts of the beast of prey, be chargeable rather
on his nature ; and, while we feel justified in confining, and the
culprit is perhaps conscious how richly he deserves his fate, we
may pity in our hearts and acknowledge that we ourselves have
often been less excusable.

« Teach me to love and to forgive,


Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and own myself a man.’’”


Y A man of determined bad principle may in like manner be shunned by the
most benevolent, on account of being odious and dangerous; though they wish
him so well as ardently to long for his reformation, and pity his organisation, his
education, and the circumstances under which he has been placed,

* Gray, Ode to Adversity.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 411


Morality is inculcated by phrenology in the most striking
manner. The faculties common to us and brutes are placed
the lowest; the superior faculties above: as though the former
should be subjected to the latter. We learn from phrenology
what several faculties do certainly exist: and, as nothing exists
but for a good purpose, each should be allowed to act. But
they should be allowed to act harmoniously, —not one in oppo-
sition to another: the love of property not be allowed to oppose
benevolence or justice, nor any one intellectual faculty to su-
persede the employment of the others. The greater the culti-
vation of all the intellectual faculties, the more abundant will be
the motives of thought and action, —the freer the will: and the
more the moral faculties situated superiorly are cultivated, and
the fewer provocations are applied to the inferior, the more will
the former guide the individual to his own happiness and that
of others.

Phrenology, too, may be of the highest use when in criminals
there is suspicion of idiotism or insanity. Idiotism often de-
pends on deficiency of cerebral development, and many idiots
have been executed for crimes when it was not exactly proved
that they were idiotic enough to be unfit for punishment, but
whose cranial development might have settled the point at
once. Many persons also have been executed who should have
been considered madmen, but were not because the fact of illu-
sion was not made out; yet the extreme preponderance of the
development of the organs of the propensities over that of the
moral sentiments and intellect would have proved that they were
deserving of coercion rather than punishment. Such does the
skull of Bellingham, the murderer of Mr. Percival, prove him to
have been.

In placing confidence in others and forming connections, phre-
nology may be of the greatest use. We might often be at once
certain of an intellectual deficiency or a moral objection. Many
heads have the development of their various parts so moderate
and nearly balanced, that the character will depend chiefly upon
external circumstances; and such will never become remark-
able. Although fulness of development does not, like deficiency,
give a certainty of the internal force, because it may not depend
upon brain or upon good brain; yet, when the person is known
to be of sound body and mind, and not torpid, the force within
will, in an immense majority of cases, be correspondent with


412 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


the fulness without. Like many other phrenologists, and, in-
deed, like Gall himself, I have suffered from having yielded to


Ga


® Gall divides men into six’ distinct classes in regard to the moral and intellee-
tual faculties : —

‘¢ In the first class, the qualities and faculties which are the most elevated and
are peculiar to man are completely developed, while the organs of the animal
qualities and faculties have but a feeble degree of development and activity.

“ In the second class, the organs of the animal faculties aud qualities have at-
tained a high degree of activity, while the organs of the qualities and faculties
peculiar to man are but little developed and but little active.

‘‘ In the third class, the qualities and faculties common to animals and those
peculiar to man have considerable development and activity.

«In the fourth class only one or some of the inclinations or talents is de-
veloped in an extraordinary degree, while the rest have only a moderate develop-
ment and activity, and are perhaps below mediocrity.

‘In the fifth class, one or some of the organs is but little developed and re-
main inactive, while the others are more favourably developed and active.

‘‘ Finally, in the sixth class, the organs common to animals and those peculiar
to man are almost equally moderate.”

«¢ When the superior qualities and faculties more peculiar to the human species
much exceed the inferior, the man will prevail over the animal. The internal
movements and all the conduct of these men are conformable to reason, justice,
and morality. To judge equitably of the weaknesses of others, to generously
pardon offences, to tolerate with indulgence the errors of their minds, to act
with integrity, always to labour for the general good, sacrificing their own_in-
terests, always to render homage to truth with a wise intrepidity, always to be
above ingratitude and persecution, always to ascend from effect to cause, and
thus always to shelter themselves from prejudice and superstition, &c. &c.— this
is the natural tendency of these men, these models, these benefactors of our race,

“© The contrary is the case with those whose organs of the animal qualities and
faculties have a very considerable development and activity, while the organs of
the superior faculties have but little development and activity. In these, all is
subjected to sensuality and error. The animal impulses are numerous and
violent; and defeat is the more to be apprehended in proportion as the_ superior
faculties and external aid are the weaker. If unhappily the prevailing inclin-
ations are of the number of those the excessive activity of which destroys social
order, will the philosophic judge be astonished at those men too frequently be-
coming the victims of their organisation ?

‘¢ When the qualities and faculties common to animals and at the same time
those peculiar to man are equally active, men result who are placed between the
man and the brute. They are stimulated by the one and warned by the other :
often humiliated by the one and often exalted by the other; great in vice and
great in virtue; in many points, they are excellence and wisdom itself; in many
others, they are subject to the most deplorable weaknesses and vices. ‘The most
opposite qualities ‘frequently render them the most problematical beings ; such as


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4138


social impulses and neglected to pay proper attention to the
organisation. But the phrenologist, and not phrenology, was in


fault.
We learn how a person may lose his memory of names, and


of nothing else; and how any one or a certain number of the
intellectual faculties or moral feelings may be over-excited, di-
minished, or otherwise damaged : just as one part supplied by one
nerve or set of nerves may be palsied, convulsed, or pained; and


a 0 0 OO ee
Louis XI., Charles V., Philip II., James II., Catherine de’ Medicis, who were
superstitiously devout, and at the same time the scourge of their subjects. These
are the persons who most acutely feel the struggle of the two beings within
them. It is Socrates, St. Paul, St. Augustin, who, having the severest battles to
fight, may pretend to the most glorious victory of virtue.

«¢ When one or some qualities or faculties, whether animal or human, are en~
dowed with an extraordinary energy, while the others are only moderate, the
result is great geniuses, great talents in a limited career, or certain inclinations,
whether bad or good, predominant over the others. These talents and inclin-
ations constitute the character of the individual, who will have the more difficulty
to withstand their impulses in proportion as the other moral and intellectual
powers are less active. You have the mere musician, mechanician, and impas-
sioned poet ; but you have also the libidinous, the quarrelsome, the thievish, who
even, in certain cases, are so impassioned that the excessive activity of such inclin-
ations degenerates into real madness, and deprives the individual of the power of
controlling them.

“ You see on the contrary, partial apathies, imbecilities, when, by the side of
other qualities and faculties sufficiently developed, one or more organs are but
little developed. With such an organisation, Lessing and Tichsbein detest music,
Newton and Kant dislike women.

“ Lastly, in the sixth class, is found the crowd of ordinary men. But, as the
organs common to animals occupy the greatest part of the brain, these men re-
main limited to the sphere of the animal qualities ; their pleasures are those of
sense, and they produce nothing remarkable in any respect.

“* These six divisions are mixed in a thousand modifications, as happens with all
the great divisions of nature. We rarely find the organisation happy enough to
bestow upon the faculties of a superior order an absolute power of impressing
a favourable direction upon the inferior. We may, therefore, admit it as a truth
established by the laws of organisation, that, among men, a very small number
find in themselves alone sufficient force or motive to be a law unto themselves, —
always to resolve upon acts conformable to the dignity of the most noble inclin-
ations, sentiments, faculties of men.” (Svo. t. i. p. 320. sqq. See also 4to, vol,
il. p. 133. sqq.) ‘

Gall required Dr. Spurzheim to infuse order, system, and philosophy into his
discoveries and views !

He belonged to the small and noble class. God grant that increased cul-

tivation of man’s higher cerebral fculties may highest enlarge it !


4:14: MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


indications of treatment will arise from the fact, just as in the
latter cases.

We learn how absurd in education it would be to attempt the
production of great excellence of a particular kind, on the sup-
position that he who can excel in one thing can excel in another,
as ‘though it were true, in Dr. Johnson’s words, that ‘‘ Genius is
general powers applied toa particular subject ;” or that, as Mr.
Dugald Stewart said, “ particular excellence is the result of par-
ticular habits of study or of business.” We know by phrenology
that all cannot do all; that the most unfit for one thing may be
the most fit for another; and the organisation will indicate from
whom we can expect nothing, and when we may hope for success.
Punishment will not be inflicted, nor irksome studies enforced,
where nature is at fault and the faculty is not strong enough
from deficiency of organ. We are enabled to decide when the
pupil is anxious for excellence through good feeling or conceit,
and yet cannot by nature succeed in the particular branch which
attracts him. We are enabled to adapt our moral management
accurately to the moral qualities of each child.

In short, in every thing human, by knowing that various intel-
lectual and moral faculties exist, by knowing what these are, by
knowing accurately in general in what positive and relative
strength they are supplied to particular individuals, we are en-
abled to act like philosophers, and not with that ignorant bru-
tality which has hitherto so much disfigured the education and
legislation of the world, as well as private conduct in society.

Gall made this noble and philosophical application from the
first, as will be seen in both his works.’ Others make them
daily.°

By phrenology the true mental faculties have principally been
discovered; and, as it shows the true nature of man, its importance
in medicine, education, jurisprudence, and every thing relating
to society and conduct, must be at once apparent.4


b Lc. 4to. vol. ii, p. 183 —212., 8vo. t. i. p. 319—457., and both works
passim.

¢ See Dr. Spurzheim’s writings; Mr. Combe’s System of Phrenology, and his
Essay on the Constitution of Man ; Dr. Combe’s work on Insanity ; Mr. Simpson
on Education; and the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, passim.

4 J shall end the subject of Phrenology with one of those beautiful passages
with which Gall’s works abound.

«‘ T have always been conscious of the dignity of my researches, and of the


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 415


While the brain is evidently the organ of mind, the nerves
united with it, and the spinal chord, together with its nerves,
are as evidently the instruments by which it affects, and is affected
by the other parts of the body, to which these nerves are dis-
tributed. By their instrumentality, the brain contracts the volun-
tary muscles, influences the functions of every other part when
under the operation of the different passions, and receives im-
pressions made upon every other part.e The consequences of
divisions of the nerves or spinal chord, fully substantiate these
points.

If a nerve supplying an organ of sense, as the olfactory, optic,
acoustic, or gustatory, is compressed or divided, the organ be-
comes insensible to odours, light, sounds, or tastes. If one exciting
muscles only, as the common motor oculi, — the internal — or the
external motor,—the facial—or the hypoglossal, the will loses
power over such muscles ;—over the inferior, superior, and internal


extensive influence which my doctrine will one day exert upon human know-
ledge ; for which reason I have remained indifferent to all the good or evil which
might be said of my labours. They were too far removed from received opinions
to be relished and approved at first. A knowledge of them required profound
and continued study: every one wished to pronounce upon them, and every one
came with opinions and views according to his means of intelligence. All
the doctrine is now consecrated to the public. Judgment cannot long remain
doubtful, Personal feeling will disappear: the passions will calm, and criticism
will haye only its due weight. Posterity will not fail to contrast the point
from which I started with that at which I stopped. My adversaries have but too
distinctly displayed the state in which the various objects of my Jabours were,
for it to be difficult to know what improvement these have derived and will de-
rive from my discoveries. What progress in the comparative anatomy, physio-
logy, and pathology of the nervous system! What a fruitful source of irre-
fragable principles for philosophical studies ; for the art of learning the disposition
of individuals to the best advantage; for the art of directing the education of
youth! What valuable materials for criminal legislation, based upon a complete
knowledge of the motives of human action! How history will change in the
eyes of those who will know how to value it according to the predominant inclin-
ations and faculties of the personages who have played the chief parts in it,” &e.
(I. c. 4to. vol. iii, Pp: Xii. sq., 8vo. t. vi. p. Vill. sq.)

© In strict language, no part of the body but the encephalon, or what corre-
sponds to it in lower animals, can have sensation. The different parts may be so
affected, that, by the intervention of nerves between them and the encephalon,
the latter perceives the impression made upon them ; but the sensation is in the
encephalon, although instinctively referred to the spot which is its source.

FF


416 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


straight muscles of the eyes, the inferior oblique, and the levator
palpebre superioris,—the superior oblique,—-the abductor straight
muscle, — many muscles of the face, viz. the orbicularis, levator
anguli oris, &c. &c.— or the muscular fibres of the tongue. If
the spinal chord, or nerves conveying both volition from the
brain and impressions to the brain, the supplied parts lose both
sense and motion.f For when nerves both convey volition and
supply common sensibility, as the fifth and the spinal nerves, they
are compound, one portion performing but one function, as is
proved by separately dividing the anterior and posterior part
of the trigeminum, or the nervous bands, proceeding from the
anterior and posterior parts of the spinal chord, before their
conjunction; when the division of the former deprives the parts
supplied of the influence of volition, and that of the latter de-
prives them of sensation. In the case of either these com-
pound or the simply motor nerves, if the divided surface, now un-
connected with the brain, is irritated (or if, indeed, the parts
are not divided, but at once irritated by pinching), contractions
occur in the muscles supplied by them; and, if a sedative is
applied to them, some say that the muscles become inert. In
the case of the compound nerves too, and in the case also of the
division of those nerves which have common sensibility or touch
and constitute a part of compound nerves, if the divided sur-
face connected with the brain is irritated, acute pain is felt,
as if in the part on which the nerve originally terminated s;
and, after the removal of a limb, it is common for uneasy sens-
ations to be experienced by the patient as if he still possessed
his hand or his foot. The nerves which convey volition only, and


f These facts are too frequently proved to be doubted; and, consequently,
four eases, in which the spinal chord is said to have been divided without the
effect of paralysis, must be suspected of error. (See Metzer’s Principes de Mé-
decine légale, translated, with notes, by Ballard, p. 357. sq.) Another has been
quoted from Dr. Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, t. iii., in which the arms
were paralysed as to motion, and the lower cervical and upper dorsal chord was
a colourless pulp, except two bands between the anterior fissure and the sides ;
so that the anterior portion of the chord was continuous (p- 184.), though
the posterior was destroyed at one part. But the description is imperfect. Dr.
“Magendie suggests that the membranes carried on sensation !

® Thus, after the loss of the glans penis, the extremities of the nerves are sens-
ible to venereal pleasure, as noticed by John Hunter and Dr, Marshall ; and I
once had an out-patient at St. Thomas’s Hospital with gonorrhea, and only an
inch of a remnant of penis.


FUNCTIONS OF NERVES. 417


those of the other four senses than touch,— the nerves of the
specific senses, —feel little or no pain when mechanical stimulus
is applied ; and these generally have not, like those which furnish
and possess common touch or common sensibility, and perhaps all
those of the specific senses, a ganglion at a certain distance from
their origin.» There is Gasser’s ganglion for the trigeminum, the
posterior and larger part of which, including the ophthalmic and
superior and inferior maxillary, gives sensibility to the face, and
even what common sensibility they possess to the nerves of the
specific senses and of motion ; while the anterior and smaller part
is not united with Gasser’s ganglion, and is a nerve of motion to the
muscles of the lower jaw, and some others of the face. There isa
ganglion for each posterior nerve of the spinal chord.i The anterior


» See Dr. Magendie’s Précis de Physiol. t. i. p. 200. sq. ed. 3.

‘The branch of the trigeminum unconnected with the ganglion was de-
clared to be a nerve of motion only, and to belong to the various muscles
of the lower jaw, by Dr. Paletta in 1784: and was, therefore, called nervus
masticatorius by Dr. Bellingeri in 1818. (Dissert. inaug. Taurini, 1818.) Dr.
O’Beirne has shown that the motor portion is more extensively distributed
in the muscles of the face; that, after uniting with the inferior maxillary of
the ganglionic portion, so that the two are intimately mixed and all the sub-
sequent branches are compound nerves one of which becomes attached to the
superior branch of the facial, it is distributed to many muscles of the face besides
those of the lower jaw. He hence explains some instances of a certain loss of mo-
tion after injury of the ganglionic portion of the fifth, and of continuance of motion
after injury of the facial ; — paralysis of the motor branch of the fifth being at-
tended by distortion of the face while the patient is at rest, and less when he
speaks, laughs, &c. and’thus puts in action the muscles supplied by the facial
nerve; paralysis of the facial being attended by distortion only when he puts
these in action ; and paralysis of both being attended by constant distortion and
an increase of it during these actions. He shows with great acuteness how
unsatisfactory and erroneous are many of Sir C. Bell’s views and statements
respecting paralysis of the face. (New Views of the Process of Defecation, p. 227.
sqq-) Dr. Bellingeni appears to have had some vague notion of the functions
of the anterior part of the trigeminus and of the facial nerve; but, since he
says that the facial nerve gives animal sensibility as well as motion to the muscles
and integuments of the face (p. 124.), and speaks of the upper branch of the
trigeminus as exciting involuntary motion (p. 177. sqq.), I cannot believe that
he anticipated Sir C. Bell, who certainly appears to have discovered step by
Step the office of the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum, and proved that
this was a double pair for sensation and motion — the portion devoted to sensation
having a ganglionic enlargement, the other none, exactly like the spinal nerves ;
although its similarity in structure to the spinal nerves he candidly states to have
been pointed out by Prochaska half a century ago, and by Sommerring. (The

FEF 2


418 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


portion of the spinal chord is nearly insensible, while its posterior
portion, and all the ganglionic branches of the trigeminum, are


Neen ee eee ee nee nnn eres nen tnrennenenense meee a


Nerv. Syst. of the Hum. Body, 1830, p. viii. In this work are various papers
presented by him to the Royal Society during the preceding nine years.) Sir C.
Bell also discovered the facial to be a nerve of motion only, though, besides
speaking of it as a nerve of voluntary motion, he gave it some properties of ex-
pression which are common to all nerves of yoluntary motion, and strangely called
it a respiratory nerve. Our knowledge of the functions of the anterior and the
posterior or ganglionic portion of the spinal nerves, we owe first to Sir C. Bell,
and next to Dr. Magendie. In a tract privately circulated by Sir C, Bell in
1811, he stated that, on dividing the posterior spinal nerves, no motion ensued ;
but that, on touching the anterior, the muscles of the back were instantly con-
vulsed. (p. xvii. sq.) He concluded that the anterior and posterior portions
had different functions, and that the anterior gave motion ; but he went no far-
ther: and even fancied that the anterior gave sensibility also, and that the pos-
terior might have other functions altogether. Dr. Magendie, many years later,
proved that the anterior nerves gave motion oily, and the posterior sensation.
(Journal de Physiologie, t. ii.) Had Sir C. Bell been aware of these, — the true
functions, —he would not lave neglected to set forth a discovery which he views
in his later writings as so great.

While a branch of the trigeminum was supposed to be a nerve of taste—a
special sense, — there was a great want of uniformity in our views of its offices.
It resembled the spinal nerves, in having a ganglionic and an aganglionic root.
The aganglionic had been shown by Paletta to be for motion only. Every
body knew that the ganglionic portion was for sensation. For example, Blu-
menbach said, when treating of smell, that the first pair was for this sense, but the
trigeminum for the common sensibility of the nostrils. Still the ganglionic
portion was thought to be a nerve of motion also, and this was Sir C. Bell’s
opinion ; for his first experiment seemed merely to corroborate the common belief,
that the ganglionic portion was for sensation and motion. After he had made
many experiments he concluded it was for sensation only, and, although he is right
in regarding it as a nerve of sensation only, he and others appear incorrectly to
ascribe a number of facts regarding paralysis of motion in the face to the seventh,
that really depend upon the trigeminum, though not upon the ganglionic portion
but upon the aganglionic portion, as Dr. O’Beirne has so well shown. In fact, the
truth of the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum being for sensation only was in
some measure incorrectly inferred by Sir C. Bell from bis experiments and cases,
exceptions being passed over or unsatisfactorily explained. They all admit,
however, of easy explanation, by referring impairments of motion on dividing
the ganglionic branches to the extensive ramifications of the aganglionic por-
tion in conjunction with those of the inferior maxillary branch ; and, where any
paralysis of motion appeared on dividing the superior maxillary branch, to the
necessary injury of one head of the levator labii superioris aleque nasi. From
BO er ae CV RRY circumstance, there can be no question that Sir C. Bell’s
view, of the ganglionic portion being for sensation only, is true, Still he has left


FUNCTIONS OF NERVES, 419


acutely sensible: the division of the former portion has the same
effect as the division of the anterior nerves; of the latter, as the
division of the posterior nerves. ‘The destruction of the centre
of the spinal chord by a wire impairs neither sensation nor
motionk, nor is pain felt by the experiment: and I may remark
that, in experiments on the healthy cerebrum and cerebellum, no


the matter confused and anomalous, by assuming the general belief of a branch
of this nerve of common sensation or touch serving for a special sense, — for
taste. The perfect analogy of the trigeminum to the spinal nerves in having
one of its two divisions for common sensation only and one for motion is now
established by Professor Panizza, through his demonstration of the glosso-pharyn-
geal being the nerve of the special sense of taste, while the branches of the tri-
geminum going to the tongue are for its ordinary sensibility, just as those which
go to the mucous membrane of the nose endow it with the same common sensi-
bility, while the olfactory endow it with its special sense of smell. (See infra,
Chapter XXI. On Taste.)

Dr. Magendie, finding that the division of the trigeminum deprived the nose,
eyes, &c. of the sense of touch, so that acrid substances no longer irritated, con-
cluded that it gave smell, sight, and taste, and threatened to overthrow the doctrine
of the optic nerve being for sight, the olfactory for smell, and so on. He mis-
took the loss of common feeling for the loss of the specific sensibility of the
eye, nose, &c., and his conclusions have long fallen to the ground.

The opinion that there are distinct nerves for sensation and for motion had
been entertained ever since the time of Erasistratus by many writers, from the fact
of paralytic limbs being sometimes deprived of sensation only, sometimes of
motion only, or even, in the latter case, becoming more sensible than previously.
In Pouteau’s uvres Posthumes, published in 1783, vol. ii. p. 532., it was main-
tained, but the author remarked that it had long been abandoned by anatomists,
He erred in supposing that the nerves of sensation came from the cerebrum, and
those of yolition from the cerebellum: as Galen erred in saying that the nerves
of sensation arose from the brain, and those of voluntary motion from the spinal
chord. Certain nerves were known to be for sensation only, as the olfactory,
optic, and acoustic ; some for motion only, as the common motor of the eye, the
external and internal motor. Sdmmerring had pointed out that one nerve gave
motion to the tongue, another sensation: whence a man might lose his taste
and yet move his tongue as before (Hirn und Nerven, p. 255.) 3 and Gall, in
1810, urged that his adversaries would find it difficult to prove that the same
nervous filament possessed the power of both feeling and motion; and that
the trigeminum pair, which supplies both sense and motion, has three distinct
roots. (Anatomie et Physiologie, t. i. p. 129. sqq.) The morbid sensibility to warmth
occasionally obseryed in paralysis, although the sense of touch be not morbidly
acute or be actually impaired, induced Dr. Darwin to fancy there were distinct
nerves even for the sensation of temperature. (Zoonomia, Sect, xiv. 6.)

« Dr. Magendie, Journal de Physiol. t. ili. p. 153. sq.

PEs


420 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


sign of sensibility appears on cutting the former to a great depth,
or the latter superficially. But the division of the trigeminum,
on the sides of the fourth ventricle, has all the effects of its di-
vision without, and severe pain attends injury of the interior and
sides of the fourth ventricle!, except as you approach the anterior
part of the spinal chord; and there is little sensibility at the cor-
pora quadrigemina. The effects of the division of the spinal chord
are of course more extensive in proportion as the division is made
higher up ; and, if made above the origin of the phrenic nerves,
which are the chief agents in causing the contraction of the in-
spiratory muscles, and consequently above the origin of all the
nerves of inspiration, death immediately ensues.” Yet, in brutes,
after removing the head or dividing the spinal chord, if any
limb is irritated, its muscles are thrown into action: thus Sir
Gilbert Blane, after such operations in kittens a few days old,
found the hind legs to shrink from the touch of a hot wire applied
to the hind paws; and the tail to move when irritated, after the
division of the chord below the last lumbar vertebra.» More
divisions than one do not prevent this effect. Ifthe head ofa
pigeon is cut off, and the whole brain removed except a portion
to which the third pair is attached, and the optic nerve is divided,
the iris instantly contracts when the extremity of the optic nerve
is pinched.c Dr. Macartney says that contraction of the iris
occurs from light suddenly admitted to the retina after the head
is cut off or the eye taken out.p Dr. Magendie also remarks
that, when the posterior roots of the spinal chord are irritated,
besides signs of extreme pain, the muscles below the part irritated
are thrown into action, but only on the same side of the body.
All these facts show a peculiar relation between the nerves of


1 Dr. Magendie, Précis, t.i. p. 237. Sd edit.

™ It is thus that animals are every day killed by pithing ; in Germany I have
never seen oxen killed in any other way: a blow on the back of the neck is
sufficient to destroy rabbits. Livy informs us that, at the suggestion of As-
drubal, in the battle in which he was slain, when the Carthaginian forces were
routed, and their elephants became unmanageable, the drivers déstroyed them
in a moment by one blow of a hammer upon a knife fixed between the junction
of the head and spine. (Histor. |. xxvii. c. 49.) The division of the phrenic nerve
only does not put a stop to respiration. See for instance, Bichat, Recherches
Physiol. p. 327.

® Select Dissertations on several Subjects of Medical Science. By Sir Gilbert
Blane, Bart. M.D. London, 1822. p. 262.

° Mr. Mayo, 1. c. p. Sah,

P Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association, 1834, p, 53.


FUNCTION OF THE OBLONG CHORD. 421


sensation and motion that originate at the same portions of the
nervous system.4

If the chorda oblongata exists, consciousness and volition be-
come evident. Mr. Lawrence saw a child with no more ence-
phalon than a bulb, which was a continuation for about an inch
above the foramen occipitale from the chorda spinalis, and to
which all the nerves inclusively from the fifth to the ninth pair
were connected... The child’s breathing and temperature were
natural; it discharged urine and feeces and took food, and at first
moved very briskly, and lived four days. M. Lallemand saw such
another which lived three days, and cried loudly.s M. Ollivier
one which not only cried and sucked, but squeezed strongly what
was put into its hand.t Unfeeling vivisectors, however, have
not been contented with such facts supplied by nature, but have
repeated them by the knife, and found that, if the cerebrum and
cerebellum are removed in a living mammiferous brute, and the
same portion of the chorda oblongata left, the poor thing cries
on attempts being made to give it pain by pulling its whiskers or
applying pungent things to its nose or mouth, and it moves its
extremities, in order to escape from its annoyances, sometimes
for two hours.«. An adult hedgehog gratified Dr. Magendie by
doing all this for two hours. Cold-blooded animals live much
longer ; and, the lower we descend in the scale of brutes, the
more diffused appear the powers of the nervous system: in-
deed, in the lowest there is, strictly speaking, no brain nor spinal
chord, but nervous granules, or distinct ganglions and nerves,


1 Journal de Physiologie, t. iii. p. 154.

Dr. Magendie, with Desmoulins, asserted that the spinal nerves of the python
thus sprang from but one root. But Mr. Mayo found them arise from two, asin
all the vertebrated animals. (Outlines, p. 254.)

* Medico-Chirurgical Trans, vol. y. p. 166. sqq-

* Obs. Path. p. 86. * Traité de la Moelle Epiniére, p. 155.

" Anatomie du Syst. Nerv., par MM. Magendie et Desmoulins, p. 560. Dr.
Magendie, for whose head the dogs, cats, and rabbits of France would in his active
days have offered a reward, if they had known their own interest, says, ‘ It is droll
to see animals skip and jump about of their own accord, after you have taken out
all their brains a little before the optic tubercles.’’ And as to “ new-born kittens,”’
he says, ** they tumble over in all directions, and walk so nimbly, if you cut out
their hemispheres, that it is quite astonishing.’’ (Jowrnal de Physiologie, t. iii.
p- 155.) Above a century and a half ago, — in 1673, M. Duverney removed the
cerebrum and cerebellum from a pigeon, and found the animal * live for some
time, search for aliment, &e.”’ (Phil. Trans. vol. xix.)

FF 4


4.29 PROGRESSION OF


which, no doubt, perform the same functions as far as required in
those animals, and are, in fact, some at least, brains also to them,
but of a different form and accommodated to their structure.* In the
same way the heart is not one mass in the cuttle-fish but three, and in
the lowest none exists,— vessels carrying on the circulation. It was,
not many years ago, customary to assert that many animals have
no nervous system. “It was reserved for the modern spirit of ob-
servation,” says Professor Tiedemann, “to establish the presence of
nerves in many of the most inferior animals — the star-fish, actinia,
pyrosoma, ascidia, and some entozoa, in which their existence was
denied in Haller’s time.”y Professor Ehrenberg has lately shown
that the infusory animalcules possess nerves and even ganglia, as
well as eyes, muscles, and sexual and digestive organs, and pro-
bably vessels, though myriads can exist in a dot: the verticella
rotatoria being only from ,},, to ;), of an inch in dimension? In
regard to brutes in which nerves are not yet found, Dr. Tiede-
mann allows that, “as we perceive in these animals phenomena
which take place by the medium of nerves in animals of a more
elevated order — that is to say, sensibility and voluntary motion
— it is not improbable that, in them, the nervous substance is
mixed with the gelatinous or mucous mass, without being demon-
strable as a particular tissue.”

The higher we ascend, the more parts exist above the chorda
oblongata, till, rising from fish and reptiles, through the numerous
warm-blooded brutes, all distinguished by the relative magnitude
of each cerebral part, according to their several mental characters,
and seeing the successive additions of cerebral structure and
cerebral mass, and of intelligence, we arrive at man, in whom the
successive impositions of cerebral matter has reached its maximum,
so that the summit of the nervous system, which corresponds
with the forehead and vertex, is much larger in him than in any
brute, and his intellect and moral feelings are proportionally


* Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. i. p. 25. sq:

Y Systematic Treatise on Comparative Physiology, by F. Tiedemann, M.D. Prof.
of Anat. and Phys. in the Univer. of Heidelberg, translated by G. J. M. Gully,
M.D., and J. H. Lane, M.D. 1834, p. 64. See my remarks, supra *, p. 4.

* See accounts of Prof. Ehrenberg’s discoveries by Dr, Gairdner, and my
colleague Prof. Sharpey, in the Edin. New Philos. Journal, 1831, 1833.

* See Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol, ii, p. 252, 364. sqq.; Svo. t ii. p. 153. sqq. 365-
sqq-, t. vi. p. 298. sqq.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.23


gaeater.> According to the smallness of the anterior and anterior-
superior portions of the brain, will individual mental superiority
to the brute creation be small. Human idiotism may arise from
faultiness of texture, or want of power °, but most congenital cases
depend upon deficiency of anterior development ; and such idiots,
as well as the whole brute creation, may be regarded as examples
of cerebral mutilations, made by nature, illustrating the use of the
cerebral parts. Attempts to mutilate artificially are not calculated
to afford much information. Brutes can generally give no oppor-
tunity of minutely observing what mental change has been pro-
duced by the removal. For instance, when a writer says that the
removal of the cerebellum causes no other effect than sluggishness
in the animal, — how does he know that sexual desire is not ex-
tinguished? When various portions of brain are removed, how
can any inference be drawn, during the short existence of the
poor animal, as to the state of its various faculties and inclin-
ations 2 And when another asserts that, after the removal of the
hemispheres and cerebellum, we may make observations whether
the animal will copulate or not, how can he ascribe the disin-
clination that may occur to the removal, when any circumstances
of suffering, —a wound, confinement, or want of food, — will make
it very difficult to induce an animal to indulge itself with sexual
intercourse 24 It is, besides, difficult, if not generally impossible,


b In the words of the 94th Number (already quoted above at p. 329.) of the
Edinburgh Review, now retracting its assertions : * In the nervous system alone
we can trace a gradual progress in the provision for the subordination of one
animal to another, and of all to man; and are enabled to associate every facully
which gives superiority with some addition to the nervous mass, even from the small-
est indication of sensation and will up to the highest degree of sensibility, judg-
ment, and expression. The brain is observed to be progressively improved in its
structure, and, with reference to the spinal marrow and nerves, augmented in
volume more and more, until we reach the human brain, each addition being
marked by some addition to, or amplification of, the powers of the animal, until
in man we behold it possessing some parts of which animals are destitute, and
wanting none which they possess.”

© Gall, S8yo. t. 0. pies? 7<

4 See Gall, |. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 210. From page 178. to 288. are excellent re-
marks upon the unsatisfactory nature of such experiments as have been made by
Fleurens, Rolando, &c. &c. See also 4to. vol. ili. p-56-, and 8vo, t.iii. p, 379. sqq.
The first three quarters of the sixth volume should be read by all who are ac-
quainted with the writings of these experimenters, or of ‘Tiedemann, Rudolphi,
Serres, &c. upon the brain. They will find those writers less meritorious than
they imagined.


A424, INJURIES OF


to remove one cerebral organ entirely and alone. Other parts of
the encephalon, &c., are almost certain to be injurede¢: and, if


e « Where is the anatomist or physiologist who precisely knows all the origins,
the whole extent, all the ramifications, all the connections of an organ? You
remove the cerebellum, at the same moment you severely injure the medulla
oblongata and spinalis, you injure the tuber annulare, you injure the tubercula
quadrigemina ; consequently, your results relate not merely to all these parts, but
to all those which communicate with them, either directly or indirectly. You
think you have insulated the tubercles, but these tubercles have connections with
the corpora olivaria, the medulla oblongata, the cerebellum, the sense of vision,
and many convolutions; the thalami, optici, the corpora striata, are connected
below with the crura cerebri, the tuber annulare, the medulla oblongata, the
pyramids, and the spinal marrow ; above, with all the cerebral membrane, all
the conyolutions, the non-fibrous, grey, substance of their surface, with the dif-
ferent commissures, as the anterior commissure, the great commissure or corpus
callosum ; with the fornix, the septum lucidum. Thus there does not exist a
cerebral part which we do not know to have numerous connections with other
parts. I do not except even the corpora mammilaria, the pineal gland, the in-
fundibulum, &c. The connections yet unknown are unquestionably still more
numerous.” (Gall, 1. c. p. 240. sqq.) Sir C. Bell has lately imitated Gall in ob-
jecting to vivisections as a means of discovery.* Gall’s nature was most tender.
He had a horror of inflicting pain upon poor brutes, and would allow Dr. Ma-
gendie to be little more than a canicide. He always kept birds and dogs in his
house at Paris; and I have seen him kiss his horses on alighting from his carriage
at his country house, and then stand to receive the caresses of several immense
bloodhounds which put their fore legs upon his shoulders. (See his glowing
remarks on cruelty to brutes, 1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 196., 8vo. t. v. p. 259. sq.)


* Phr. Trans. 1834. No doubt in complete ignorance of Gall’s writings, be-
cause he says that ‘* not one of the great divisions of the brain has yet been dis-
tinguished by its function,” and alludes evidently to Gall’s physiological disco-
veries as the * weakest fancies that ever obscured any science.” He had said before
that Gall’s strictly inductive method “is the most extravagant departure from all
the legitimate modes of reasoning ;”” that Gall, without comprehending the grand
divisions of the nervous system, without a notion of the distinct properties of in-
dividual nerves, or having made any distinction of the columns of the spinal mar-
row, without having ascertained the difference of cerebrum and cerebellum, &c.
(Ph. Tr. 1823.) Sir C, Bell must be in total ignorance of Gall’s works, more espe-
cially as he adopts some of Gall’s facts without mentioning his name. His folly

as been exposed by Dr. Spurzheim (Appendix to the Anatomy of the Brain.
18390. p. 23. sqq-) It is delightful to find that, even in 1823, Sir C. Bell was
harassed by the popularity of Gall’s discoveries and the difficulty of keeping
his pupils from being converts to phrenology. (Nervous System, p. 122.) We
phrenologists, however, must console ourselves with reflecting that his ignorance
is not confined to Gall’s labours, as he disfigures the Philosophical Transactions
(1834, p. 471.) by speaking of “ a minute spicula.”


THE ENCEPHALON. 425


others should not be injured, they may he influenced by the
extension of the irritation from the injury‘, and by sympathy
with the injured parts; just, for example, as we see epilepsy
from exciting causes in every part of the encephalon and from
exciting causes even in distant organs ; amaurosis is frequently
induced by wounds of the supra-orbital nerve, sometimes by
wounds of the infra-orbital nerve, and of the portio duras; M.
Fleurens declares that, in cutting the semicircular canals in which
the acoustic nerves only are spread, peculiar motions occurred.
If the horizontal canal on each side was divided, horizontal
movement of the head took place from side to side, and rotation
of the whole body. Division of the inferior vertical canals on
each side produced vertical movements of the head, and caused
the animal to lie on its back. Division of the superior vertical
canals caused vertical movements of the head, but the animal lay
forwards. The direction of the inferior vertical canal is back-
wards, and of the superior forwards. If all the canals were
divided, all sorts of violent motions took place." Some parts
which have distinct names are only portions of organs, so that
injury of several parts may have the same effect;— we may
have blindness from wounding the. optic nerves, the tractus
optici, or the corpora quadrigemina. Some parts which have
distinct names are compound, so that the immediate and obvious
effect of injuring them is not the only consequence which would
be observed if the others had an opportunity of becoming appa-
rent. The chorda oblongata is an instance of this‘, and all the
double nerves of sensation and motion. *


f See Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 409. sqq., where examples are given.

8 See many cases in Mr. Wardrop’s work, On the Morbid Anatomy of the Eye,
vol. ii. p. 179. sqq. The fact is even mentioned by Hippocrates ; and, what is
singular, the blindness generally arises from an imperfect division of the nerve,
and has been cured by making the division complete. The blindness has some-
times taken place instantly, sometimes come on very gradually.

h Mém. del’ Acad. des Sc. t. ix. p. 454, sqq.

i« The tubercula quadrigemina are a continuation of the bands of the me-
dulla oblongata and medulla spinalis. They are also formed by ganglia, one
portion of which gives origin to the fibres of the optic nerve.

“In the same manner, the medulla oblongata is in a great measure a continu-
ation of the spinal marrow, besides containing many collections of non-fibrous
Substances, which, like so many ganglions, are the origins of many neryes of
the highest importance, and relating to very different functions.


426 INJURIES OF


Hence the contradictory and strange observations and infer-
ences of most experimenters on the brain of living brutes.' The


—_———-


« The tuber annulare is not only composed of the nervous bundles of the two
hemispheres of the cerebellum, or of the commissure of the cerebellum, but is
also a continuation of several bundles of the medulla oblongata and spinalis, of
the anterior and posterior, or inferior and superior, pyramids, and contains a
considerable quantity of non-fibrous substance interposed between the transverse
and longitudinal bundles, and giving rise to fresh filaments for the crura cerebri,
the tubercles,” &c. (Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 243. sq.)

k « You cannot insulate even the nerves of sensation before they are com-
plete. The origin of the nerves of taste is confused with the masses of the
origin of many other nerves ; the auditory is confused with the nervous and
non-fibrous masses of the fourth ventricle; the optic nerves at first with all the
mass of the tubercles, with the corpora geniculata and their attachments, with
the crura cerebri, with the grey layer situated immediately behind their junction.
The olfactory nerves are at first intimately connected with the grey substance
placed upon the interior and inferior convolutions of the middle lobes, with the
anterior cerebral cavities,” &c. (I. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 245.)

i Fontana says that, after removing the brain of a turtle and entirely empty-
ing the cranium, the animal lived six months, and walked as before. M. Rolando
attempted the experiment repeatedly, but the animal always died as soon as a
cut was made behind the cerebellum.

M. Rolando says that he “made innumerable experiments upon goats, lambs,
pigs, deer, dogs, cats, and guinea-pigs, to ascertain the results of lesion of the
tubercles, and parts near the optic thalami, but rarely obtained the same results.”
M. Rolando says that lesion of the thalam optici causes convulsions; M.
Fleurens denies it. (Gall, 1. c. t. vi. p. 191.) M. Rolando found an unsteadi-
ness like that of intoxication follow the removal of two thirds of the lobes of
the cerebrum from a chicken. M. Fleurens declares that he must have wounded
the cerebellum. M. Fleurens protests that the results of the experiments of M.
Rolando are contradictory to each other (p. 215.): and, after finding a chicken
walk, fly, and swallow, shake its wings, and clean them withits beak, subsequently
to losing the hemispheres of its brain, infers that these are the residence of the
understanding and feelings, and that the cerebellumis destined to balance, to regu-
late motion ; yet birds, after losing these parts, pecked and clawed their enemies,
and perched. (p. 266.) M. Rolando considers muscular action to depend upon
the cerebellnm; yet Dr. Magendie found animals perform regular motions after
losing it.

'. In the Report of the Physiology of the Nervous System, read at the British As-
sociation in 1833, in which Gall’s name is not once mentioned, the compiler,
after saying, “ But there docs appear sufficient evidence to prove that those
volitions, which have motion for an effect, whatever be their origin, whether in
the cerebrum, cerebellum, or medulla oblongata, require for their accomplishment
the co-operation of the cerebellum,” declares further on, that ‘*a duck, whose cere-


THE ENCEPHALON. 42°7


same effects moreover do not occur in the same experiments upon
different species of animals. The observation of nature’s own
mutilations in brutes which have little or no development of parts
that are large in others, or in man, is therefore preferable ; and
next to this comes the observation of morbid changes of different
parts,—a subject, however, incapable of affording information till
the faculties had been ascertained by Gall. (See supra, p.349.sqq.)
Still some results of mutilating the living brain appear generally
allowed, and are not at all in contradiction to phrenology. The ex-
periments of M. Fleurens are allowed by Gall to be very ingenious,
and sometimes satisfactory™; and, with respect to injuring the
cerebellum, Gall remarks, ““we must never forget that the same
part may have its general vital function and its particular animal
function. If it is true that the lesion of the tubercles in birds
always causes convulsions, it is not less true that the tuber-
cles are destined to vision; and in the same way the cerebellum
(connected as it is with the medulla oblongata, &c.) may partici-
pate in the vital function of the medulla oblongata and spinalis,
may give rise to disturbed motion when injured, and yet have its


bellum had been destroyed,” by Dr. Magendig, “swam backwards,—could swim
only backwards” (p. 69.): and Dr. Magendie shows that it is requisite to neither
sensation nor motion; for, when, after having robbed hedgehogs and guinea-pigs
of their cerebrum and cerebellum, he kindly held a bottle of refreshing vinegar
under their nostrils, they rubbed their little noses with their paws! And he says
that he has over and over again seen animals performing very regular movements
after he had disburthened them of the whole of their cerebellum. (Précis, t. i.
p- 408.) In opposition to M. Fleurens, MM. Foville and Pinel Grand-Champs
ascribe to the cerebellum the function of sensation.

M. Fleurens, after removing the cerebrum, declared all sensation and vo-
lition to be lost. M. Bouillaud found animals so deprived give signs of pain
and exert will in endeavouring to escape. (Dr. Magendie’s Journal, t. x. p. 36.
sqq.) M. Fleurens infers that the lobes of the cerebrum concur as a whole in
their functions, and that, when one sense is lost, all are lost. But M. Bouil-
laud, on removing the anterior lobes, found that dogs, rabbits, pigeons, hens,
saw, smelt, and moved voluntarily; but were indifferent to familiar sounds,
persons, places, or things. In fact, he found Gall’s assertion true, — that, though
sensation was independent of the anterior part of the brain, the faculty called by
Gall sense of things (objects as wholes), and those of language, places, and per-
sons, were altogether dependent upon the anterior part. The result of M. Bouil-
laud’s experiments made him a strenuous phrenologist.

ic ts Vi. p. 249.


428 INJURIES OF


own particular animal functions.”" That animals should skip and
jump, and eat, after losing their hemispheres, is not surprising, if
these parts perform the phrenological functions assigned to them
and are not necessary to motion. The chorda oblongata and other
lower parts of the encephalon have, no doubt, much to do with
motion as well as the chorda spinalis. Accordingly, when the
oblongata was pressed in the child mentioned by Mr. Lawrence
convulsions eccurred ; and the same effect ensued on irritating it,
in Gall’s experiments and those of Lorry.° Pressure of it, how-
ever, is also said by vivisectors to occasion stupor.

Dr. Magendie, who cut living animals here and there with no
definite object, but just to see what would happen, informs us,
that,

1. Deep cuts of the hemispheres do not affect motion in mam-
malia, reptiles, fish, and many birds, any more than their entire
removal: but the latter is said to occasion blindness in mammalia
and birds, though not in fish or frogs, probably from the arrange-
ment of the cerebral parts being different, so that a similar wound
affects different organs. Neither a longitudinal section of the
mesolobe, nor its removal, has any more effect on motion.

2. If the whzte substance of both corpora striata is cut away
with the hemispheres, the animal darts forward against all objects
in its way, and retains the attitude of progression, if prevented.?
If the injury is to the grey portion, or to the white of one corpus
striatum only, motion is not interfered with. When a thalamus
was removed from a poor animal moving forwards after this mu-
tilation, it ceased to attempt advancing, but began to turn to
the corresponding side ; and, when the other thalamus was next
cut away, it became still, with its head inclined backwards. M.
Fodéra had found that the removal of a part of the cerebellum


"]. c. t. ill. p. 385. sq. Dr. Vimont also conceives that the cerebellum is not
simple. Finding its processus vermiformis very large in climbing and remark-
ably sure-footed animals, he imagines that it will be found somehow connected
with motion. (I. c. t. ii. p. 242.) 1835. Mr. S. Solly lately stated to the
Royal Society that he has traced a superficial and a deep-seated layer of fibres
from the anterior columns of the spinal chord into the cerebellum.

° Gall, 8vo. 1. c. t. iii, p. $92.

P Yet Drs. Foville and Pinel Grand-Champs fancied that the anterior lobes
and corpora striata presided over the motions of the inferior extremities ; and
the posterior lobes and thalami over those of the superior.

1 Report of Brit, Assoc. 1833.


THE ENCEPHALON. 4.29


always caused motion backwards, or a corresponding attitude.
Injuries of one side of it paralysed the same side of the body,
as the fibres of the restiform bodies do not decussate like the
anterior pyramids.* But Dr. Hertwig asserts that injuries of the
cerebellum affect the opposite side, just as Gall found removal
of the testis affect the opposite lobe of the cerebellum. Dr.
Magendie often found animals perform very regular movements
after the removal of the cerebellum; yet he observed that the
removal and wounds of it to a certain depth, and of the chorda
oblongata *, gave mammalia and birds a tendency to move back-
wards, though the same effect does not occur in fish, which, after
the loss of their cerebellum, swim as usual.

3. In a vertical section of a crus of the cerebellum, or of the
mesocephalon from before backwards, the animal immediately
rolled forcibly towards the same side, making sometimes sixty
revolutions in a minute; and the corresponding eye was directed
forwards and downwards, the other backwards and upwards. After
the division of a crus, animals continued rolling, and with their
eyes thus directed, for eight days. If both crura were divided,
all motion ceased, and the eyes resumed their natural state.t A
similar vertical section downwards of the cerebellum from before
backwards half way on one side of the central line, through the
whole substance of the arch over the fourth ventricle, or of the
mesocephalon upwards, had the same effects, and the motion was
the more rapid as the section was nearer to the mesocephalon.
When an incision of one half of the cerebellum had set an
animal rolling to that side, an incision of the opposite crus arrested
the rolling and caused the eyes to resume their natural position.
A vertical incision downwards in the median line of the cere-
bellum caused the animal to attempt motion, but deprived it of
the power of balancing itself. Its eyes rolled and started, and its
fore legs were rigid and extended forwards.

4. If the fourth ventricle is exposed and the cerebellum re-
moved, a perpendicular incision in the chorda oblongata on one side


* Journal de Physique, July, 1823.

* If ever he amused himself by sticking pins in the chorda oblongata of pigeons,
the birds thus ornamented by him would walk and fly backwards for above a
month ! (Précis, t.i. p. 409.)

t Journal, t. iv. p. 403.

"“ Journal de Physiol. t.iv. All these points were ascertained on noticing the
effect of a wound made unintentionally in a crus,


430 INJURIES OF


of the median line, near the outside of the anterior pyramid, will
cause a rabbit four months old to turn to the right, if made on the
right side ; and to the left, if made on the left.

5. Notwithstanding the decussation of the anterior pyramids, a
division of one or both had no sensible effect, except, perhaps,
that of retarding motion a little; the section of the corpora
restiformia does not seem to affect general motion ; and a com-
plete division of one half of the chorda oblongata neither affects
sensibility nor prevents irregular motions, though the power of
volition appears lost on the same side.

The same phenomena occur in disease. Persons labouring
under hysteria or chorea sometimes reel violently or spin round.*
Persons have been known to feel an impulse to move forwards
or backwards.y An infinite variety, however, of extraordinary
and regular movements also occur, and frequently vertigo attends
them, whatever their variety. Vertigo cannot be their cause, as
they are so various in different cases, and they or it frequently
exist alone.

From these experiments I draw no inference. The consider-
ations already mentioned prevent me from concluding that the
parts which are cut are the sole organs concerned in giving origin
to the peculiar motions, that their sole purpose is for such mo-
tions, or even that peculiar motions depend originally upon them,
We can only say, as in the undoubted and numerous cases of
amaurosis following an injury of the supra-orbital or infra-
orbital nerve, and as in regard to the peculiar motion said by


x See Med. Chir. Trans. vol. v. p. 1. sqq., also vol. vii. p. 237. sqq-

M. Serres mentions a drunken shoemaker who spun round till he died, and
in whom the only morbid appearance was disease of a crus cerebelli, (Dr. Ma-
gendie’s Journ. t. iv. p. 405. sq.)

y Inaman who had an irresistible desire to move forwards, tubercles were found
particularly at the anterior part of the hemispheres. (Dr. Magendie, Journal de
Physiol. t. iii.) I have seen several epileptic youths with this propensity. They
would walk away toa very considerable distance, without knowing why ; and this
repeatedly. A hemiplegic young man would walk upwards of 50 miles from
home, and be lost for a considerable time. I frequently see persons with a pro-
pensity to precipitate themselves forwards. In some there is desire merely to
leave their abode, and they walk to gratify this, or travel by some conveyance.
Dr. Laurent exhibited a girl at the Académie Royal de Médecine, who, in irre-
gular hysteric attacks, rushed rapidly backwards, (Dr, Magendie, Précis de Phys.
p- 409, sq.)


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 4.3]


M. Fleurens to occur on division of the branches of the acoustic
nerve, that such effects ensue. Inhemiplegia, disease is frequently
found in a corpus striatum; and some have endeavoured to prove
that paralysis of an upper or lower extremity is attended by dis-
ease in this part or that, but the coincidences are not such as to


warrant any conclusion.


In foetuses full grown, without encephalon or spinal chord 2, the
circulation, nutrition, secretion, &c. proceed equally as in others,
which, besides spinal chord, nerves, and ganglia, possess a brain.*
These mutilations by nature are conclusive, and render all vivi-
sections on the points unnecessary. Further, the heart and arteries
are formed in the foetus before the encephalon and spinal chord,
and therefore cannot depend on them for power and excitement.
Vegetables absorb, assimilate, circulate, secrete, and in many in-
stances contract on the application of stimuli, and yet are not


2 See Morgagni, Ep. 48. No. 50.; Van Horne, Curios. Miscell. Dec. 1. an. 3.
obs. 129.: Kerkring, Spic. Anat. obs. 23.; Littre, Hist. de Acad. des Sciences,
1701, p. 24. ; Mery, bc) i712, p. 38.3 Fauvel, 1. ce) 1711,) pis 26. 5; Sue,
1. c. 1746.; M. Roux, Mém. sur l' Anencéphalie, 1825.; all quoted by Dr.
Brachet, Recherches Expérimentales sur le Systeme Ganglionaire. Paris, 1830. p. 83.
sqq- p- 69. sqq-; for instances of the absence of the spinal chord.

Also, Phil. Trans. 1775.

Brainless foetuses are not uncommon.

A feetus attached to another has been minutely described by Dr. Mayer of
Berlin, in Graefe’s Journal, t. x. without brain, spinal chord, or encephalo-
spinal nerves. There was one neryous twig accompanying the renal artery, and
arising apparently from the renal plexus, which, with the mesenteric, existed
and had ganglia.

Imperfect foetuses have been seen, with some organs evolved, though not
even nerves could be discovered. See Phil. Trans. 1793. See on this subject
the excellent remarks of Dr. Marshall, in his works edited by Mr. Sawrey in
1814 and already quoted.

««¢ A girl lived to the age of eleven years, with the use of her senses, and with
voluntary motion, weak it is true, but sufficient for her wants, and even for pro-
gression.” ‘* After death no cerebellum nor mesocephalon could be found.” (Dr.
Magendie, Précis, t. i. p. 414., and Journal, t. xi.) Here was one of Nature’s
own mutilations, without mechanical injury or disturbance of other parts; and,
with patience till it occurred, a multitude of innocent animals would have escaped
cruel and disgusting vivisections, and an attempt would not have been made to
prove that the cerebellum was necessary to motion or secretion, or to prevent
involuntary motions backwards.—The girl had prurigo pudendi, and frequently
scratched herself. Some antiphrenologists therefore inferred that she mastur-
bated and showed sexual desires, although she had no cerebellum!

GG


432 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


thought to possess nerves. I cannot but believe the blood pos-
sessed of vitality ; and, if it be net, still a clot of fibrine sponta-
neously becomes vascular without the aid of nerves, though
they may be subsequently produced. Muscles, after the division
of the nerves which connect them with the encephalon or spinal
chord, contract equally as before, when irritated; nay, if they
are over-excited by any means and exhausted, and are then allowed
repose, they absolutely recover themselves and obey the stimulus
again, In animals liable to torpor, the season of torpidity pro-
duces its effects equally upon those muscles whose encephalo-
spinal nerves have been divided, and equally if the encephalon
and spinal chord, &c. are destroyed. In sleep and even coma, the
action of the heart, &c. continues ; and, even after the removal or
gradual destruction of the encephalon, spinal chord, or encephalo-
spinal nerves, the heart still continues to act and the blood to
circulate, provided respiration is artificially supported >, — for
respiration depends upon the excitement of the muscles by
means of nerves of motion springing from the cervical portion
of the spinal chord, and these nerves are excited through the
sensation of the want of respiration, conveyed to the chorda
oblongata, as Dr. Brachet makes probable, by the pneumono-
gastric pair, which appears to give sensibility to the pha-
rynx, larynx, cesophagus, stomach, and lungs°,—parts in all


b Duyerney, whose experiments on a pigeon in 1673 I mentioned at page 421.
also removed the cerebrum from a dog, without a fatal result for some time: the
removal of the cerebellum was instantly fatal. Yet, by instituting artificial re-
spiration, he sustained life for an hour after the removal of the cerebellum. In
one experiment, the dog “ lived twenty-four hours and his heart beat well.”
The instantly fatal result of the division of the spinal chord he prevented also by
artificial respiration, and found that the motion of the heart continued and the
animal could move his body. (Phil. Trans. vol. xix.)

Spallanzani removed the brain, without injury to the organic functions. (Ez-
périences sur la Circulation : ouvrage traduit de l'Italien, p. 377. Généve, 1783.)
Fontana injured the brain and spinal chord with no more effect. (Sur le Vénin
de la Vipere. Florence, 1781. t. ii. p. 169.)

Experiments, &¢c., by A. P. Wilson Philip, M.D., and Wm. Clift, Philos.
Trans. 1815.

Also, Experimental Inquiry, by the former. London, 1826. 3d edit. Dr.
Brachet has lately repeated these experiments upon warm and cold blooded
animals. (Rech. Expér. p. 73. sq.)

And lastly, Fleurens, Mémoires de V Acad. des Sc. t. xX. 1830.

© Dr. Le Gallois (Expériences sur le Principe de la Vie, p. 247. sqq. 1812.)
first pointed out that a perfectly anencephalous foetus cannot live after birth,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 433


which sensation is most important. All the organic or nutri-
tive functions proceed: nails grow, wounds heal, vesicatories


— that respiration will not take place without the portion of the chorda
oblongata connected with the pneumono-gastric. The pneumono-gastric are
also nerves of motion to the larynx and trachea; and are distributed to the
liver, spleen, kidneys, ‘and duodenum, — probably to convey impressions to
them from the brain under emotion, and to give them sensibility enough for
sensation under causes of great irritation,

The pneumono-gastric on each side gives off, 1. The superior laryngeal, which
runs to the membrane of the glottis (see Mr. Swan, On the Nerves, plate
xvi., Expl. of plates, p. xlviii.) and therefore gives it sensibility, and to the
arytenoid muscles which close it, as well as to the crico-thyroid muscle which
raises the ericoid cartilage. (Dr. Magendie, Mém. sur I’ Usage de l’ Lpiglotte dans
la Déglutition, &c.) ;

2. Twigs to numerous parts in the neck, to the facial, lingual, and three upper
cervical nerves, to the cardiac plexuses, the pulmonary plexuses, and the sym-
pathetic nerve.

3. The inferior laryngeal or recurrent nerves (see Mr. Swan, I. c.), which
supply “the membrane of the trachea as high as the membrane covering the
posterior part of the cricoid cartilage,” and the transverse fibres at the hack of
the trachea, ‘‘ and ultimately divides into branches which terminate in the lateral
crico-arytenoid and thyro-arytenoid muscles,” (see papers by Dr. H. Ley, Lond.
Med. Gazette, June 20. 1835.) besides giving branches of communication with
many other nerves. On account of their supplying the membrane of the glottis,
Dr, Brachet found that, after removing a portion of the pheumono-gastric nerves
from which they spring, a ball of orris-root or a few drops of muriatic or acetic
acid might be admitted into the trachea of a dog without uneasiness ; whereas,
while the nerves were entire, a drop of blood in the trachea induced cough, and
the balls and acids most violent cough, which instantly ceased on the division of
the nerve and was succeeded by mucous rattle without expectoration, the mucus
no longer exciting sensation, nor the muscles possessing power for its expulsion ;
and death ensued in less than an hour. (Rech. Expér. p. 167.) As the recurrents
supply tie opening muscles of the glottis, the division of those nerves causes the
death of young animals, since in them the rima glottidis is narrow ; in the older,
or in animals whose rima glottidis is of such a form that its sides cannot touch,
dyspnoea and a croaking sound of the voice instantly follow from their approxi-
mation. *


* Dr. Le Gallois, Expériences sur le Principe de la Vie.

Some think that filaments go from the recurrents to the closing muscles also ;
but Dr. H. Ley conjectures, with probability, ‘that these, together with the ana-
Stomosing branches of the superior laryngeal and the recurrent, are intended for
those rapid and delicate associated actions connected with the voice, by which
the chordze vocales ure rendered more or less tense and their vibrating portions
longer or shorter ; whilst the main branches, described by Mr. Swan as termi-

eG 2


ss |


434 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


produce blisters, fractured bones and soft parts unite, in limbs
which are perfectly paralysed. But the involuntary functions
are closely connected with the encephalon and spinal chord ;
for the sudden destruction of these parts, or of a certain eX-
tent of them, puts a stop to the circulation This, however,


So ee EE EEE —e— ee


The pneumono-gastric next supply the membrane of the bronchiz and air-
cells, so that, after their division, an animal may be plunged into water without
any uneasiness or effort at respiration, although previously violent struggles
ensued ; or the animal may be kept in confined air or nitrogen, and, although
it still breathes and laboriously, it gradually dies, we are told, without any suf-
fering. We breathe from an uneasy sensation; but, after the division of these
nerves, the want is little felt. Respiration continues for a time, probably from
some nervous connection : for, if the origin of the nerves in the chorda oblongata
is destroyed, respiration ceases at once.* Dr. Brachet believes that all ex-
citement of the heart by the brain, even though the cause be pain induced any
where, is communicated by the pneumono-gastric ; for excitement of the heart
from causes of pain ceased on the division of these nerves, and did not occur if they
were divided before their application ; nor would irritation of the upper extremity
of the divided nerve, or of the brain, excite the heart.

They give sensation, we have seen, and also, according to some, motion, to
the stomach. According to Dr. Brachet, the stomach still acts but antiperistal-
tically, so that its muscular excitability does not depend upon the nerye, though
it may be acted upon through the nerve. On irritating its cesophageal plexus, the
cesophagus and stomach contract, and, after its division, their peristaltic action
ceases. T

4 Dr. Le Gallois, Sur le Principe de la Vie ; and Dr, Wilson Philip, Exper.
Inquiry. _ Probably by excessive stimulus, as the voluntary muscles are after-
wards insensible to stimuli, although, after a mere division of their nerves, they


retain their excitability.


nating in the opening muscles of the glottis, are for the purpose of those grosser
movements of the rima glottidis connected with respiration and deglutition,”’

* In considering the continuance of respiration after division of these nerves,
and the occasional occurrence of rattling and apparently laborious breathing
without any suffering for even a long time before the death of some persons, we
must reflect how faint an uneasy sensation causes us almost unconsciously to
will an action, — how we wink all day, and hem, without thinking of the sens-
ations which excite our will, or thinking of the exertion of our will. A person
may have sensation enough in the lungs to make him breathe, and yet not enough
to make him suffer. When dogs plunged in water after the division are said to
have made no effort to breathe, I presume that the faint sensation induced them
to make a faint effort, but was not sufficient to induce them to contend for re-
spiration, as they must have done, from the absence of air.

+ Drs. Tiedemann and Gmelin, Recherches sur la Digestion. Drs. Breschet and
Edwards, Arch. Géndr. de Médecine, 1821.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 435


is no more than happens if any important part of the body re-
ceives an injury, or if any unimportant part is extensively in-
jured ;—if a leg is crushed or falls into gangrene, the whole
system suffers, though a leg may be removed and the system be
none the worse.e The application of stimuli to the encephalon
or spinal chord excites the action of the heart and, even after
its removal, of the capillaries: but stimulus to any important
part will stimulate others; and even to an unimportant part, if
the stimulus is strong. The passions do the same: but they
influence all parts ; and, though a due excitement of the passions
is necessary to the health of all parts, it is only because the
body thrives best as a whole when each part fully performs its
functions. Compression of the brain causes slowness of the pulse
and constipation: but this is only such a sympathetic influence
as may exist between any parts. It appears, from Dr. Brachet’s
experiments, that irritation of the brain affects other parts by
means of the pneumono-gastric; for its division prevented all
effects of the brain upon the heart.

The removal of a piece of the pneumono-gastric, or the de-
struction of that part of the chorda oblongata with which it is
connected or of a considerable portion of the chorda spinalis,
heavily impairs the functions of the lungs and of the stomachs,
putting a stop, some say to the muscular action of the stomach,
others to the secretion of gastric juice and to digestion. The


© The hearts of six decapitated robbers beat strongly and regularly for nearly
half an hour; and after a man’s cerebrum and cerebellum were blown off by an
explosion of fire-arms, the respiration and circulation continued above half an
hour. (Dr. Brachet, |. c. p. 80. sq.)

f Rech. Expér. p. 118.

& Le Gallois, 1. c. and many former writers.

Dr. Philip conceives this influence of the brain and spinal chord to be gal-
vanic, as he prevented the ill effects of the removal of a piece of the pneumono-
gastric nerve upon the Jungs and stomach, by supplying these organs with gal-
vanic influence. (1. c. p. 210. sqq.) Dr. Brachet, however, equally succeeded by
mechanically irritating the end of the portion of the divided nerve running to the
stomach.

Division of the nerve had no effect if the divided ends lay opposite each other,
although a quarter of an inch intervened. (Dr. W. Philip, 1. c. p. 226. sqq.-)

A mechanical stimulus, or a substance in its nature stimulating, applied to
the brain about the origin of the nerves, excites contractions in the voluntary
muscles ; a substance in its own nature stimulating excites the heart and capil-
laries, when applied to any part of the brain or spinal chord, but requires to
be applied to a considerable portion. (Dr. Philip, 1. c.)

GG 3


436 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


animal may continue quietly to eat till the stomach is enormously
distended; and this, no doubt, because the stomach is deprived
of its sensibility so that its distension is no longer felt, and the
animal, though it must at the same time be insensible to the pangs
of hunger in it, continues to eat from habit or the pleasure of
masticating.’ We need not suppose its muscular power to be
destroyed by the injury of the nervous system, because continued
eating must produce over-distension, though the power of con-
traction be, before the over-distension, unimpaired. Dr. Philip
maintains that the injury suppresses the secretion of gastric juice
and digestion; but Drs. Leuret and Lassaigne assert that di-
gestion proceeds as before, though even six inches of each nerve
be removed in the horse; and Sir B. Brodie and Dr. Magendie
found digestion uninfluenced, if the division was made, not in
the neck, but close to the stomach; and, again, Dr. Magendie
found digestion proceed in brutes after the removal of the cere-
brum and cerebellum. (See supra, p. 87.)

The division or ligature of the pneumono-gastric nerve has
been a favourite experiment with endless vivisectors from the
time of Galen himself; but I believe that Dr. Le Gallois was the
first to point out that the blood experiences no longer the
chemical changes in the lungs, but their air-cells become filled
with frothy mucus, their substance gorged with blood, and their
surface marked with dark patches. The engorgement and black
patches result, however, merely from the want of changes in the
blood; and this partly from the animal scarcely feeling the want
of respiration ; so that in a rabbit the respirations instantly become
very slow, —an instance analogous to the slow breathing of sleep
and the much slower of apoplexy, in which states the want of
respiration is less perfectly felt; and partly from the stay of all
the mucus in the air-cells and tubes, which, like the stomach,
have lost their sensibility, so that, the quantity of mucus not being


h Dr. Le Gallois found that, after this division, a guinea-pig would eat, from
habit or the pleasure of the mouth, till its belly was as long as its body ; and the
cesophagus would also become distended, sensation being lost and muscular
power paralysed. Dr. Brachet kept animals without food, and they showed all
the signs of hunger. He divided the pneumono-gastric, and then offered them
food. But they were now indifferent to it; and, on being enticed to eat it, they
ate on till the stomach would hold no more and the cesophagus was filled,
The cessation of muscular action might be the result of merely the loss of sen-
sibility.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 437


felt, none is expectorated and mucous rattle occurs in the trachea.
The blood, consequently, is no longer exposed properly to the air.
These changes are declared to happen even after death, if the ex-
periment is made as soon as the animal is killed: but I really
doubt this.

Every point of the body communicates with the brain by
means of nerves: since, on the one hand, every point of the
organisation either is sensible or may by disease acquire sensi-
bility and communicate painful sensation to the braini; and, on
the other, mental emotions, continued or violent, may affect any
point. We cannot, therefore, be surprised to see nerves pass
between the encephalon or spinal chord and parts which ordi-
narily have no sensation and are never under the influence of
volition. Indeed, many parts considered insensible are at all times
destined to give some variety of sensation, under certain circum-
stances, without any morbid sensibility. The want of chemical
change in the lungs for less than a minute so impedes the passage
of blood through them, that we have an uneasy sensation: the
stomach feels hunger, and it, and the intestines, and urinary
bladder, feel distension every day in health: the ligaments, un-
doubtedly, give a peculiar sensation if a joint is over distended:
and the testis or coats of the testis when compressed.k The func-
tions of the lungs and stomach could not easily proceed without
sensation. In the one we feel the want of air, if we interrupt
the function, as we continually do when talking and eating and
performing many other acts, in all which we are compelled to
attend to respiration by an uneasy feeling : without sensation in the
stomach, supplies of food would not be given to it and regulated.
The necessity for almost continual sensation in the lungs and
stomach explains why a nerve goes directly from the brain to these
organs,— the pneumono-gastric. The end of the intestines and
the bladder require habitual sensation for their functions, and they
are well supplied from the spinal chord. The functions of the rest


i In nervous disturbance, the parts which carry on the organic functions
without sensation sometimes acquire such sensibility that the ordinary silent
processes appear attended with sensations: at any rate, unusual sensations are
felt in such parts.

* I have compressed the tunica vaginalis and the albuginea when the testis
was atrophied after mumps, and great pain was felt. Still, although nothing but
membranes appeared left, there probably was a portion of the gland, as pressure
of the vas deferens is equally painful.

GG 4


438 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


of the intestinal tube, of the liver, kidneys, and absorbents, &c., of
the abdomen require no sensation in health; and sensation, there-
fore, occurs in them only under unhealthy influences, and they
neither require nor have communication with the brain beyond
such an amount as all parts possess for occasional sensation and the
sympathetic influence of the mental affections of the brain and
that influence which it, like all other organs, exerts at all times on
all parts. There is thus a sufficient reason for the presence of
encephalo-spinal nerves where there is no volition, and where
ordinarily no sensation occurs, without ascribing nutritive or
functional influence to them.

Although the division of the spinal chord or of its nerves, or
compression or disorganisation of these or of parts of the brain,
prevents voluntary power over the corresponding muscles, without
suspending the circulation, &c. in them, and does not impede the
functions of the lungs or stomach ; yet circulation, and, what are
dependent upon it,— nutrition and frequently animal heat, are
evidently impaired. Sir Everard Home found that, by dividing
the nerves running to the horn of a buck, the temperature of the
horn fell about 6° below that of the other, and, as the divided
ends advanced in the process of re-union, the temperature rose
again towards alevel.! Palsied limbs are often colder than others,
or, as Dr. Abercrombie enounces the fact more accurately, are more
easily cooled and heated, —follow variation of external tempera-
ture more, than others. Palsied limbs waste, and the ends of the

alsied fingers are very pale and the nails blue trom time to time, for
want of use. Division of the trigeminum pair of nerves close to the
brain causes inflammation of the eye and cloudiness of the cornea ;
and its division at its ganglion Gasseri produces opacity of the
cornea and ulceration and destruction of the eye.™ The at-
tempt to cure morbid sensibility of the horse’s foot by dividing
its nerves has been relinquished on account of the frequent
separation of the hoof after the operation. Injury of the lum-
bar spine frequently occasions alcaline urine. In hectic fever,
sweat breaks forth generally as soon as the patient falls asleep,
—as soon as the brain becomes inactive. Some persons have
large quantities of acid rise into the mouth, and suffer other
dyspeptic symptoms, if they fall asleep after dinner. It is indeed
maintained that in paralytic parts the muscles only waste, and


1 Phil. Trans. 1826.
™ Dr. Magendie, Journal de Physiologie, t. iv.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 439


their atrophy is ascribed to want of use. The loss of the hoof
after division of the nerves is said by Mr. Youat to occur only
when considerable inflammation is present at the time; that the
horse, having no sensation in the part, knocks it about, and in-
creases the inflammation to such a point, according to him, that
the hoof is detached: he assures me that, if no severe inflam-
mation is present at the time of the operation, the hoof is not
lost.

Now, such among these effects of division or incapacitation in
any way of parts of the nervous system as cannot be attributed
to indirect circumstances, do not, in my opinion, militate against
the numerous general facts already mentioned of the independence
of the organic properties and functions upon the nervous system.
I do not see that we are justified in considering these results as
more than instances of the sympathetic influence of one part
upon another. ll parts influence each other and the whole sys.
tem exclusively of their peculiar functions. The encephalo-spinal
nervous system must be like all other parts in this respect: and
yet every result of their injury on other parts is strangely re-
garded as a proof of dependency upon them. Besides its functional
powers and influences, its condition, even as to its structure and
organic functions, must sympathetically affect other parts, —a
fact too often overlooked, and thus power has been presumed for
it without reason. When the kidneys are in such a state that they
produce sugar, a mental impulse is destroyed, and the power of the
genitals is lost. Under diabetes a man usually has no sexual im-
pulse and is impotent, yet no one supposes that the faculty of the
brain known as sexual desire, or the vigour of the genitals, depends
upon the kidneys. The brain is besides especially connected with
every other part of the body, and is one of the most important or-
gans which exist. The effect, therefore, which any injury of it must
have over other parts must be very great. But children live and
eat and preserve their temperature for many days, though born
without brains; and we have seen what was borne by brutes in
the experiments of Duverney and his imitators. Nay, we have
seen that injury of nerves not supplying a part will injure it; just
as the extremities may be absent or removed without injury to
the functions at large, and yet diseased states or severe injuries
of them may destroy the system. Injury of nerves, just as of
any other organs in proportion to their importance, may affect
parts, not which they supply, but with which they are connected :


440 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


amaurosis and even cataract may follow wounds of the nerves
belonging, not to the eye, but to the face ; and convulsions may
follow wounds of the acoustic nerve. Although disease of the
spine injures the renal secretion of urine and causes inflammatory
excitement of the mucous membrane of the bladder, disease of
the kidney frequently produces such an affection of the corre-
sponding part of the spinal chord, and consequent paraplegia ®,
that both are ascribable to sympathy only; for no person would
consider the spinal chord as depending on the kidney for its
power. Castration prevents the horns of the buck from coming,
or from growing longer and being shed; and the removal of the
boar’s tusks destroys his violent sexual propensity ®: yet these
effects are not thought to show dependence, but merely con-
nection.

Although the involuntary and unconscious functions do not ap-
pear to depend upon the encephalo-spinal system, an argument in
favour of their dependence upon the ganglions and ganglionic
nerves, properly so called, is the fact,— that the ganglionic system
of nerves is formed before the encephalon and spinal chord ; in-
deed, the nervous system of the chest and abdomen are fully
formed, while the brain appears still a pulpy mass.P These
ganglia and nerves, it may be urged, would hardly be formed
before the encephalon and spinal chord but for the sake of the
organs which they supply, and the functions of which (with the
exception of the genitals) are as perfect at birth as at adult age ;
the brain and its mental powers are slowly perfected.
igh the encephalon and spinal chord may be absent in
monsters 1, the ganglionic system is, perhaps, always perfect, un-
less in extreme deviation, where the nervous system may be
diffused invisibly, as in some lower animals. But 1 do not know


n See a paper by Mr. Stanly, full of interesting facts, in the Med. Chir. Trans.
vol, xviii.

© Lisle On Husbandry, quoted by ‘the Rev. Gilb. White, Nat. Hist. and
Antiq. of Selborne. 1837. p. 304. sq.

P Gall, l. c. 8vo. t. i, p. 191. See also 4to. vol. iii. p. 239. sq.

4 Lobstein, p. 52. sqq. De Nervo Sympathetico, 1823, relates six cases of ab-
sent brain and other organs, where the ganglionic system was perfect or even
remarkably large ; and Dr. Cayre relates the dissection of nine idiots, in whom
the encephalo-spinal system was diseased and wasted, the ganglionic healthy.
Nouveau Journ. de Med. t.iv. In Gall’s 4to edit. vol. i. p. 37. sqq. will be
found a history of the hypotheses respecting the use of the ganglia, as well as in
Lobstein’s more recent work.


#


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 441


that it has ever been absent. The heart never exists without its
ganglion; so that the cardiac ganglion, as the heart is the first
organ that comes into action, is the commencement of the nervous
system.

A striking difference is observed in the structure of ganglionic
nerves and the effect of injuries upon them. Bichat asks, ‘* What
anatomist has not been struck with the difference between the
cerebral and ganglionic nerves? ‘Those of the brain are larger,
more numerous, whiter, denser, subject to fewer variations. On
the other hand, extreme tenuity, considerable number, especially
at the plexuses, a grey colour, remarkable softness, and very
frequent varieties, are the characters of the ganglionic nerves,
if you except those which communicate with the cerebral, and
some of those which unite” the ganglia. ©

If these nerves are cut, or their ganglia torn, some assert that
no pain is produced. Dr. Brachet declares that he found the spinal
nerves running to the sympathetic ganglia to be very sensible :
the nerves running from and between ganglia to be insensible,
unless inflamed, and, when inflamed, to become sensible, but at the
inflamed point only, and to lose their sensibility again if the twigs
of communication with the spine were divided: a ganglion to
be sensible or insensible accordingly as a point in it was touched
or not in which a spinal nerve ran, and to lose all sensibility on
the division of the nerve connecting it with the spine; to be very
sensible if inflamed, but insensible again on the division of the
spinal nerve.s If all the ganglia of the neck are remove d
even the first thoracic, Dr. Magendie says that no sensible or im-
mediate derangement of the functions is observable, even in parts
to which the filaments united with them may be traced.t Bichat
long since remarked no disturbance of .the heart’s motion on at-
tempting to irritate, or on dividing, the cardiac filaments of the
sympathetic; nor of the stomach, bladder, &c. by applying vio-
lence or stimuli to their ganglionic nerves. Neither did he suc-
ceed with galvanism": but Humboldt and Dr. Fowler, Home and


* Recherches Physiologiques, p. 72. sq. 1805. See also Anat. Générale, t. i,
p-. 222.

See also Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol.i. p. 40. sqq-, 8vo. t. vi. p. 312.

Dr. Magendie, Précis Elément. t. i. p. 171. sq:

~ lc. p. 804. sqq.

“ Dr. Magendie, 1. c. says he has made these experiments repeatedly,

“ 1. c. 334. sqq., 360. sqq.


4.42 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


Weinhold, say that they succeeded with galvanism in the case of
the heart*; and Dr. Bartels declares that, when he opened the chest
of six robbers in 1826, immediately after decapitation near Mar-
bourg, he found the heart beat regularly for half an hour, and,
when languishing, to be momentarily excited by irritating the
great sympathetic, though irritation of the spinal chord had no
effect on it, but on the muscles of the trunk.y Dr. Brachet as-
serts that, on dividing the cardiac plexus, the action of the heart
instantly ceased for ever ; probably, however, from the shock,
since the hearts of brutes taken out of the body will beat.

But let us examine this hypothesis a little farther. Besides the
mental faculties of the encephalon, and the transmission of the
will from it, and of impressions for sensation to it, by the spinal
chord and the nerves of motion and of sense, two other kinds
of phenomena remain, one of which possibly, and the other
certainly, depends upon the nervous system. The former is the
excitability, irritability, vitality, life, or whatever else it is termed,
possessed by every part: the other is the various degrees and kinds
of sympathy which exist among the different parts of the system,
and the influence of the mental feelings upon the body at large,
the susceptibility of which influence is but that of sympathy
with the encephalon. Now the ganglions and ganglionic nerves
must have some function, and, as they are not the organs of the
mind, nor concerned in sensation, or volition, the only func-
tions which remain are the supply of excitability, the trans-
of sympathy and the effects of mental emotions, and the
affording a passage to encephalo-spinal filaments of sensation
to those parts which do not otherwise receive any; for every
part is capable of sensation in inflammation, and therefore must
always have nerves connecting it with the brain, however indi-
rectly. The rise and progress of the opinion which gives them
the first office are detailed by Dr. Fletcher, who advocates it
strongly, and, in addition to the fact of the earlier development
of the ganglionic than of the encephalo-spinal system, urges the
following arguments.— It is more strongly developed in children
and females than in the less irritable adult and male. They appear
universally distributed. The arteries of the brain and all the


x Dr. Le Gallois, Expériences sur la Vie. Dr. Brachet, 1... p. 127.
Y Dr. Hufeland’s Journal, quoted by Dr. Brachet.
2 See Dr. Fletcher’s Rudiments of Physiology. Edinb. 1856. P. ii. a. p. 64.


5qg-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.4.3


larger blood-vessels are supplied by them, and these may convey
them throughout the frame. ‘There is no reason to say that the
ganglionic nerves merely arise from the encephalo-spinal: they
give branches evidently to the encephalo-spinal*, and conse-
quently we may presume that they are as extensively distributed;
and the ganglionic nerves are very fine and at length must be in-
visible. The property they give must be supposed similar to that
of sensibility: and we see, therefore, why they have ganglia
exactly like those of nerves of sensation, inasmuch as they consist
of grey and white substance inextricably mixed, and their white
matter is exceedingly soft like those nerves, whereas in nerves of
motion it is hard; and we are not surprised to find them convey
galvanism badly, like nerves of sense, while nerves of volition
conduct it well; nor to find that, as narcotics applied to nerves
of sensation destroy the sensibility of the parts which these
supply, so, when applied to ganglionic nerves, narcotics destroy
the excitability of the parts supplied by them. The filaments of
ganglia are declared by Lobstein® to be different according to
the organs which they supply, just as we know the vital properties
or excitability of every organ to differ. Hence we cannot wonder
at the continuance of the organic functions during inactive states
of the encephalo-spinal system,—in sleep and coma; nor even
when the brain is removed, or the muscle itself is detached from
the body : we cannot wonder at the division of the principal trunks
belonging to a muscle not preventing its irritability from being re-
newed after exhausting stimulation has been intermitted. stly,
when the encephalon, or both it and the spinal chord, are wanting
in monsters, the ganglionic system almost always, if not always,
exists; and is said never to be absent, if a monster is not far


® This is shown by Mr. Mayo, 1. c. p. 265.; and Mr. Swan conceives that
there is no doubt of the branches of the sympathetic proceeding to the sixth,
instead of arising from it. (On the Nerves.) But, abovea century ago, Petit
demonstrated the error of those who derived the sympathetic from the fifth and
sixth pairs (Mém. del Acad. Roy. des Sc. 1727.) 5 and Fontana, according to
Girardi, argued against the origin of the sympathetic from the third or fifth pair,
because the twigs were not detached from these pairs, but ran to them; so that
they should be called the end and not the origin of the sympathetic. Professor
Panizza declares that the branches of the sympathetic which ascend with the
carotid artery merely entwine around the sixth pair, and may be detached with-
out injury to their continuity. (Ricerche Sperimentali, p. 6.)

> De Nervo Sympathetico. 1835.


44:4: FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


removed from the human form: and in idiots, with a want of
quantity and quality of encephalo-spinal substance, the ganglionic
system is usually well developed and sound. No wonder, there-
fore, that, by irritating these nerves, the parts to which they run
are not pained or moved; for they are not nerves of sense or motion,
but, instead of stimulating, give the property of being capable of
stimulation. Again, the division of the ganglionic nerves is not
tullowed by a loss of excitability, as the nerves in the parts them-
selves appear calculated to produce excitability, since the gan-
glionic nerves contain, like their ganglia, grey and white substance,
not white substance only, like the nerves of sensation and the
nerves of motion, both which are merely transmitters, and not
producers, of the respective qualities with which they are con-
cerned.

A powerful argument against this hypothesis is the cireumstance
of no nerves existing in vegetables, although they are nourished
and secrete great varieties of substances, — perform organic func-
tions similar to those of animals. Another is the account of
foetuses having existed without nerves; imperfect foetuses indeed,
but still animal organised active substances.© Another is the cir-
cumstance of a clot of blood becoming organised before it is con
nected with surrounding nerves or vessels. Another is the fact
that, while some parts are abundantly supplied with ganglia and
their nerves, other parts of great size, of great vital properties, of
great secretion, have no more supply than is communicated along
all arteries, and which is very far short of what parts supplied with
vole and plexuses must possess. I allude to the extremities,
in which are a great extent of superficial and cellular secreting
structure, as well as the synovial membranes of the joints, great
masses of muscle, &c. that would require ganglia for their
nourishment and powers as much as the stomach, liver, and other
viscera ; and yet they have no ganglia and receive no more gan-
glionic nerves than what pass insensibly along the arterial coats,
while the viscera have copious supplies to their blood-vessels, amidst
which numerous plexuses and ganglia are found. The various
experiments made to prove the importance of nerves to secretion
are considered unsatisfactory by Dr. Brachet —a great supporter
of the necessity of the nerves to all the organic functions ; and his
Own appear to me equally unsatisfactory. Finding that he could


¢ Dr. John Clark, Phil. Trans. 1775.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.45


not prevent the secretion of urine by dividing all the nerves of the
kidney, he divided the renal artery, and passed a canula between
the two portions, so that no nerves could run to the ergan along
the arterial coats. Secretion ceased. But the functions of the
small vessels were unlikely to continue when the trunk was so
severely injured: just as we shall find the functions of the ovaria
or of the testis often to be arrested by dividing the Fallopian
tube or vas deferens. For what purpose of nutrition or supply
of properties can a ganglion be particularly required just in the
situation of the ophthalmic or the otic? But, if we reflect that
the motions of the iris and muscles of the internal ear must
be regulated by the condition of certain other parts, we can under-
stand why those ganglia exist in their respective places. For the
ganglionic system, no doubt, communicates important influences.
The functions of each of the complicated and numerous organs of
all but the lowest animals, require constantly to vary according
to the condition of others. Not only, for instance, does every
organ of digestion, assimilation, and excretion, require to be in
nice adjustment with another and with all, but is each affected by
organs not forming a part of the group nor necessary to their
powers. The nutritive functions do not require the brain; yet
if the brain is harassed by a disagreeable state of feeling —
sorrow, vexation, anxiety, &c. whatever be its intensity, that
group suffers, and dyspepsia, diarrhoea or costiveness, pale or
morbidly coloured stools, a morbid colour of the urine and the skin,
in some degree or other result. Whereas, in a happier state of
mind, the functions, ceteris paribus, go on well; and, in a truly
happy state, persons are often struck with the excellence of their
condition. The converse operation of all these upon the brain is
as certain. Now, if such is the mutual influence of organs not
necessary, except indirectly, to each other, but bound up, where
they all exist, into a common whole, so that the well-being of each
is essential to the well-being of the whole, we may well conceive
the important influence of organs upon each other which co-
operate in function. I conceive the influence of organs upon each
other to be incessant and to be ever varying accordingly as the
state of each influencing organ varies: and that they are all at
all times influenced and influencing. This constant mutual in-
fluence is indispensable to perfect function, though it frequently
disturbs function: and, as all seem thus bound together into a
common whole, the removal of this general and particular influ-


446 FANCIED FUNC


ence by the division of the nerves of an organ must affect it; and
the more readily shall we believe nis, when we consider that the
nerves are so minutely and universally distributed throughout
each organ. But the dependence of all parts for their vital pro-
perties upon nerves is a very different matter, and appears to
me far from having been proved or even rendered probable. If
the vitality or irritability, &c. of all parts is given by the nerves,
what gives it to the nerves? If one mass of matter can become
by combination and organisation and suitable circumstances en-
dowed directly with it, why cannot another? To suppose nerves
indispensable to vitality is to ascribe to nature circuitous and
complicated means when unnecessary. The action of voluntary
nerves is merely to excite the irritable muscular fibre ; the oper-
ation of nerves of sensation is not to endow the constituent parts
of organs with sensibility, but to be present in the organs, and
with their sensibility feel impressions made upon them. But this
hypothesis does not make the nerves excite as in the former case,
nor be the residence of the peculiar properties of the part, as in
the latter. It makes the nerves give powers of ogugraction, se-
cretion, &c. none of which they themselves possess. When per-
sons suppose vitality to be given by nerves, they do not suppose
the nerves to be the organ, but to communicate to the constituent
parts properties which they themselves or their system have en-
gendered, and which properties they themselves do not possess,
except that they have vitality in common with all parts. If all
organs were nerves, I could understand how nerves might be de-
clared necessary to all parts for their vitality: but, as nerves are
not supposed to perform the functions of the organ, I cannot see
why the organ should not by its composition and organisation be
sufficient, without another composition and organisation to give it
the powers it possesses: and besides, there are the facts re-
specting vegetables, nerveless foetuses, and clots of blood, already
mentioned, which show that vital properties may exist without
nerves. The various specific properties of the various parts of
the system are totally different from those of the encephalon,
spinal chord, ganglia, and nerves, and must depend upon the
specific composition and organisation of each part, or each part
would not require and have a specific composition and organis-
ation. If a part runs to another and pervades this, as in
the case of the nerves of sensation, that part, having its own
properties wheresoever it goes, will have them in the part


THE RVOUS SYSTEM. 4.4.7


which it pervades; but it cannot give them to this, and far
less can I believe that it gives to this properties which it
itself does not possess: and, as to its performing the offices
of the part which it pervades, the thought is not entertained ;
and yet, except by admitting such an absurdity, I cannot see
how the power of secretion, nutrition, &c. can be ascribed to
nerves. The hypothesis is usually confined to the ganglionic
system: and the encephalon, spinal chord, and encephalo-spinal
nerves are considered to be appropriated to the intellectual and
moral functions, sensation, volition, and the mutual influence of the
brain and rest of the body. That the ganglia and ganglionic
nerves are developed in proportion to the activity and force of
the circulation, and to the development and activity of the functions
of organs, is no more an argument for the dependence of the vital
properties of these upon them, than the simultaneous development
of the ganglia and of the various viscera in early life. The sooner
the viscera are formed, the sooner must the ganglia and nerves
which convey influence to and from each of them be also formed ;
and, the more bulky and active an organ, the more nerves will it
require to influence and be influenced by other organs. All
must allow that the ganglia and ganglionic nerves cannot be for
the purpose of vitality alone, since branches from both anterior
and posterior encephalo-spinal nerves join them and form part of
them.

I should consider the functions of all nerves to be analogous
to each other. The spinal chord and encephalo-spinal nerves do
not give properties ; they communicate only between the brain and
the rest of the body. They convey to the brain an impression of the
state in the form of sensation ; and they convey an influence from
the brain in the way of emotion or volition. They do not bestow
the qualities of the brain, much less convey qualities which it has
not. They convey volition, and the influences of the moral feel-
ings, from the brain, and carry back the impressions of sensation
to the brain. Analogy would incline us to suppose that nerves
running between other parts would convey to those parts, in either
direction, the impressions of the state of the communicating parts,
— this impression, like the impressions of sensation when followed
by volition, being sometimes followed by an influence to some
third organ or some other portion of the first organ,

Dr. Brachet concludes from his experiments that the encephalic
nerve, called pneumono-gastric, gives moving power to the air-

H H


448 FANCIED FUNCTIONS.OF


cells of the lungs, the stomach, and the upper part of the small
intestines: and that the motion of the lower part of the- small
intestines, of the large intestines, the bladder, and uterus, is de-
pendent upon the spinal chord. That the action of the bladder
and the lower part of the large intestine depends upon the spinal
chord cannot be doubted; because the functions of the bladder
and rectum are carried on with sensation and volition. If these
parts are paralysed, the rest of the large intestines and the ad-
joining portion of the small will suffer accumulation, from which
he drew his inference, though they themselves be not paralysed.
The regular contraction of the stomach ceased indeed after the divi-
sion of the pneumono-gastric; but the stomach was not paralysed,
for it acted antiperistaltically after the division. This he ascribes
to irritation of the divided end of the nerve. But such an irritation
ought as readily to have excited the regular contraction of the
stomach. Dr. Wilson Philip denies that the division paralyses
the muscular coat of the stomach; and Drs. Leuret and Lassaigne
say the paralysis is confined to the cardia. If Dr. Brachet is
right in his fact, still some might say it was through the division
of the ganglionic nerves united with the pneumono-gastric that
the paralysis was occasioned. The instant cessation of the motion
of the heart on the removal of the cardiac ganglion may be
ascribed, I have already said, to the shock as probably as to the
absence of the ganglion.4


4 Y will not presume to doubt Dr. Brachet’s fidelity, but his results all square
so wonderfully, except where he is not aware they do not, that confirmation
would be desirable, were it not for the torture necessary. Some points, however,
in his experiments I do not comprehend. In one experiment (Ixxxiv.) we saw
that, after the division of the pneumono-gastric, a puppy might have its head
ws in water without making any effort to raise it and to breathe ; yet in other

ances (x1. and xli.) puppies made violent efforts to inspire. He does not explain
the difference, but explains the efforts to breathe on the score of habit. The ex-
planation I attempted of the difference (swprd, p. 434.) may not be satisfactory to all.
When wishing to show that the secretion and discharge of semen are independent
of the encephalo-spinal nerves, he mentions the case of a man completely para-
plegic, and as high as all the lower fourth of the abdomen, without any sensibility
of the external parts, or the interior of the rectum or urethra: and yet the man
had two children in the time. How the necessary movements were performed,


ins


without voluntary power of the lower parts, and how ejaculation could occur
without sensation of the external parts or urethra, Icannot imagine. He reduced

poor tom cat to the same situation by dividing the spine in the lumbar region,
Here he allow hat the necessary moyements were impossible. However, he sup-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4:49


When I consider that every part must have nerves for feeling,
because every part may become sensible— capable of experiencing


plied their place by “ une sorte de masturbation,”’ which was neither more nor less,
I suppose, than la masturbation. It required more time, he says, but at length
he made the cat emit. This was what some bluff John Bulls would call French
taste. Now, as the cat had lost all sensation, I cannot see how it could be alive
to the pleasures of masturbation, — how emission, which in coition results only
when sensation arrives at a certain height, cquld be excited ; nor how the presence
of semen in the urethra could be felt and ejaculation effected. Whatever might
have been the effect of imagination on the man, the cat must have been a stranger
to the pleasures of imagination as much as of Dr. Brachet’s masturbation.
Dr. Brachet, on the other hand, seemed delighted ; for, as if he had not proved
what he wished, he masturbated the cat again the next day (je fis répéter
la méme maneeuvre (literally), et une nouvelle éjaculation eut lieu); and,
not yet satisfied, he did it again the day after. There, I am thankful to say, he
stopped. ‘ Je m’en tins la, et lanimal me servit pour d’autres expériences.”
Not only were these repetitions superfluous, but the experiment was altogether
superfluous, as the man’s case was perfectly similar. I do not think a phy-
siologist would have ventured to divulge such a disgusting experiment in this
country; and I cannot refrain from expressing my horror at the amount of
torture which Dr. Brachet inflicted upon so many unoffending brutes. Nearly
or quite two hundred must have suffered under his hands. I hardly think that
knowledge is worth having at such a purchase; or that it was ordained that
we should obtain knowledge by cruelty. I care nothing for killing a brute
outright, without pain: it is then but as before it was born, feels no loss, and
escapes all further chance of suffering. Vivisection may be justifiable in some
instances. But before an inquirer commences an experiment of torture, he ought
to be satisfied of its absclute necessity, — that the investigation is important and the
means indispensable ; and also that he is master of the existing knowledge on the
subject, and qualified to operate and to philosophise upon the results. He should
proceed to the task with the deepest feelings of regret. I do not wish to make
a parade of feeling: but to torture animals unnecessarily is a most cowardly and
cold-blooded act, and in my opinion one of the utmost depravity and sin. A
course of experimental physiology, in which brutes are agonised to exhibit facts
already established, is a disgrace to the country which permits it. My wen
French friends will pardon me, but I fear that in France there is among many
too little repugnance to vivisection *: and I am sure that the following expe-
riment would have caused Dr. Brachet to be blackballed in any respectable


* Tn his youthful days the tone of feeling among French medical students
must have been bad, unless the following brutality was followed by immediate
expulsion from the hospital. He says that one of his colleagues, when he was
interne of the Hotel Dieu, regaled the rest of them with a dinner of cats, which
he had experimented upon in their lifetime; and the next day sent the skins, bowels,
&c. to the party in order to let them know what they had eaten, (p. 338.)

HH @


450 USE OF


impressions and transmitting them for sensation to the brain,
and must have nerves for incessantly influencing and being in-
fluenced by the rest of the frame, and in many instances for
influencing or being influenced by some other organ in par-
ticular, the existence and the amount of nerves called the gan-
glionic system, in addition to those which convey volition and
possess sensibility, is explicable ; and I conceive it unnecessary
to invent any other use of them. ‘These purposes of the gan-
glionic nerves are certain. ‘To ascribe others is an hypothesis;
and in my opinion a very improbable and inconsistent hypothesis.
The old name of sympathetic system appears to me highly proper,
because it expresses the use of the system, as far as is known to
us. The especial use of ganglia is unknown. If Gall’s opinion
of the use of the pulpy substance is right, and I think it is, they,
as they contain pulpy substance, may be, like ganglia in the brain
and chord, destined for the origin and reinforcement of the nerves,
as well as for their mingling. The encephalo-spinal nerves ori-
ginate in pulpy substance ; and the ganglia of the spinal nerves
of sensation are probably to give them the greater bulk and num-


society in England, for a physiologist was blackballed at the Royal Society from
the horror excited by an account read just before of experiments in which rabbits’
heads were crushed, though, on reflection, it was found that these experiments
were unattended with pain, and he was honourably elected on an early occasion,—
P J ners + a = + 7
Expt. clxi. “ I inspired,” says Dr. Brachet, “‘a dog with the greatest aversion for
me by plaguing and inflicting some pain or other upon it, as often as I saw it. When
this feeling was carried to its height, so that the animal became furious as soon
as it saw or heard me, I put out its eyes: I could then appear before it, without
its manifesting any aversion. I spoke, and immediately its barkings and furious
movements proved the passion which animated it. I destroyed the drum of its


ears, disorganised the internal ear as much as I could: when an intense
infl ion which was excited had rendered him deaf, I filled up its ears with


wax. He could no longer hear at all. Then I went to its side, spoke aloud, and
even caressed it, without its falling into a rage,—it seemed even sensible to my
caresses.” Nay, Dr. Brachet repeated the same experiment on another dog, and
begs to assure us that the result was the same. And what was all this to prove ?
Simply, that if one brute has an aversion to another, it does not feel or show that
aversion when it has no means of knowing that the other brute is present. If he
had stood near the dog on the other side of a wall, he might equally have proved
what common sense required not to be proved. After all, I do not understand
how it happened that the poor dog did not scent him. I blush for human nature
at detailing this experiment ; and shall finish by informing my readers that the

Memoir containing this, and all the other horrors, obtained the physiological
prize from the French Institute in 1826.


‘. GANGLIA. 45]
bers which they have cbove thcse of motion. The ganglionic
nerves establish a communication between all parts without par-
ticular reference to the encephalo-spinal mass, and therefore do
not originate in it: they would seem to require origin in pulpy
substance somewhere, and therefore I should have imagined 2
priori that masses of pulpy substance would exist here and there
for the origin and reinforcement of the nerves of general organic
‘communication. Of course the ganglia must contain fibrous
matter also; and, while they may serve for origin, or reinforce-
ment, they appear to serve for mingling the filaments which
enter and leave them. It is also possible that the ganglia are
analogous to the encephalon and spinal chord,— that they act
like certain portions of the encephalon and spinal chord in this,
that, as soon as an impression is conveyed to them from one part,
they may send forth an influence ; just as, in the case of the ence-
phalo-spinal mass, a sensation:is felt and a muscular action may
ensue.

We see encephalo-spinal nerves run to these ganglia, and
some run in great abundance to parts not voluntary. They appa-
rently mingle in ganglia with all the other filaments in the gan-
glia, as much as these do together ; but they are not imagined to
convey life, or the power of nutrition, secretion, &c. Why then
should the others? They appear, like those which do not run to
the ganglia, to convey impressions of sensation to the brain and of
emotion or will from it: as well as such mutual influence as
exists among all parts. Both the posterior and anterior root of
the spinal nerves run to the ganglia of the sympathetic, as Scarpa
showed above fifty years ago ®, and Sommerring £, whose remarks
are now confirmed by Panizza.8

When sensibility is constantly wanted, as in the case of the
lungs and stomach, and of the pelvic intestinal and urinary organs,
a large supply of encephalic or spinal nerves is seen, and is given
directly, without the intervention of ganglia :—the pneumono-gas-
tric nerves, besides forming abundant communications with gan-
glionic nerves, run directly to the lungs and stomach, and certain
sacral nerves to the rectum and pelvic urinary organs. The
evident purpose of the encephalo-spinal nerves which run to
ganglia being to convey impressions in both directions, I shall not


© Anat. Annot. lib. 1. § xi. p. 18.

f Dee. h. fubrica, t.iv. § clviii. ,

& Recerche Sperimentale. Pavia, 1834. &c, -~
HH 3


4.52 SYMPATHY. 4 ;


ascribe other purposes to them any more than to those nerves of
the same class that do not run to ganglia. They take this course
probably for convenience and complete mingling; just as the
spinal nerves of sense and motion run together in one trunk, and
these mingle by means of plexuses. ,

I may remark that it is even requisite not only for different
organs but for different structures in the same organ to sympa-
thise: a stimulus applied to the inner surface of the alimentary
canal, heart, or urinary bladder, causes the muscular fibres to
contract.

This mutual influence is sympathy; and it exists universally
throughout the system, although the more palpable and striking
instances of it only pass usually under that name.


We will now consider sympathy more minutely.

By sympathy” is meant the affection of one part of the body
directly by the affection of another, through vital agency alone,
independently of physical. When the sun shines into our eyes,
or something irritates the nostrils, the expiratory muscles con-
tract violently and we sneeze by sympathy. If the fauces are
tickled, we vomit by sympathy. If cold is suddenly applied to
the surface, the bladder endeavours to expel its contents by
sympathy. This property of sympathising is indispensable to
the functions of the body. Unless the operation of one part
is varied according to the condition of another, the harmony
of our functions would be destroyed. When the uterus has been
gravid its full time, the breasts secrete milk: perhaps before this
period, or whenever it may expel its burden. The presence of
food in the mouth produces a flow of saliva from all the salivary
ducts; and when semen touches the inner surface of the urethra
the levatores ani and ejaculatores seminis are thrown into con-
vulsions. When the skin perspires but little, the kidneys secrete
more urine. The extreme importance of sympathy will appear
when we consider that it occurs not only between different
organs, but different parts of the same organ. The blood, the
chyme, the faeces, are not applied to the muscular portions of the
vascular and alimentary systems, but to their lining membrane ;


n « J, H. Rahn, De causis physicis Sympathie, Exerc. i.—vii. Tigur. from
1786. 4to. Sylloge select. eorum opuscul. de mirabili sympathia que partes inter
diversas c. h, intercedit, Edited by J. C. Tr. Schlegel, Lips. 1787. 8yo,”


. SYMPATHY. 453


yet the irritation of this, independently of distension, excites the ac-
tion of the muscular tissue. In disease these sympathies are some-
times more striking; because there may be an undue excitement
of the part influencing, or undue excitability of the part influ-
enced. An exquisitely sensible growth at the end of the rectum may
produce tenesmus of the expelling muscles. On the other hand,
in morbid excitability of the intestines, although the stomach be per-
fectly healthy, the ingurgitation of warm fluid into it will often cause
immediate defecation; in neuralgia, at a distance from the sto-
mach, oppositely, I have seen an instant aggravation of pain when
any thing was swallowed ; and I have attended two cases of violent
cough in young men érom the slightest touch of one half of the
chest i, though this was not in the least tender ; indeed we have the
skin exquisitely tender in some cases of hysteria, and when it is in-
flamed, without such effect. Sometimes natural sympathy may lan-
guish from the want of excitement in the influencing part or of
excitability in the influenced. The iris will not contract by light
if the retina becomes insensible ; and, on the other hand, if the
nerves of the iris are paralysed, the stimulation of the retina by
light will fail to excite the iris to contraction.

Sympathies occur in disease between parts which are not
observed to sympathise at all in health; and the disease may be in
the affecting or affected part. When the liver is inflamed, the
right shoulder often aches; when the hip joint is diseased, the
knee is often the seat of severe pain: on the other hand, pain
in an extremity often increases the very instant that stimulating
articles are swallowed which in health scarcely caused a glow
even in the stomach, and which still do no more than this in the
stomach while they aggravate the pain. In disease new sym-
pathies occur between parts which naturally sympathise, as when
constipation of the intestines produces vomiting; and the breasts


' I presume that, as the sensibility of both halves of the surface was the same,
the reason of such effects from touching the one only was, that the morbid ex-
citability existed in that half only of the expiratory part of the spinal chord with
which the nerves of sensation of that side were connected, and with which the
expiratory portion of the other side sympathised. In hydrophobia, a slight blast
of air, or the settling of a fly upon the surface, causes the inspiratory muscles to
act suddenly and violently, though the skin is not tender tothetouch. Yet I will
not adduce this to illustrate the second cause of morbid sympathy, because a
strong flash of light has the samé effect ; and light, noise, and the application of
cold to the surface, or any slight and sudden eause of sensation, are very un -
pleasant, and show a morbid sensibility of all the external senses, -


HH 4


454 SYMPATHY. &


may become painful, and even secrete milk, when the uterus or
the ovaria are only diseased.

The influence of mental emotions is an example of sympathy.
The affection of the nutritive functions of the brain —such
affections as are common to it and all other organs —the state of
its circulation, the degree of its general excitement and of its
strength, the state of its structure, all may sympathetically
influence other parts, and may be influenced sympathetically in
turn. But, besides these, the condition of the peculiar functions
of certain parts of the brain exercises very powerful influence
upon every part of the body. When grief, fear, anxiety, despair,
terror, or contentment, hope, enthusiasm, *joy, love or hatred,
sexual passion, &c. &c. — occur in the brain, certain sympathetic
effects take place in certain other parts of the body, as in the cir-
culating organs at large, in the genitals, &c. ; and the effect may
be violent, even to destruction of life and perhaps laceration of
structure, or continued so as, if agreeable, to remove disease,
or, if unpleasant, to occasion functional or structural derangement
in any part that may be the most predisposed. Now blushing
under anger or shame, paleness, polyuria, and diarrhoea, under fear,
erections under desire, all called effects of the passions, can be
but so many changes occurring sympathetically from certain states
of certain parts of the brain, as peculiar states of other functions
of other organs affect different organs sympathetically.

It must be obvious that the sympathising part is not always
that which appears to sympathise. When a voluntary muscle
contracts sympathetically, it is not the muscle but the nerves
moving the muscles, and indeed generally the ultimate fibres in
the encephalon or chord, that are sympathetically excited; and the
contraction of the muscle is the result of their excitement, just
as it would be if their excitement occurred in any other way.
The sympathy is not between the excited part and the muscles, but
between it andthe nerves of the muscles : wherefore, if the nerves
of the muscle are divided, the sympathy still exists, but ceases to
be manifest, because the muscles are no longer influenced by the
sympathising nerves. Hence Bichat *, — who divided sympathy


* Anatomie Générale, t. i. p. 183. sq.

John Hunter divides sympathy into general and partial; such as pyrexia
from a wound, and vomiting from irritation of the fauces. Partial sympathy he
subdivides into remote, contiguous, and continuous, — Where there is no evident
connection between the sympathising parts sufficient to account for the circum-


* SYMPATHY. 455


as it affects animal contractility or sensibility, tetanus from a
wound in the extremities being an instance of the former and
pain of the knee in hip disease an instance of the latter; and as
it affects organic contractility or sensibility, of which palpitation
from disorder of the stomach is an example ,— states that sym-
pathy of animal contractility occurs only when the nerves con-
necting the affected muscles with the encephalon or spinal chord
are entire. When he divided them, the convulsions in the cor-
responding muscles ceased: and the iris ceases to contract when
the third pair is divided, though light glares on the retina.
Neither, where sympathetic muscular. action arises from a sens-
ation, will it occur, if the nerves communicating impressions from
the affected part to the sensible part of the nervous centre are
compressed or divided, or if the brain itself is unable to receive
the impression. If the optic nerve is divided, the sun’s rays will
not excite contraction of the iris, Although the stomach in an
animal newly dead may be thrown into contraction by mecha-
nical irritation, no sympathetic action of the diaphragm and ab-
dominal muscles,— no vomiting, occurs !; in perfect coma neither
sneezing nor contraction of the iris can be induced by applying
stimulants to the nostrils or letting the sun’s rays into the eye.
The sympathies of the organic functions are not all ascribable,
as many might imagine, to continuity of surface; for, after di-
viding the esophagus of a dog, Bichat produced vomiting equally
as before, on irritating the fauces ™, and Dr. Brachet sneezing on
irritating the nasal membrane after having divided the trachea.
Sympathy depends on the peculiarity of the impression as well
as upon the part. “ When the sides or soles of the feet are
tickled,” says Dr. Whytt, “‘ the body is often thrown into convulsive
motions; but nothing of this kind happens when those parts are
either inflamed or wounded: neither an acrid injection of a so-
lution of corrosive sublimate, nor the introduction of a catheter
into the urethra, occasions any alternate convulsive motions of the


stance ; as vomiting from the pregnant state : — Where there is proximity of the
sympathising parts; as tenesmus when a stone exists in the urinary bladder:
—and Where, as most commonly, the sympathising parts are continuous; as
itching of the nose and verge of the anus from worms in the intestine.  T’reatise
on the Blood, &c. Introduction.

' Dr. Whytt, On the Vital and Involuntary Motions.

™ Anat, Générale, t. i. p. 192. "lec. p. 298,


456 SYMPATHY. :


acceleratores urinz, although the semen, which stimulates the
nerves of the urethra much more gently, has this effect.”

The same cause, too, may produce the same sympathetic effect,
though applied to different parts. Convulsions arise from tickling
any part of the skin capable of the sensation of tickling ; nausea
from a disgusting smell, taste, or sight: for the sympathetic effect
results from the peculiarity of the impressions in the nervous
centre.

The same sympathetic effect, lastly, may arise from many dif-
ferent causes in different parts: vomiting may arise from injuries
of the head, a stone in the kidney, pregnancy, disgust, sailing,
&c.°

Now, although it is evident that nerves are necessary to sym-
pathetic contractions of muscles which are never moved but by
the stimulus of nerves, viz. the voluntary, because it is the roots
of these nerves in the brain or chord that sympathise, and the
chords convey the sympathetic excitement; and that nerves are
necessary to convey those impressions which occur in any parts
and must be transmitted to the encephalon or spinal chord in
order that the roots of nerves in these may be excited to stimu-
late the voluntary muscles ultimately affected; and although we
must conceive that the influence of the passions must-be trans-
mitted to the various sympathising parts by means of nerves;
still some deny that other examples of sympathy arise from nerv-
ous connection, because it frequently happens that no particular
nervous communications of sympathising parts are discoverable,
as between the nose or eye and diaphragm, although sneezing fol-
lows from a pinch of snuff in the nose or the sun’s glare upon
the eyes, while remarkable connections exist between other parts
not particularly disposed to sympathise. ? Vegetables, it is urged,
which are not known to have nerves, show what has been termed
sympathy: ifa leaflet of the sensitive plant is stimulated by a
burning-glass the whole leaf contracts and the foot-stalk drops ;
when the branches of trees feel the warmth of summer, the sap
ascends from the roots, and even in a frost it will ascend from
the roots through the stem, if a single branch is introduced into
a hothouse.1 But the former phenomenon is probably the result


° See Dr. Alison, 1. c.
® Consult Dr. Whytt, Observations on Nervous Diseases, ch. i.
‘ Sir Gilbert Blane, Medical Logic, $d edit. p- 154. In the Times for


» SYMPATHY. . 4:5'7


of mere continuity of surface, which sort of extension of effect
occurs in animals; and the sap is thought to rise from the roots
in consequence of the mere expansion of the branches: but all
true sympathy is no doubt effected by nerves, though mere nerv-
ous connection without peculiar disposition, or property, will not
explain it.

The smaller number of organs and the continuity of most parts
of vegetables produce sufficient connection of all spots without
the necessity for distinct intervening bodies like nerves, which
are absolutely required to connect the numerous, separate, and
frequently quite uncontinuous and very eaenhy organs of compli-
cated animals.

Although the sympathies of animal systems, not explicable by
continuity of surface, but true sympathies, must, I conceive, de-
pend upon zervous communication, even where the sympathising
part is not naturally stimulated by volition nor known to be stimu-
lated to its functions by any thing but its contents, and although
nervous communication can always be shown ; still the intervention


October 23. 1834, when I read it daily, was an account from the Berlin State
Gazette, of a branch of a vine introduced into a hothouse, bearing flowers and
fruit when the rest had none. Some, as M. Dutrochet, have imagined vegetables
to have a nervous system, but never shown it. Dr. Brachet has lately contended
for it, but the best botanists consider that this part of his book should not have
been printed. The opinion has been thought proved by the action of certain poisons
upon them. We know that they are poisoned like animals; arsenic, mercury,
copper, lead, and tin, destroy them, and are found to be taken up by their ves-
sels. Carbonic acid, azote, nitric oxide, hydrogen, when applied to the roots, are
equally fatal. Opium, prussic acid, belladonna, nux vomica, menispermis
coculus, hemlock, digitalis, alcohol, and oxalic acid, are no less so; and, because
these destroy the life of animals without leaving chemical traces, and affect the
nervous system, Dr. Marcet, jun., whose experiments will be found in the
Annales de Chimie, June 1825, and are confirmed by many others, concludes
that they must destroy vegetables by acting on a nervous system in them. But,
although no trace be discoverable, this may be on account of their chemical
peculiarities, (and, in fact, prussic acid and alcohol have been found absorbed,
Annales de Chimie, Oct. 1814, and Dr. Cooke on Apoplery,) and they, as well
as other poisons, affect the nervous system of animals only as one part of the
hving body, — arsenic, besides its general deleterious agency, causing particularly
gastritis, even if applied to a sore of the leg, digitalis exciting the kidneys
(indeed their action on vegetables might, on the other hand, be urged as a
proof of their general hostility to life) ; and the mineral ones, which often leave
chemical traces, also produce peculiar effects on the nervous system, and often
destroy ‘ad without being detected beyond the alimentary canal.


458 SYMPATHY. “


of the brain or spinal chord of course cannot be requisite, if
there is no motion in the sympathy, nor any influence trans-
mitted by nerves of voluntary movement. To the individual
sympathy between the brain or chord these and their nerves
must be indispensable, as in this respect they stand exactly
in the condition of all other sympathising parts. When sym-
pathetic pain is felt, brain and encephalo-spinal nerves must be
required, the latter to communicate and the former to take
cognizance of the sympathetic condition of the part in which the
sympathetic pain is felt. But this is not an agency of the brain,
chord, or encephalo-spinal nerves in sympathy: a sympathetic
change first occurs in “the part, and this is then felt by the en-
cephalo-spinal system. If the ganglionic nerves have the
office, assigned to them by so many writers, of giving vital pro-
perties to all parts, and not this, authors can hardly suppose
that peculiar nerves for sympathy exist, seeing that all the
other than the ganglionic are ‘nerves for sense or motion or
convey the influence of emotions from the brain: and, should dis-
tinct nerves for sympathy exist, I still cannot believe that the
ganglionic system is for vitality on account of the reasons given
above ; and much less when I consider that its ganglia and nerves
contain a large quantity of fibrils from the encephalo-spinal nerves |
of both sensation and motion; which very circumstance, I may re-
mark, prevents me from believing that the anterior spinal nerves
serve for motion only,—have no other function. I can conceive that
the posterior are for transmission ¢o the brain and chord only,—for
sensation and for insensible influence, as when something unfelt inthe
stomach produces hiccup from the irritation being conveyed to the
roots of the phrenic nerves: that the posterior are for transmission
Jromthe brain and chord ; not however for the transmission of vo-
lition only, but of the influence of emotion and of excitement of
their roots however induced. If we cannot always explain the oc-
currence or absence of sympathy by nervous distribution, we must
remember that we are imperfectly acquainted with this. Fibrils
often seem to unite which afterwards prove to run side by side only:
and, the more knowledge we have, the more distinct do we find the
office of individual fibrils. “ Often,” says Gall, “the different
filaments of the same nerve are very visibly different: not only
different nerves but also the threads of the same nerve proceed
from different ganglia placed in different situations. All the pe-
culiarities are the same in the same nerves; they must therefore


SYMPATHY. 4.59


depend upon a primitive difference of inner structure, and be
essentially necessary for difference of structure: whence Baron
Cuvier naturally concluded that ‘nerves are not all entirely alike,
and do not all convey one fluid, like the arteries, for example ;
but that there are in the structure and mode of action of each,
some peculiarity relative to the functions and nature of the organ
which they animate.’ I should say not animate, but influence.” *

Sir C. Bell teaches that certain nerves are destined for Respir-
ation and the Expression of the passions. These he terms re-
spiratory nerves ; and says they are the pathetic or internal motor
of the eye, the portio dura of the seventh or facial, the glosso-
pharyngeal, the eighth or pneumono-gastric, the accessory, the
phrenic, and the long subclavicular or, as he terms it, external
respiratory. These all arise, he says, in a tract, by him called
respiratory, beginning at the mesocephalon, and descending on
each side between the anterior or motor, and the posterior or
sensitive, portion of the spinal chord, and terminating about the
middle of the back. Chaussiers had previously pointed out the
lateral tract, as suggested by Le Gallois t, especially the portion
contained in the skull, and suspected respiration to depend much
upon it.

It is undoubted that several of these nerves are concerned in
respiration and actions in which respiration is affected, —in sneez-
ing, coughing, &c., as well as in the expression of the passions,
in laughing, crying, and the expression of rage, terror, &€c. But
why the nerves of voluntary motion which are concerned in these
actions should be regarded as different from other nerves of vo-
luntary motion, I cannot imagine. Respiration is accomplished
by muscles as voluntary as any voluntary muscles, and moved by
nerves as voluntary as any other nerves of voluntary motion.
We inspire because prompted to do so by uneasy sensation, just
as we move from an uneasy posture. The pathetic, facial, ac-
cessory, phrenic, and long subclavicular, differ in no point from
other nerves of motion; by their means we contract at pleasure
the muscles to which they are distributed: in truth, the superior
oblique muscle of the eye supplied by the pathetic, and some, as
the orbicularis palpebrarum, supplied by the facial, have no con-


* Gall, I. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 128. sq., and 8vo. t. vi. p. 312, sq., where he quotes
this part of the first 4to. volume under the name of Mon Traité sur la Difference
des Nerves.

* Exp, Sommaire, §:c. 1807. ‘ Sur le Principe de la Vie, 1812,


460 SYMPATHY.


nection whatever with respiration. The motor nerves of respir-
ation conspire in operation for a particular end. But so do the
nerves of all other muscles: those of the lower extremity in
walking, those of the upper and lower end of the trunk in rising from
the recumbent posture. For any particular action whatever, instinc-
tive or arbitrary, association of the action of the nerves of sets of
muscles takes place. As to their action being instinctive and in-
voluntary, the action of every voluntary muscle may be instinctive
and involuntary; and is always involuntary if a motive of great
strength exists. We breathe or wink unconsciously or involun-
tarily ; so also may we run, withdraw an arm, leg, or whole body,
unconsciously or involuntarily. It is true that respiration con-
tinues during sleep and a certain degree of coma; but other
associated actions do the same which are voluntary. Patients
will move any part unconsciously, if you make it uneasy during
sleep: they will swallow in apoplexy till near death. Poor chil-
dren, when fast asleep through fatigue, will continue to move their
hands and fingers as if at work, even after the machines of their
unprincipled employers have stopped." Having begun any mus-
cular actions, we continue them often unconsciously if our at-
tention is directed to something else, and, on its ceasing to be so
directed, we may be surprised to find what we are doing. Then as
to the muscles supplied by these nerves being respiratory, there
is hardly a muscle in the body which may not be respiratory. In
dyspnoea, more and more muscles are employed in proportion to
the difficulty, till at length almost every muscle of the four ex-
tremities may be called in to give assistance.— With respect to
expression, every other voluntary muscle may give expression as
well as those which are moved by the voluntary nerves above
enumerated. In despair, we as instinctively wring our hands as
we lengthen our features and bewail; in rage, we as instinctively
clench our hands and toss our arms as we knit our brows and
project our lips and vociferate; in joy, we as instinctively move
briskly as we laugh; in surprise, we instinctively depress our
lower jaw: — motions in none of which respiratory nerves have
any share. I see no difference in the agency of these nerves and
of all other nerves of voluntary motion. — Lastly, the glosso-
pharyngeal appears now to be a pair not of motion, but of sense,


“ Report of the Factory Commissioners, 1833. The inhuman facts detailed
in this report cover our Christian country with shame, and may be retorted by
Continental vivisectors with triumph against us.


SYMPATHY. 461


and of a specific sense, — a deadly blow to the respiratory set of
nerves; and the pneumono-gastric to be a pair both of sense and
motion. The peculiarity of the improperly called respiratory nerves
arising from a peculiar tract amounts to nothing, if these two nerves
of sense also arise from it: and, if the other nerves do arise from a
peculiar tract, still nothing can be inferred from the circumstance,
since they are all voluntary nerves, and we have seen that their
operations differ in nothing from those of all other voluntary
nerves, when combinations of actions are required for particular
voluntary or instinctive motions, or for the instinctive expression of
the passions. The accessory, subclavicular, and phrenic, however,
only are in general allowed to have the origin assigned to them by
Sir C. Bell; and even the accessory is declared by Gall * to arise
from the posterior (sensitive) roots of some spinal nerves. The re-
spiratory tract, or column, is rather an anatomical fancy, for it is not
always to be found, and the best anatomists deny its existence.y
It thus appears to me that Sir Charles Bell’s doctrine respecting
the respiratory nerves is merely an untenable whim; and that his
discoveries of the function of the ganglionic portion of the tri-
geminum pair, (its other portion having long before been assigned
to motion by Paletta,) and of the facial, and of the excitement of
motion on irritating the anterior roots only of the spinal nerves,
— the whole amount, I believe, of his real contributions to the
physiology of the nervous system, — are only sullied by his views
of the functions of his respiratory set. Even the two first of


* M. Manee says it often arises at a right angle from the posterior roots of
some spinal nerves. Anatomie Analytique. Tableau.

¥ Dr. Spurzheim asked Sir C. Bell (Appendiv, &e. p. 31.) whether it is true,
i. e. whether it is not untrue, that “ each lateral portion of the spinal marrow
contains three tracts or columris, one for voluntary motion, one for sensation,
and one for the act of respiration ;” and “ that a fasciculus may be traced down
the spinal marrow between the sulci which give rise to the anterior and posterior
roots of the spinal nerves.” These are Sir C. Bell’s words, in his Evposit. &c.
p. 123. 129. — I said nothing of the origin of the anterior and posterior roots of
the spinal nerves from an anterior and posterior lateral sulcus, when speaking
of the anatomy of the chord, because Gall says he could find the posterior only
and seldom lower than the first dorsal vertebra, and that the anterior roots
do not proceed in a straight line and regularly, as M. Chaussier describes and
represents in his plates, but confusedly, sometimes at one distance, sometimes at
another, from the middle fissure ; the very dots by which M. Chaussier represents
the exits of the nerves, are farther from the middle line than the grooves. (Gall,
4to. vol. i. p- 61. sq.)

* Dr. Fletcher conceives that Sir Charles Bell is right, as far as he goes; yet


4G2 SYMPATHY.


these three discoveries he has obscured by ascribing morbid
phenomena dependent upon the motor branch of the trigeminus


~
i a ee


that the nerves arising from the respiratory tract serve not only for the sym-
pathetic action, as he regards it, of respiration and the expression of the passions,
but that they serve for the production of all sympathy and for the effects of in-
stinct and the passions on the system ; instinct being considered by him as a part
of the passions, only attended by a desire and by actions adapted to a particular
end, and the word passion being synonymous with emotion. ‘The operation of
passion or instinct and of sympathy may be regarded as the same: the various
parts of the body sympathising only with the brain in the two first cases. Now
instinctive actions may be actions of any voluntary muscles of the body, and
their source must be certain parts in the brain, but the conveyance of the im-
pression from these parts of the brain which are the seat of the mental operation
must be to that other part of the brain or spinal chord whence the voluntary
motor nerves which excite the respective muscles arise. No peculiar system of
nerves is required farther for instinctive motion. Peculiar nerves or nervous fibres
may exist in the brain and chord, or peculiar nerves may exist only between these
and all parts of the body for the conveyance of the effects of the passions, and be-
tween the various parts of the body for their endless sympathies. Nervous commu-
nication there must be between all parts sympathising not through mere continuity,
but the communications throughout the system by means of all the encephalo-spinal
and ganglionic nerves are abundant enough for sympathy to occur between any
two. Many of the very nerves which he regards as the specific agents of sym-
pathy are voluntary nerves ; the facial, pathetic, phrenic, are employed by our
will; and I conceive that they no more excite muscles sympathetically than any
other voluntary nerves, where the nerve is excited sympathetically through some
other nerve communicating with their roots: the fact being that these nerves of
motion may be stimulated at their source in the brain or spinal chord by the will,
or by emotion or some other excitement operating sympathetically. Dr. Fletcher
only makes it probable, in his own raind, that such general communications exist
by these peculiar nerves. He argues, 1. That the respiratory system of nerves is
likely to be distributed almost universally, because the ramifications of the
pneumono-gastric are inextricably interwoven with the roots of the ganglionic
nerves, which are presumed already by him to be universally dispersed by
travelling with the blood-vessels, and which also reinforce every encephalo-spinal
nerve, so that, wherever a ganglionic nerve goes, a so called respiratory twig
may go likewise: this probable distribution of the pneumono-gastric nerve would
be sufficient to establish the universal distribution of these nerves, though others
of the set are probably very widely disseminated. In fish, the pneumono-gastric
is universally distributed. This set of nerves have almost a common origin, so
that by means of one’s diffusion, the whole may be regarded as diffused. Thus
the sympathy between the lungs and the respiratory muscles is maintained by
the pneumono-gastric nerve distributed to the lungs and conveying the sensation
of want of breath; by the phrenic and intercostals and accessory and external
respiratory nerves, which are associated at their roots with it, and excite the
muscles as well as by other muscular nerves, the pathetic, facial, and even


NERVES. 463


nerve to affection of the ganglionic portion and of the facial, and
by considering the facial as exclusively controlling all motions
Soren a ae a Ea tel BL eet Ya ie eee
those distributed to numerous muscles of the body when the irritation from
dyspnoea is extreme. The pneumono-gastric and the rest of the set associated
with it at their roots appear to maintain the sympathy between the heart and
the rest of the system. —TI reply that he allows the ganglionic nerves to
be as widely distributed ; and so indeed must be the nerves of sensation, for
any vascular part of the body may show sensibility when inflamed.

2. He argues that the nerves of sensation cannot convey sympathy, because
this may occur independently of sensation and some sympathising parts have no
sensibility.—But all vascular parts may acquire sensibility under inflammation 5
and therefore all vascular parts must have nerves of sensation. Yet sympathy may
doubtless occur without sensation, just as the various nutritive functions occur
without it. Still, if the ganglionic nerves are allowed by him to administer
to these, they may administer to sympathy. Indeed, sympathy is often the result
of sensation only. We do not sneeze unless the sensation in the nose arises toa
certain height, — not the sensation of smell, but of touch ; and I may remark that
Dr. Fletcher appears wrong in arguing that sensation in the nose does not occur
before sneezing, because it is not the sensation of smell. Some sympathies
are sensations and therefore carried on in some measure at least by nerves of
sensation ; other sympathies certainly can have nothing to do with nerves of sens-
ation, but it does not follow that they must be carried on by the so called
respiratory nerves.

3. The occurrence of sympathy during sleep he considers an argument that
sympathy is independent of the brain.—No one can doubt that many sympathies
are independent of it. Communications of nerves exist independently of the
brain: and Dr. Fletcher is correct in condemning the old hypothesis that the
brain is necessary to sympathy. Still this does not show that the so called
respiratory nerves must be the sole organs of sympathy.

4, He maintains that the manifestation of the effects of sympathy, passion,
and instinct, are in proportion to the development of this system.— Certainly,
in proportion to the voluntary muscles, which act under instinct and passion, are
the nerves which serve these voluntary muscles, Fish, he urges, have, of the
respiratory nerves, only the pathetic and the pneumono-gastric, which latter is
in part a nerve of motion like the pathetic, and they have it of great size. Fish
display the effects of many instincts and passions. Reptiles have, in addition,
the glosso-pharyngeal and facial. Similar additions of other nerves are found in
other classes, The glosso-pharyngeal, however, is now proved to be a nerve of
special sense, and the facial supplies the voluntary muscles of the jaws and
fauces, which in fish were supplied by the pneumono-gastric. But I can see
here no argument for these voluntary nerves being exclusive agents of sympathy,
although they are used as excitants of voluntary muscles under instinct and
Passion, and in morbid involuntary excitement of these muscles as well as in
Volition.

5. The structure of the sensiferous and ganglionic nerves is similar; and of

é Lil!


464 FUNCTIONS OF


of the face concerned with respiration and expression, wher
the mere descent of the lower jaw which accompanies surprise
proves the aganglionic portion of the trigeminus nerve to be,
as almost any nerve of voluntary motion may be, a nerve of
expression."


ce a ee a


the motiferous and respiratory. As the motiferous convey a stimulus, so there-
fore probably do the respiratory.—Unquestionably those which are voluntary
nerves are like all other voluntary nerves. Such are the facial, phrenic, and
partly the pneumono-gastric, which are similar to the common motor of the eye,
the abductor, and the hypo-glossal. This really tends nothing to the argument.
Indeed the analogy does not hold with respect to all, for the glosso-pharyngeal,
however similar in structure to nerves of motion, is a nerve of sense.

6. The sensiferous and ganglionic nerves do not transmit the galvanic in-
fluence; while the motiferous and respiratory transmit it with facility. —But this
proves no more than the fifth argument ; and I know not that all the latter do.

7. A stimulus applied to the trunks of these nerves occasions in general a
display of irritation in parts sympathetically connected with them.—I believe
this is the case with all nerves of motion, as well as those concerned in the
motions of respiration. Stimulation of even nerves of sense will often excite
those of motion which are sympathetically connected with them. Indeed, the
acceleration of respiration after a time is said to follow the irritation of the
glosso-pharyngeal — a nerve of only specific sense, as much as of the accessory
and pneumono-gastric.

8. When the respiratory nerves are divided, the effects of passion and
sympathy upon the parts which they supply are lost.—This is true of those
which convey the effects of volition,—for this they can do no longer, nor, of
course, can they convey involuntary any more than voluntary excitement to the
muscles to which they run. But the fact amounts to no more than would be true
of the division of any nerve of voluntary motion, The division of the glosso-
pharyngeal can have no such effect, — for, being a nerve of sense, its sense
(taste) only is lost in the part which it supplies. Various disturbances follow
the division of the pneumono-gastric, but various ill effects also ensue upon
the divisions of the sensiferous fifth.

Although I consider Dr. Fletcher’s views equally unfounded with those of
Sir C. Bell, I must not omit to mention that he puts them forth most candidly
and rationally as purely hypothetical, and intended to give way to whatever
shall be proposed of a more satisfactory nature.

It may be well to mention here that Sir Astley Cooper has lately published
an account of the ligature of the two great sympathetic nerves in rabbits, and
found no evident effect. One rabbit was killed at the end of seven days, when one
nerve was found ulcerated through and the other nearly so; another rabbit was
alive, at the end of a month, when the account went to press. (Guy's Hospital
Reports, No. iii.)

“ For his three discoveries Sir C. Bell deserves great praise, and his name
will endure as long as the physiology of these respective nerves. But, when


NERVES. 465


credit is given him for having made discoveries, some of which belong to others,
and some of which are no discoveries at all, but fancies; and when so much
that to me is unintelligible, so much error, so much want of extensive knowledge,
pervade his writings, I cannot refrain from smiling at the expressions splendid,
brilliant, profound, luminous, and I know not what others, applied to his opinions
by persons who cannot have considered the subjects laboriously, and only imi-
tate one another in their belief and their language. The most ludicrous eulogy
is in the Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association. Dr. W.C. Henry
says, ‘* The honour of this discovery*(that there are distinct nerves of sensation
and motion), doubtless, the most important since the time of Harvey, belongs ex-
clusively to Sir C. Bell.’’ (p. 62.) Now no new principle was discovered. We
knew before that some nerves, as the optic and olfactory, were for sensation only,
and some, as the common motor, the external motor, and the internal moter of
the eye, and the lingual, for motion only. The only discovery was that two
individual nerves were, one for the first function and the other for the second.
That no one nerve could be for both sensation and motion had always been
evident to reflecting minds. Galen taught his cotemporaries that one set of
nerves went to the skin for sensation, and another to the muscles for motion.
That Sir C. Bell had no idea that the anterior spinal roots were for motion only
and the posterior for sensation only, is evident from the fact that above ten
years after he had found motion to depend upon the anterior roots only, his able
nephew, the late Mr. John Shaw, who lived with him and acted under him,
published a paper * in which he says that his uncle is of the same opinion as
Galen, and mentions the experiments of his uncle showing the connection of
the anterior roots with motion, but has no idea that they are for motion only
and not for sensation also, nor that the posterior are for sensation. His words are,
— ‘“ These experiments we have often repeated, and always with the same re-
sults; but from the violence necessarily used in making them, it has been dif-
ficult to ascertain which of the filaments bestows sensibility on the part. It was
easily shown that if only the posterior set was destroyed, the voluntary power
over the muscles continued unimpaired, but the pain necessarily attendant upon
the performance of the experiment prevented us from judging of the degree of
sensibility remaining in the part.” (p. 148. sq.) Now this paper was read on the
last day of April, and printed in July, 1822, and Dr. Magendie’s discoveries of
the distinct functions of the two roots appeared in August (Journ. de Physiol. ) ;
so that, though Sir C. Bell refers to it in triumph (Nervous System, Preface, xxii.)
as a proof that he had made the discoveries before Dr. Magendie, it proves
precisely the reverse, and exhibits the imperfect state of his views up to the very
time of Dr. Magendie’s discoveries. Numerous as have been Dr. Magendie’s
physiological errors, humbly as I estimate his knowledge and reasoning
powers, and much as I abhor his cruelty to brutes, I have never known him
dishonourable ; and I am satisfied that he knew nothing of Sir C. Bell’s original
discovery respecting the anterior nerves, for it was communicated in a pamphlet
privately distributed: and as to the discovery of the office of the posterior roots, it,
and thus the exact division of office between the two, is certainly Dr, Magendie’s,


* Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xii. 1829.
LbZ


466 FUNCTIONS OF


After all, I do not believe the whole discovered ; because filaments from the
anterior, as well as from the posterior roots, go to the sympathetic ganglia, and
certainly not for motion. Gall had proved, in the last century, that distinct parts
of the nervous system had distinct offices. This he taught in opposition to many
of the most noted of his cotemporaries: he taught it with respect to the grand
nervous organ — the brain, and with respect to the universal divisions of the nerves.
(l.c. 4to. vol. i. p.131.sq.) Sir C. Bell’s discoveries are simply individual exam-
ples of Gall’s great general principle in merely nerves. So little, however, does
the gentleman entrusted to report for the Association know of Gall’s discoveries,
that he not only thus ventured to address it, but, after detailing the unsatisfactory
vivisections of Messrs. Fleurens and Magendie, he passes Gall’s labours over in
silence, and gravely informs the assembled savants that there does not exist any
conclusive evidence for referring separate faculties, or moral affections, to distinct
portions of the brain.” (p. 90.)! Phrenologists should really not allow the Asso-
ciation thus to expose itself.


Since the preceding sheets were printed, I have seen the paper by Professor
Ehrenberg, alluded to supra, p. 324. 325., in which he asserts, in opposition to
M. Raspail, that, by means of the microscope, he has found the fibres of the
encephalon, spinal chord, and nerves to be tubular, The following is pretty
nearly his own summary of his observations : —

1. The fibrous substance of the brain consists not of solid fibres, but of
parallel or fasciculated tubes, dilated at intervals, or jointed, and from 4; to ayh5 of
a line in diameter. Conveyed from the surface towards the ventricles and basis,
increasing in size, and not united by any visible medium, they pass into the
spinal chord, which they in a great measure constitute.

2. The brain, a central organ in function, is a peripheral in structure, as
Gall had already remarked, and not to be compared with the heart or stomach
as central organs.

3. The spinal chord of man, and of all great divisions of vertebrated animals,
consists of tubes similar to those of the brain ; but the finer tubes are placed more
inwardly, the thicker outwardly. The thicker are continued into the cylindrical
tubes of the spinal nerves.

4. The three soft (higher) special nerves of sense, — the olfactory, optic, and
acoustic, and the sympathetic, consist of tubes which are collected into fasciculi
and surrounded by neurilema. The three are immediate prolongations of the
white matter of the brain: the sympathetic has a mixed structure of jointed and
cylindrical tubes,

5. The jointed tubes of the brain, spinal chord, and articulated nerves,
contain a perfectly transparent tenacious fluid, never visibly globular, the liquor
nerveus, which differs from the nervous medulla as the chyle does from blood.
Visible motion of this fluid has not been satisfactorily observed; a slow pro-
gression, however, is probable

6. All other nervous chords consist, not of jointed tubes, but of cylindrical


NERVES. 467


larger tubes, collected into bundles. These tubes are the immediate prolong-
ations of the jointed tubes of the brain and spinal chord, for the most part
suddenly changed and deprived of their dilatations, and are surrounded by
neurilema. In the invertebrata they are from ;; to yJ55 of a line in diameter:
in the vertebrata from 5}, to s{j- They contain a granular, and, as it were,
congealed, medullary matter, that by gentle pressure can visibly be forced out
from them, after which they appear as empty sheaths, &c.

7, Hence the nervous substance consists of jointed tubes carrying the
liquor nerveus, and cylindrical tubes with true nervous pith.

8. The brain does not consist of nervous pith.

9. The invertebrata do not possess a spinal chord consisting of jointed
tubes without pith; or, in other words, the inyertebrata have no spinal chord,
although their abdominal ganglionic chord, which consists chiefly of cylindrical
tubes containing pith, may perform the function of a spinal chord.

10. In the invertebrata the jointed cerebral substance and blood globules
appear in much less proportion.

11. The jointed nervous tubes are, in relation to the human organisation
and their distribution in the animal kingdom, the more important and noble part
of the nervous system, and more immediately subservient to sensation.

12. Almost all cerebral terminations (only less obviously in the ear) are
pervaded by a network of vessels, and contain large scattered globules, the size
of which has a constant ratio to that of the blood globules in the same animal.

13. The structure of the retina, even in man, has been hitherto very erro-
neously described. The granular layer of the anterior surface of the retina is
pervaded by a network derived from the central vessels. Behind this is placed
the expansion of the optic nerve, which consists of jointed tubes, and separates
into a peripheral cortical, and a central medullary matter. Many single, scat-
tered, club-shaped bodies appear to moderate the luminous impression, Their
connection with the jointed tubes of the nerve, Professor Ehrenberg could not
clearly make out.

He confirms the discoveries of old anatomists mentioned above at page 341,
respecting the pulpy (cortical) substance,— that it consists of a thick but delicate
vascular network, and a soft substance; and the latter he pronounces to be
finely granular, and to contain numerous insulated larger granules, which are
composed of smaller ones, strung on filaments, as far as it was possible to observe
them. Near the fibrous (medullary) portion of the brain, the filaments of the
pulpy (cortical) substance become more and more evident, and the blood
vessels somewhat larger and much less numerous. These observations greatly
strengthen Gall’s opinion of the pulpy (cortical) substance being the source of
the fibrous (medullary): and Ehrenberg farther states, we see (12), that al-
most all the terminations of the cerebral nerves are again contained in a dense
vascular network, with scattered globules, which he conjectures to be the nuclei
of blood globules, especially as these in the pulpy substance of the brain are pro-
portionate to the size of the blood globules of the animal.

Gall, it must be remembered, conceives that the nervous fibres originate, not
only in the pulpy portion of the encephalon and chord, but in the peripheral
extremities, where also pulpy substance, he urges, is found. In the pulpy
portion of the ganglia, similar granules have been discovered by Ehrenberg, so

Leo


468 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


that at least one great use of the ganglia of the sympathetic, as of the encephalo-
spinal system, may, with still further probability than I urged at page 451. sq.
be to reinforce the substance of the nerves; and the opinion of Gall respecting
the use of the pulpy substance of the nervous system, supported by his most
powerful arguments, though rejected on the most silly grounds by Dr. Tiede-
mann, has acquired more probability than ever. The series appear to be exter-
nally abundant blood vessels, though fewer and fewer inwards ; next granules,
probably the nuclei of blood globules; and, lastly, the fibrous structure, now
pronounced to be tubular.

Beobachtung einer auffallender bisher wnerkannten Structur des seelenorgans bei
Menschen und Thieren. Von C. G. Ehrenberg. Read Oct. 24. 1833. Abhand-
hungen der Kiniglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften xu Berlin, 1834.


«


469


CHAP. XX.


VOLUNTARY MOTION.


THE processes of every living system, like those of inanimate
nature, are carried on with motion.


«* By ceaseless action all that is subsists.” ®


It is implied in the circulation, secretion, nutrition, and absorp-
tion of the minutest vegetable and animal ; and, generally, when
observation is possible, the solids, no less than the fluids within
them, are seen in these functions to move.» Some contend, though
without proof, that the nervous functions are performed with
motion of a vibratary kind. The evident motion of the brain
from circulation and respiration, and the very much larger quan-
tity of blood constantly passing through the brain and other
nervous parts than mere nutrition (unless each functional act causes
waste of solids) can require, and this in proportion to activity of
function, show that in one sense motion is indispensable even to
nervous function. The other functions by which fresh substance
from without is obtained, the blood purified, the new animal
originated, and indeed all those other functions and modes of
function which distinguish animals from vegetables, take place
with manifest and considerable motion, and, though vegetables
have not the power of locomotion, the leaves and flowers of
many of them move rapidly and considerably. Now motions of
the leaves, flowers, and vessels of plants are evidently the result
of life, and are inexplicable by mere gravity, electricity, &c. No
peculiar known structure is united with their movements, Some

* Cowper. Task.

> We witness vegetable fluids passing along surfaces and through cellular
structure; and fluids in some adult animals through such a structure ; and in all
before a heart exists, or even vessels at the spot. Many declare that particles
move spontaneously not only in blood (Dr. Tiedemann, l.c. eclxv.), but in the
juices of plants (celxxxvii.), (ccce]xxxiii. sqq.) (also dixx.). Perhaps some of
these motions are to be explained by the absorption and emission of fluid, some
by evaporation, some by chemical processes altering the position of particles, and
some by extraneous impulse. In many animals we shall see that the movements


of fluids upon surfaces arise from the vibration of hair-like projecting bodies,
termed cilia.


Li 4


4.70 VITAL MOTION.


animals consist of substance as soft as mucous or gelatinous tissue ;
for instance, the polypi, most radiaria, some entozoa and the
infusoria: yet the former will swim or craw], attach or detach
themselves, and seize prey; the infusoria swim rapidly, turn, and
avoid each other, and possess distinct muscles. Sedatives and
stimulants affect these movements of vegetables and of such
animals like those of large animals. Such vegetables and animals,
as well as minute insects and infusoria, which evidently perform
what in large animals we should term muscular movements, show
that living structure, though so soft that it cannot be regarded
as precisely similar to the flesh of large animals, —to muscular
fibre,—to what is termed muscle, is capable of living contrac-
tion. Such minute voluntary actions are attended, Raspail de-
clares, in one infusory animalcule—the rotifer, by thickening
during contraction of the muscular cylinders running from its
head to its tail, and by tenuity of them when they lengthen.° In
animals possessing muscles, many parts, not apparently muscular,
contract, and instantaneously and forcibly, by a living force. Such
are minute vessels and canals of all kinds. These lose their con-
tractile power, like muscles, immediately or soon after death.
Some structures are most adapted for contraction, as muscles ;
others not at all, as tendons and bones: but others, though not
evidently muscular, possess the faculty in various degrees ; and
to expect distinct muscular fibre in every excitable part would
be erroneous.

The vital power of motion, whether sensible, as in the heart
and voluntary muscles and the leaves and flowers of many vege-
tables; or insensible, (except by its effect on contained fluids) as
in the minute vessels of vegetables and animals, may have the
term excitability restricted to it (see supra, p- 25.), and thus will
be distinguished from sensibility, to which the idea of motion is not
necessary, as seen in the terminations of the optic and olfactory
nerves, though motion may follow sensation ; and sensation again is
not necessary to motion, for not only do many animal motions oc-
cur without sensation, but vegetables are utterly destitute of sens-
ation. The term irritability was peculiarly given by Haller 4 to the


© 1. ¢. § 497. Dr, Tiedemann says that, with a microscope and strong lens,
he observed contractions and expansions in the simplest infusoria, 1. c. dlxxvy.
though previously he had asserted that neither could be detected in them,
eccclxiii.
1 «See Haller on the irritable parts of the human body, Commentar, Soc. Sc.
Golting, t. ii.


VITAL MOTION. 4.71


excitability of parts which both move evidently from the applica-
tion of stimuli, and possess distinct fibres ; and he therefore said
that muscles only are irritable*®, though other animal parts, as
well as vegetables, possess excitability, — move independently of
gravitation, or chemical or electric circumstances, or mechani-
cal impulse. To deny this power, styled also by Haller vis znsita
or propria, to parts which may not show muscular fibres, or which
may not move evidently on the application of a stimulus, would
be absurd; yet Haller did this. ‘To avoid confusion, the term
myotility is given to the power of instant and evident con-
traction of fibrous parts on the application of a stimulus: it is


And Nov. Commentar. Gotting. t. iv.

Among innumerable other writers on the same subject, suffice it to quote the
following : —

Zimmerman, De irritabilitate. Gott. 1751. 4to.

Oeder, on the same. Copenhagen, 1752. 4to.

J. Eberh, Andree, on the same. (Pras. Ph. Fr. Gmelin.) Tubing. 1758.
4to.

As well as three entire Collections of writings which related to the great
controversy excited throughout Europe in consequente of the Gottingen
publications.

Sul? Insensibilita e Irritabilita, Dissertaxioni transportate da J. G. V. Petrini.
Roma, 1755. Ato.

Sulla Insensitivita ed Irritabilita Halleriana opuscoli raccolti da G. B. Fabri.
Bologna. 1757—59. iv. vol. 4to.

And what were published under Haller’s inspection, Mémoires sur la Nature
sensible et irritable des Parties du Corps Humain. Lausanne, 1756—59.
Wwe vol. 12.”

€ Our countryman, Dr. Glisson, whose portrait we possess in the College
of Physicians, was the first who absolutely ascribed animal movement to
a specific power, which he termed irritability, (De Natwra Substantie ener-
getica, sew de Vite Natura. London, 1672. 4to.),—to a property of being
influenced by excitants; and he distinguished it from sensibility. He pointed
out that it might occur without sensation, with sensation, or through the
will, — “ Irritatio est perceptio, sed sensatio est perceptio perceptionis.” Yet
his facts, for his statements of the existence of such a living power were no
theory but facts, found no supporters, Dr. Tiedemann remarks, (I. c. dxxvi.)
“among his contemporaries, blinded as they were by the system of chemistry
and iatro-mechanics, and were only justly appreciated in the following century.”

Dr. De Gorter pointed out that the former is possessed by all parts of living
bodies and by vegetables also. (Hwercitationes Medice quatuor, Amstel. 1734, 4to.
Ev. Med. quinta. Amst. 1748. 4to.) Dr. Glisson had allowed excitability even
to the blood and humours, and Dr. Gaubius of Leyden afterwards did the same.
(Institutiones Pathologie. Leyden, 1758. 4to. p. 169.)


4.72 MUSCLES.


synonymous with the two words — muscular contractility; but we
must regard the power as the same with that which produces the
motions of the minute vessels of all kinds of minute or gelatinous
animals, and those rapid motions of some animal and vegetable
parts which show no fibres, — we must regard it as a form of ex-
citability. The term irritability should have a more extensive
meaning than excitability: for, while this implies motion, irri-
tability implies the general power of being affected by irritating
causes, whether manifested by direct motion or by other changes
which show either sensation or an operation distinct from what
is seen in inanimate bodies: it is in truth vital affectibility in the
largest sense.f

“The muscles, which are the immediate organs of by far the
greater number of our motions, form the greatest bulk among all
the similar parts.”

« They are distinguished from other similar parts chiefly by two
characteristic features, the one derived from their structure, the
other from their remarkable powers.

«“ Their fleshy structure is formed of moving fibres, suz generis,
and of a very faint red colour, and every muscle may be resolved
into fibrous bands, these into bundles of fibres, and these again
into very fine fleshy fibres and fibrils.

«“ Every muscle possesses a covering of cellular membranes,
which is so interwoven witn its substance as to surround the bands,
the bundles, and even each particular fibre and fibril.

«‘ Every part of the muscles is amply supplied with blood-vessels
and nervous threads. The latter appear to deliquesce into an
invisible pulp, and unite intimately with the muscular fibres: the
former are so interwoven with the fibres that the whole muscle
is red and acquires its own paleness only by being washed.

«« Most muscles terminate in tendons", which are fibrousi parts,
but so different in colour, texture, elasticity, &c., as to be readily
distinguished from muscles: thus disproving the opinion of some,
—that the tendinous fibres originate from the muscular. This
error arose chiefly from the circumstance of the muscles of infants


f In my own use of terms, at note (°) p. 24, 25. supra, irritability and
irritation, should be substituted for excitability and excitement.

® « See Ad. Murray, De Fascia Lata. Upsal. 1777. 4to.”

» « See Fourcroy, Mémoires de [ Académie des Sciences de Parts, 1785, p. 392.;
and 1786, p. 38.”

' « Albinus, Annotat. Academ. 1. iv. tab. v. fig. 2.”


MUSCLES. 4.73


containing a greater number of fleshy fibres, in proportion to the
tendinous, than those of the adult.”

“ They are in general divided into hollow and solid. The first,
not directly subject to the will, belong more to the vital and
natural functions.” They are the heart, one of the coats of the
alimentary and respiratory canals, of the urinary bladder, and
of some blood-vessels ; and are seen in a few other parts. They
shorten and narrow the cavity or canal which they surround.

« Among the second,” which are subject to the will, ‘‘ there is
much variety. For, not to allude to difference of size, there is
great diversity in the disposition of their bands and fasciculi, the
direction of their fibres, the proportion of the fleshy to the
tendinous part, their course, mode of insertion, &c.

«“ The greatest number are long, and their fleshy bellies,” lying
outside solid parts, and passing over one or more joints, “terminate
at each extremity in tendinous chords, inert, and destitute o
contractility, and fixed to different bones, which, while con-
tracting, they move in the manner of levers.” The movable
solids are drawn. towards each other, if of equal mobility and
size; if not, that which is movable or more movable and small is
drawn towards the other.

“The commonly received law—that a muscle during its con-
traction draws the more movable point of insertion to the more
fixed, must be considered, as Winslow justly remarks*, perfectly
relative and subject to various limitations. Thus, for example,
sometimes the one point, and sometimes the other, may be the
more movable, accordingly as the united action of many different
muscles may render the opposite more fixed.”

‘While a very few muscles are destitute of tendons, such as the
latissimus colli, an equally small number are not inserted into
bones,” but into soft solids, as into the lips, palate, tongue,
pharynx, nose, eye, ears, genitals. These approach the hard part
during contraction.

“A property common to all muscles is to become shorter, more
rigid, and generally unequal, and, as it were, angular, during
contraction,” gaining in thickness what they lose in length.
Dr. Tiedemann argues that, in contracting, a muscle acquires
greater density, because it will support or raise a weight which
would tear it after death. This, however, shows only the more


k « Mém, de Acad, des Sc. de Paris, 1720.”


474 MUSCLES.


perfect composition of the part during life than after death. A
muscle, however, may act, without shortening or growing thicker.
If we hold, or act upon, a resisting body without moving it, the
muscle, though in action, does not shorten. Again, a muscle
may be made to shorten without contraction. We can bend
the extremities of a person asleep, and thus his flexors be pas-
sively shortened.

“To attempt, with J.and D. Bernouilli and other mathematical
physicians, to reduce the shortening of muscles to a general
admeasurement, is rendered impossible, by the great difference,
among other causes, between the hollow and solid muscles in
this respect, and between the solid muscles themselves, v. ¢.
between straight muscles (such as the intercostals) and sphinc-
ters,”

Some have peculiar actions, dependent upon figure, situation,
&c., “and, consequently, varying so much as to be referable to no
general laws.

« To cite one instance out of many, that action of certain
muscles is peculiar and anomalous which seldom occurs alone,
put nearly always subsequently to, or simultaneously with, the
action of some of a different order. Such is that of the lum-
bricales, when, during rapid motions of the fingers, they follow
the action of other muscles of the metacarpus and fore-arm; and
of the lateral recti muscles of the eyes, the adducens of either
of which seldom acts unless simultaneously with the abducens of
the other eye.

« And, on the other hand, although the action of the flexors is
generally so much stronger than that of their antagonists — the
extensors, that, when the body is at rest, the arms, fingers, &c,
are a little bent, this‘docs not so much depend upon the strength
of the contraction of the flexors, as upon the voluntary relaxation
of the extensors for our own relief.

“Every muscle has, moreover, a peculiar mechanism!, adapted
to the individual motions for which it is intended.

«« Besides the determinate figure of each, many other kinds of
assistance are afforded to their peculiar motions, v.c. by the
burse mucos@, chiefly found among the muscles of the extremities ;
the annular ligaments by which some are surrounded; the fat in


l«p . 7, 4 '
P. J. Barthez, Nouvelle Mechanique des Mouvemens de 1 Homme et des
Animaur, Carcass. 1798. 4to,’””


MUSCLES. 475


which most are imbedded; the lymphatic vapour around each ;
and, above all, by the conformation of the skeleton, chiefly in
regard to apophyses, condyles, and articulations ; nay, even
whole bones, .¢. the patella, the pisiform of the carpus, and the
sesamoid bones™, are destined solely to facilitate the actions of
certain muscles.

“In this mode is compensated, or, at least, diminished, that
inevitable loss of power which necessarily takes place from the
conformation and stature of the whole system, as, from the acute
angle at which some muscles are inserted, or the proximity of
their insertion to the centre of motion, much of that power is lost
which would have existed, if their insertion had been more remote
or at a more obtuse angle."

«¢ The human body, possessing about 450 voluntary muscles, or
upwards, according to sexual or individual variety, is thus fur-
nished with a double advantage, — with an extreme agility of
motion in particular parts and throughout the whole, and with a
surprising degree of strength and endurance of labour. Both
these are accomplished partly by the perfection of the muscles
that, like the perfection of the bones, takes place at manhood;
and partly by habit and practice, the power of the former of
which in affording strength and agility to the muscles is demon-
strated in rope-dancers, leapers, runners, wrestlers, porters, sa-
vages, and the examples of ancient nations.’ °

When a muscle has ended its contraction, antagonising muscles,
the elasticity or gravity of parts, solid, fluid, or gaseous contents
pushed forwards from the higher portions of the canal, &c. &c.,
are enabled, through its diminished resistance, to elongate its Lhe
mere cessation, however, of its contraction must be supposed to
lengthen a muscle. For if, while under the exertion of a force
drawing it together it is of a given length, this cannot remain the
same when this force is no longer exerted. But any great elong-
ation of it is accomplished by antagonising powers. When the
heart has contracted, its relaxation is said, as we have seen, to be


™ « Fence, of all animals which I have dissected, the mole is supplied with
the most remarkable apparatus of sesamoid bones ; its anterior palmated feet,
with which it digs, have many of these bones, which greatly facilitate the action
of the brachial muscles.”

» «& Gilb. Blane, On Muscular Motion, p. 51.”


° «JT have treated on this point at large, in the Medic, Biblioth, vol. ii.
p. 407.”


476 MUSCLES.


attended with an active enlargement of the organ forcing it
energetically against the hand if placed upon it.

We will now consider the anatomy and physiology of the ultimate
muscular fibre. Mr. Hare affirms that, in the field of a moderately
powerful microscope, a muscular fibre evidently appears made up
of numerous minute tubes, each exhibiting longitudinal striae with
transverse bands; the aveNeee diameter of cach of these ultimate
fibres or tubes being 15 of an inch.P Under contraction, the por-
tions between the transverse bands draw the latter nearer together,
and, swelling out, seem girted by them, so that the whole fibre some-
what resembles a string of eggs. This appearance, Mr. Hare sup-
poses, led Dr. Croon to adopt the idea that the ultimate fibre of
muscle was constituted by a chain of bladders filled with fluid.
In fact, Mr. Bauer thinks he discovers muscular fibres to be chains
of globules4, and Prevost and Dumas declare the same from their
microscopic observations." The muscular tubes are represented
by Mr. Hare as filled with a matter which causes them to appear
solid till it is liquefied by heat: Mascagni describes the muscular
fibre as a small cylinder, filled with glutinous matter Fon-
tana asserts that the primitive muscular fibre is marked by con-
tinual minute crispations and nodosities, and that it pursues a
straight course, but is solid like the tendinous. Meckel, Rudolphi,
and Tiedemann believe the primitive muscular fibre solid. Dr.
Hodgkin found it not to consist of globules, and to be marked
by transverse lines, which he thinks distinguish muscular from all
other fibres. Raspail, like Mr. Hare, corroborates the assertion
of Mascagni. He declares that every muscle, like the adipose
texture and vegetable organs in general, consists of cells inclosed
within each other in an indefinite series ; but that, whereas their cells
approach to a spherical form, those of muscle are cylindrical. The
ultimate cylinders are closely applied to each other in very loose
spirals round an imaginary axis ; and each is full ofa substance not
completely miscible with water; and here and there globules ap-
pear irregularly, in contact with the inner surface. In the bullock,


? Thomas Hare, 4 View of the Structure, Functions, and Disorders of the
Stomach, &c. p. 28. sq. 1821.

% Phil. Trans. 1818. J. F. Meckel, by microscopical observations, fancies
the muscular no less than the neryous fibre, and the substance of the liver, kidney,
spleen, &c., to be globular.

" Annales de Chimie, t. xvili, * Prodromo, p. 97.


MUSCLES. 477


éach cylinder is ‘002 of an inch in diameter, and slightly crimson.*
A bundle of cylinders is enveloped in a membrane ; and such
masses are enveloped in another membrane ; these larger masses
in others; till all have one general outer covering, which is usually
white and hard towards its extremities, and terminates in a white
shining chord called tendon and inserted into periosteum." The
fibres of tendon are said to be really solid, of infinitely smaller
diameter, and disposed ina reticulated manner. Even cellular
membrane is said to consist of reticulated tubular fibres, =4,, of
an inch in diameter on the average, and exhibiting transverse con-
tractions.x Fontana, by means of glasses of moderate powers,
found tendon to be composed of bands, which again are com-
posed of solid spiral cylinders, of uniform size, and pursuing a
tortuous course.’

M.M. Prevost and Dumas assert that the muscular fibres, straight
while at rest, approximate each other at intervals, under con-
traction, so as to acquire a zigzag course (\/\A/\/) and shorten
the distance of their two extreme points ; and thus Dr. Hales re-
marked that, when the abdominal muscles of a frog contracted,
“the scene instantly changed from parallel fibres to series of rhom-
boidal pinnulz, which immediately disappear as soon as the muscle
ceases to act.’4 They ascertained satisfactorily that during con-
traction no increase of volume is acquired. If muscles, while the
fibres are straight, are stretched still more, as continually hap-
pens in the muscular coats of cavities, the subsequent shrinking
to the original dimensions is unattended by the zigzag appear-
ance. Nervous filaments, they also assert, go perpendicularly to
the muscular fibre at the very points where the angles are formed
under the zigzag contraction, and yet not to terminate there or
unite with the muscular fibres, but to return to the same nerve or
anastomose with other nerves. ‘The approximation of the nerv-
ous filaments to each other is thought to draw the muscular
fibres into angles, and thus be the cause of muscular con-
traction. But Raspail objects that it is hard to conceive how


t « The ultimate muscular filament has been estimated at jj, of an inch in
diameter ; their union forms fasciculi. Prochaska says that 200 fasciculi form
a bundle; these are from } to 7, of an inch in diameter.” Dr. Tiedemann,
lc. p. 418. additional notes by Drs. Gully and Hunter Lane.

“ Nouveau Systeme, § 490. sqq.

* Mr. Hare, I. c. p. 36. Y Sur les Poisons, t. ii, p. 280. sq.

* Dr. Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, t. ili. * Hemastatics, p. 59.


478 MUSCLES.


elastic filaments could form lines so sharply angled ; that he him-
self could not distinguish by the microscope which filament be-
longed to nerve and which to muscle; and that, if MM. Prevost
and Dumas did see something like what they represent, their ex-
periment was worth nothing, because, the muscular lamina being in
contact with the object-holder in many points, any tremor caused
mechanically or by galvanism applied to the nervous fibre would
produce sinuous movements which afterwards were supposed
more or less regular and angular. In short, he truly says that
the only rational mode of observation is with a living muscle in ac-
tion; that he has carefully watched the contraction of the muscles
of the feet of gasteropoda, &c. and always found the fibre simply
shorten, its diameter increasing at the time and small swellings
appearing throughout its length.>

Dr. Wollaston © states that muscular contraction is accompanied
by a vibratory sound like that of carriages passing rapidly over
a pavement at a distance ; and infers that it is not continuous but
intermitting, consisting of a number of contractions repeated at
extremely short intervals: and he fancied that such vibratory
alternations might be about twenty or thirty inasecond. He
applied the ball of the thumb to the ear, pressing the end of
the thumb at the same time against the head. As soon as the
thumb is bent so as to press against the head, the noise is heard ;
and I find it far louder if both thumbs are used at once, and still
louder if the jaws are at the same time tightly closed. In regard,
however, to-the intermittence of muscular action, a friend informs
me that the action of the muscles of the eye cannot intermit
even the 2000th part of a second, because, if a luminous point is
moved with rapidity perpendicularly, and the eye horizontally,
the luminous line is not a zigzag, as it would be were there inter-
missions, but perfectly continuous."

The muscles, voluntary and involuntary, of all animals in which
a nervous system has been discovered, contain nerves; for the
will operates by encephalo-spinal nerves on the voluntary muscles,
and the stimulating contents of involuntary muscles do not act,
except by distension, directly upon them, but upon a membrane


ble. § 494 sqq. ¢ Phil. Trans. 1810, p. 2. sqq-

4 Two curious cases are related in Dr. James Johnson’s Med.-Chir. Review
Oct. 1834, of the action of muscles occurring with a cracking noise like that of
snapping joints, and with pain,


MUSCLES. 479


which lines them, as in the case of the heart and blood-vessels, the
alimentary canal, and other hollow muscles, nor does light act
upon the iris but upon the retina, and the influence of emotions,
sudden or continued, on the action of all involuntary muscular
parts, whether large, like the heart and as in the alimentary
canal, or minute, as in the capillary vessels, must be communi-
cated by nerves. Some vivisectors say that a stimulus applied
to the nerves of an involuntary part do not excite it; others
assert the reverse. But any stimulus applied to a nerve belong-
ing toa voluntary muscle, mechanical or pungent, heat or elec-
tricity, excites it instantly to action, and will excite it after
pricking or cutting the fibres themselves has ceased to produce
contraction.¢ Stimulation still further back, of certain parts of the
chorda spinalis or oblongata, or of the brain, has the same effect.
Division of the nerves or spinal chord, great compression, dis-
integration, any thing which prevents continuity of influence
from the brain to the termination of the nerve in the muscle,
destroy the power of the will. The contractility of the
muscle is of course unimpaired; it contracts equally as before,
if a stimulus is applied to it or to the portion of the nerve
connected with it. Yet, some contend that the very power of
contraction depends upon nerves. They adduce the influence of
poisons, applied to the nerves, in destroying the irritability of
muscles to which they are distributed, and declare that, even if
strong poison is applied to the nerves of muscles detached from a
living animal, the muscles cannot afterwards be excited.f But
Fontana discovered that the portion only of the nerve that has
been in contact with alcohol is incapacitated from conveying
stimulus ; so that, if the stimulus is applied to the nerve farther on,
the muscle contracts as at first.¢ Even had not Fontana made
this discovery, the effect could have been ascribed to the trans-
mission only of the effects of the poison along the nerve, and
could, like the effect of mechanical and all other irritation of
the nerves upon muscles, have shown only the connection and
influence between the two. Dr. Whytt discovered that, if an
animal is poisoned by opium, the effects pervade the system much


* Whytt. Physiol. Essays. ed. 2.1761. p. 249. Sensibility.
f Dr. Bostock. Elemen. Syst. of Phys. ed. 3. p. 179. Dr. Tiedemann, cecexlii.
® This was fully confirmed, in regard to other narcotics, by Dr. C. Henry,
Edinb. Med. and Surgical Journal, 1832. No. CX. p. 17.
K K


480 MUSCLES.


more if the brain and spinal chord are entire, than if they are
previously removed: and the inference is clear, that the nerves
more readily transmit the effects of the poison than other parts, and
not that the muscles lose their excitability through the loss of the
nervous influence ; because the destruction of the brain and spinal
chord has not the effect of poison.§ Another fact of the same
kind is the immediate cessation of the action of the heart or of
the intestines by the injection of poison into their cavities, while
its application to their external surface operates slowly upon
them.» Far greater nervous connection must exist between their
inner surface than their outer surface and their muscular fibres,
because these are destined for stimulation by their contents, and
not by matters on the exterior; and thus the effects of poisons
will be more readily transmitted by the inner than the outer
surface, just like the effects of all stimulating causes. Detached
muscles contract under the application of various stimuli of
all kinds, and this looks as if their power of contraction is
their own. When a detached muscle can be excited no longer,
a little rest enables it to become excitable again: and the
alternations may be repeated many times. Nay, if a muscle is
not detached, but merely all its nerves divided so that its life is
preserved, its excitability may be exhausted and recovered for
some days.i The power continues longer after separation in cold
than in warm blooded animals; in voluntary muscles than in the
involuntary; and Dr. Whytt discovered, also, that, when an


& Whytt himself infers that ‘ opium does not only destroy the moving power
of the muscles of animals, by intercepting the influence of the brain and spinal
marrow, but also by unfitting the muscular fibres themselves, or the nervous
power lodged in them, for performing its office.” ‘Tt destroys their powers, by
means of that sympathy which they have through the brain or spinal marrow,
with the nerves to which the opium is immediately applied.” Laperiments made
with Opium on living and dying Animals, First published in Ed. Physical and
Literary Essays. 1755. (t+)

I may remark that he found the nearest part of the nervous system to be the
most affected ; for, when a solution of opium was inserted into the large in-
testines, “ dogs not only lost the power of motion sooner in their hinder legs
than in their fore ones, but also were insensible of any pain in them, and yet
howled strongly when their ears were pinched.” (m.)

h Dr. Munro Secundus, and Dr. Wilson Philip ; confirmed by Dr. C. Henry,
le. Still Whytt found opium to poison the whole system sooner if injected
into the peritonaum than into the stomach or rectum, 1. c. Exp. 21, 22, 23.

' Report of the Fourth Meeting of the British Association. 1835. p. 671. sqq:


MUSCLES. 48]


animal is poisoned by opium, the actions of the involuntary muscles
of the heart and intestines continue after the voluntary muscles
have ceased to contract on the application of the scalpel; the
power continues longer in the muscles of the young than of
the old; of the well fed than of the ill fed; in warmth than im
cold; in atmospheric air and oxygen than in irrespirable gases;
and strong stimuli, chemical agents, or narcotics, applied to
either muscles or their nerves, rapidly annihilate their powers.
Repeated stimulation exhausts a muscle more slowly if its: nerves:
have been divided, because, while the nerves are in connection
with it™, the stimulus affects them also and thus the muscie
indirectly as well as directly. If the power of contraction’ de-
pended on the nerves, the division of the nerves, by cutting off
the supply of power, should hasten exhaustion. Vegetables:
have no nerves, and yet exhibit striking movements. If a
muscle, in a mean state of extension, is divided transversely’
in the living body, the two portions instantly separate; and: Bi-
chat found that they separate just as far if its nerves have been
previously divided, — another fact in harmony with the opinion
of the contractility of muscles being inherent. To ascribe mus-
cular excitability to the nervous system, is but an individual
instance of the ascription of the vital properties of all parts to
the nervous system, — an opinion which I endeavoured to refute
at page 431. sqq. supra.» Still the contraction of voluntary
muscles is not only excited by nerves at the moment of volition,
but preserved constantly to a certain point by the encephalo-
spinal nerves of motion, because, if connection with them is de-
stroyed, or the portion of the encephalon or spinal chord with
which they unite is disorganised or compressed, the antagonist
muscles, as those of the face, overpower them, or the sphincter
of the rectum or bladder is no longer able to retain. ‘Thus: in
hemiplegia the muscles of the mouth half draw their antagonists’


© Of course galvanism to their nerves is equally inoperative. Dr. C, Henry,
lee’ p. 16: '

1 Dr. Tiedemann, 1]. c. ecccxlv.

™ Dr, Wilson Philip, xp. Inquiry, p. 100. :

u Whytt, in opposition to Haller, contended that the susceptibility of excites
ment in museles,— the recognition of stimulus,— depended altogether upon their
nerves ; and that stimuli excite them by producing an unvasy fecling in them or
their nerves. Essay on the Vital and Involuntary Motions of Animals. Edinb.
1751.


Km Y


482 MUSCLES.


towards them: in perfect paraplegia, the sphincters of the rectum
and bladder no longer retain their respective contents. Some
persons, as Cuvier, and since him Dr. Tiedemann, allow excita-
bility to be inherent in muscles, but contend that it is always acted
upon through the medium of nerves. It is, however, a mere
assumption that, if stimulus can be applied to muscular structure,
directly, the presence of nerves is indispensable. Distension acts
directly on the muscular fibres; but, with this exception, the
functions of muscles are excited intermediately, and therefore
through nerves.

The constant tension of muscles is called their tone. After
the retraction of the two portions of a divided muscle, these
will contract further on stimulation, and relax again to the
length they had after retraction. If overstretched, as by a
tumour or other cause, muscles lose much of their forced
length immediately on the removal of the cause, but may not
completely recover for some time ; and such shortening is said
by Prevost and Dumas not to be accompanied by a zigzag di-
rection of their fibres, though this appears in them as soon as
farther contraction is excited by galvanism. If a muscle not
sverstretched is divided transversely in several places before its
life has ceased, each portion necessarily retracts and necessarily
grows harder and heavier. When this is done with fish, it is called
crimping, and the retraction is, as might be expected, heightened
by immersing the portions in cold water. When fish are to be
crimped, they are knocked on the head as soon as caught, that
they may crimp the better. This impairment of their nervous
powers preserves the power of the muscles, which would other-
wise be lost in the struggles of the poor animal: but, if the con-
tractility of muscle depended upon, nervous energy, it should
impair the effects of crimping. This retraction on transverse di-
vision takes place only during life or very soon after death, because
muscles grow rigid when life has ceased. The latter rigidity
is unattended by contraction: it is a mere consolidation, and unfits
the fibres for contraction from any cause. Mr. Mayo says that
the injection of warm water into the arteries of a muscle induces
sudden rigidity.° I presume that, like the coagulation of the
blood or of albumen, it is a merely chemical change. When death
occurs under circumstances which prevent the coagulation of the
blood, the rigidity of the muscles is said to be equally prevented.


© Outlines of Human Physiology, ed, 3. p. 38.


MUSCLES. 483


If a muscle has been much distended, it does not contract
readily at first. This we notice in the case of the urinary bladder:
when the urine has been retained too long it stops, after flowing
for a short time; and flows again when the bladder has a little
recovered itself. Leeuwenhoek believed that over-distension of
the heart might cause sudden death : and he probably was right, for
sometimes nothing is seen in cases of sudden death but extreme
distension of the right half of the heart, and Professor Coleman,
after hanging and drowning animals, found the right auricle and
ventricle turgid with blood, and the auricle insusceptible of irri-
tation; but, on opening one of its veins and allowing blood to
escape, the application of stimulus in a few minutes induced con-
traction of the auricle.P Pressure upon a muscle facilitates its
action. Thus the over-distended bladder, and the uterus after
delivery, contract better if the hand is placed over them; and a
moderate ligature is often employed by those who are about to
make much exertion with particular muscles.

When a muscle is weakened by excessive action, a peculiar
unpleasant sensation is experienced, termed fatigue. The weaker
the system, the sooner is this sensation experienced. General
weakness at the commencement of disease is usually attended
by this sensation of weariness, though, when disease is over and
mere weakness remains, it is commonly not felt till exertion is
made. Distress of mind will bring on this sensation. Whena
set of muscles is much more exercised than usual, they at first
become stiff and painful: but these conditions soon cease, not-
withstanding equal exercise is persevered with.

All muscles increase by use; so that, if a man has spent much
of his life in some mechanical occupation which requires the
action of particular muscles, these are easily distinguished through
their disproportionate magnitude. It is thought that the mus-
cular fibres of the urinary bladder increase by exercise more than
any others; a continued obstruction to the exit of the urine calls
them into such exertion that the inner surface of this organ often
resembles that of a cardiac cavity. The heart also frequently
grows inordinately from obstruction to the exit of its blood. But
this organ, above all other muscular parts, will grow inordinately
from mere morbid disposition. In the heart this hypertrophy
may produce much distress, if any undue excitement occurs;


Lectures on the Blood, by James Wilson, F.R.S. London, 1819.
Kk: Ss


A484 VOLUNTARY AND


whereas, in another muscle, the overgrowth may be a matter of
noimportance. In different persons, different muscles may be better
developed and stronger than others: and some persons have their
general voluntary muscular system remarkably developed. When
this is the case, there is usually a disposition to employ the more
powerful parts freely, and thus exercise farther augments them.
From the most ancient times some men have performed extraordin-
ary feats of strength. Milo of Crete, after killing an ox with his fist,
carried it through the stadium,—a space of 625 feet; and, when the
pillar which supported the roof of his master’s schoo] gave way, he
saved Pythagoras and the scholars from destruction by supporting
the roof himself till they escaped. The Jews had their Sampson ;
and at our shows I have seen a man support a table with many
persons upon it and even carry it some little distance between his
teeth. Muscular strength appears by Dr. Edwards’s experiments
to vary at different periods of the day, and to be much affected by
diet. By means of the dynamometer he found it increase during
the first half of the day, and decrease during the latter; to be in-
stantly increased by a moderate and nutritious meal, except in the
weak, in whom the immediate effect of a meal was depression of
the strength. Mere water, especially warm, and sugar and water,
also instantly diminished the strength. Gelatine, well flavoured
with the skin and odorous parts of meat, gave the greatest
strength. 4

The muscles are usually divided into involuntary and volun-
tary, — those which we have not ordinarily the power of di-
rectly contracting, and those which we have ordinarily the
power of directly contracting. The action of the heart and all
vessels, canals, and cavities, except the outward opening of
some, is involuntary: that of most other muscles, voluntary.
The mind, however, though not its will, powerfully affects in-
voluntary muscles. Under emotion, the action of the heart may
be excited or depressed: any one part may grow turgid and red
or shrink and grow pale: and by thinking, voluntarily, of circum-
stances calculated to excite such emotions, we may voluntarily,
in this indirect manner, affect the action of involuntary parts,
and even without thinking of circumstances” affecting ourselves,
but by only dwelling on the circumstances of others,—as in
reading. Betterton the actor, when playing Hamlet, could cause


* Read in the Academy of Arts and Sciences at Paris, Feb. 11. 1835.


INVOLUNTARY MUSCLES. 485


his face at once to become bloodless... Blumenbach says he has
seen “some persons able, at any time, to produce a spasmodic
horripilation of the skin, by representing some unpleasant object.
to their imagination. Others have had the power of exciting local
sweat in the hands, &c.”* Strong feelings and a strong power of
attention may render many involuntary parts thus indirectly
voluntary.t Whether strong attention explains the power which
some possess over the iris, I do not know." The distribution of
its nerves is sometimes unusual, and this may render it directly
voluntary. Blumenbach says he once found “the action of the
stomach distinctly voluntary in a ruminating man.” Unusual dis-
tribution of nerves may occur any where just as of arteries: and,
if a nerve of voluntary motion should run to a muscle intended
to be involuntary, this would become voluntary.*


* Penny Cyclopedia.

% « See, for instance, T. Bartholin, Act. Hafniens. 1676. vol. tv. p. 191.”

t « See the Rapport des Commissaires churgés par le Roi de VExamen du
Magnttisme Animal, written by J. Sylv. Bailly, a man worthy of a bettér
fate. Paris, 1784. 4to. p. 16.”

« Belingeri informs us that Mascagni found the iris voluntary in Fontana.
Dissertatio ‘nauguralis, P. ii. §. xxi.

* Dr. Cheyne, in his Treatise on Nervous Diseases, p. 307. sq., relates the
following case, which #s often adduced as an instance of voluntary power over
the heart. If it was, this power had not always existed, nor could it be exerted
at once as over voluntary muscles: and probably the mental influence was
indirect.

« Colonel Townshend, a gentleman of excellent natural parts, and of great
honour and integrity, had for many years been afflicted with a nephritic com-
plaint, attended with constant vomitings, which had made his life painful and
iniserable. During the whole time of his illness he had observed the strictest
regimen, living on the softest vegetables and lightest animal foods, drinking
asses’ milk daily, even in the camp ; and for common drink Bristol water,
which, the summer before his death, he had drunk on the spot. But his illness
increasing and his strength decaying, he came from Bristol to Bath in a litter,
in autumn, and lay at the Bell Inn. Dr. Baynard and I were called to him,
and attended him twice a day for about the space of a week, but his vomitings
continuing still incessant and obstinate against all remedies, we despaired of his
recovery. While he was in this condition, he sent for us early one morning ;
we waited on him with Mr. Skrine his apothecary ; we found his senses clear
and his mind calm; his nurse and several servants were about him. He had
made his will and settled his affairs. He told us he had sent for us to give him
some account of an odd sensation he had for some time observed and felt in
himself, which was, that composing himself, he could die or expire when he
pleased, and yet by an effort, or somehow, he could come to life again; which it


KK 4


sh se x


486 VOLUNTARY AND


On the other hand, there is no voluntary muscle that may not
act involuntarily. If the motive to contract a muscle is very


seems he had sometimes tried before he had sent for us. We heard this with
surprise ; but as it was not to be accounted for from now common principles,
we could hardly believe the fact as he related it, much less give any account of
it, unless he should please to make the experiment before us, which we were
unwilling he should do, lest in his weak condition he might carry it too far.
He continued to talk very distinctly and sensibly above a quarter of an hour
about this (to him) surprising sensation, and insisted so much on our seeing the
trial made, that we were at last forced to comply. We all three felt his pulse
first: it was distinct, though small and thready, and his heart had its usual
beating. He composed himself on his back, and lay in a still posture some
time; while I held his right hand, Dr, Baynard laid his hand on his heart, and
Mr. Skrine held a clean looking-glass to his mouth. I found his pulse sink
gradually, till at last I could not feel any by the most exact and nice touch.
Dr. Baynard could not feel the least motion of his heart, nor Mr. Skrine the
least soil of breath on the bright mirror he held to his mouth; then each of us
by turns examined his arm, heart, and breath, but could not by the nicest
scrutiny discover the least symptom of life in him. We reasoned a long time
about this odd appearance as well as we could, and all of us judging it inexpli-
cable and unaccountable ; and finding he still continued in that condition, we
began to conclude that he had indeed carried the experiment too far, and at last
were satisfied he was actually dead, and were just ready to leave him. ‘This
continued about half an hour, by nine o’elock in the morning, in autumn. As
we were going away, we observed some motion about the body, and upon
examination, found his pulse and the motion of his heart gradually returning :
he began to breathe gently, and speak softly: we were all astonished to the last
degree at this unexpected change, and after some further conversation with him
and among ourselves, went away fully satisfied as to all the particulars of this
fact, but confounded and puzzled, and not able to form any rational scheme that
might account for it. He afterwards called for his attorney, added a codicil to
his will, settled legacies on his servants, received the sacrament, and calmly and
composedly expired about five or six o’clock that evening. Next day he was
opened (as he had ordered) : his body was the soundest and best made I had
ever seen ; his lungs were fair, large, and sound; his heart big and strong, and
his intestines sweet and clean; his stomach was of a due proportion, the coats
sound and thick, and the villous membrane quite entire. But when we came to
examine the kidneys, though the left was perfectly sound and of a just size, the
right was about four times as big, distended like a blown bladder, and yielding
as if full of pap; he having often passed a wheyish liquor after his urine, during
his illness. Upon opening this kidney, we found it quite full of a white chalky
matter, like plaster of Paris, and all the fleshy substance dissolved and worn
away, by what I called a nephritic cancer. This had been the source of all his
misery ; and the symptomatic yomitings from the irritation on the consentient
nerves, had quite starved and worn him down. I have narrated the facts, as I


*


INVOLUNTARY MUSCLES. 487


strong, we may not be able to refrain from willing its contraction ;
just, as a very strong motive may involuntarily impel us to will
any mental operation. If you cause strong pain or titillation in a
person, he will be compelled, whatever restraint he may at-
tempt upon himself, to cry out or laugh, and to make an effort
to remove it by motion of some part. We are instinctively and
almost unconsciously led to will suitable motions, and if, as
usually is the case, we have no motive not to yield to the in-
clination, the motion takes place almost without the appearance
of our will. It is thus that we breathe and wink all day. The
respiratory muscles deserve the epithet voluntary as much as any
in the body, for we directly contract themy: we feel an uneasy
sensation in the chest from the retardation which occurs to the
blood, and we inspire to remove it; the uneasiness being re-
moved, our effort ceases, and expiration spontaneously ensues,
The necessity for sighing after reading or listening attentively
arises from our having forgotten to breathe fully,— not having
fully perceived the want of breath while our attention was so oc-
cupied7; and the general coughing and sneezing in church at
a pause in the sermon are owing to the sensations which give rise
‘to those actions having been for a time overpowered throughout
the congregation by other feelings. It is true that respiration
continues while we are asleep, and that the uneasiness is so
great that we are forced to inspire.» But the same is true
of all voluntary muscles.


saw and observed them, deliberately and distinctly, and shall leave to the philo-
sophic reader to make what inferences he thinks fit; the truth of the material
circumstances I will warrant.”

M. Ribes is said to have published a similar case: but I have not been able
to find it.

Y This is the opinion of Haller, and ably defended by him, E/. Physiol. t. iii,
lib. viii. § 18.

* Dr. Darwin, Zoonomia, vol. i

@ Dr. Alison’s Observations on Sympathy in the Edinburgh Med. Chirurg.
Trans. vol. ii.

> Opposite circumstances have an opposite effect. When the French soldiers
drove the Piedmontese on the tops of the Alps between St. Bernard and Cenis,
Parat and Martin say that the mouth and nose were involuntarily closed against
the storm, — that all attempts at inspiration were fruitless, and, if they could not
oppose the blast by turning round or putting the hand to the mouth, they fell
down giddy and died. (Mém, de la Soc, Méd, de Lyons. 1798. )


*


488 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


First as to the continuance of respiration during sleep.
If you irritate any part of a person asleep, an effort of some
kind is made to withdraw from the source of uneasiness,
and people turn in their sleep when uncomfortable ; fowls
perch on one leg, voluntarily contracting their claws be-
fore they go to sleep, and remain thus supported till they
awake, though the bent condition of the claw is much pre-
served by mere mechanism. But men will sleep standing: som-
nambulists unconsciously perform astonishing muscular move-
ments: and, while awake, we continue winking, coughing,
and often continue walking, or performing other voluntary ac-
tions, while our minds are totally absorbed in reflecting and give
no perceptible attention to our corporeal movements ; a person
will play even a rapid piece of masic, familiar to him, while
thinking and perhaps talking of something else, and forgetting
that he is at the instrument, though originally each of the
infinite number of volitions requisite to the performance may have
been slow and laborious: nay, a person may fall asleep after
beginning a very habitual set of actions, and continue them,


© Dr. Whytt confounded mind and life, and, believing that they were an im-
matcrial substance, and matter incapable of vital and mental properties or soul,
ascribed all the functions of animal bodies, human and brute, to a soul
diffused through every part. (Of the Vital and Involuntary Motions of Ani-
mals. 1751. sect. xi. obj. i.) But, notwithstanding this prejudice and hypothesis,
he shows that volition may be exerted without consciousness. “ Many of the
voluntary motions are performed,” he says, “when we are insensible of the
power of the will excited in their production. Thus, while in walking, we either
meditate by ourselves, or converse with others, we move the muscles of our legs
and thighs, without attending to it or knowing what we are doing. ‘We are not
sensible of the eye-lids being kept open by the continued operation of the will ;
but yet, when drowsiness and sleep steal upon us, we find it requires a con-
siderable effort to prevent the falling down of the superior palpebre. The same
thing is known of the muscles which support the head. The most probable
account of our ignorance of these things seems to be this; — namely, that we
not only acquire, through habit, a faculty of performing certain motions with
greater ease than at first, but also, in proportion as this facility is increased, we
become less sensible of any share or concern the mind has in them. Thus a
young player upon the harpsichord, or a dancer, is, at first, solicitous about
every motion of his fingers, or every step he makes, while the proficients or masters
in these arts, perform the very same motions, not only more dexterously, but
almost without any reflection or attention to what they are about. (Ib. obj. iii.)

Mr. Dugald Stewart’s chapter on attention (£lements of the Philosophy of
the Human Mind. 1792. ch. ii.) well deserves perusal, though published forty-
one years after Dr. Whytt’s Essay.


*


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 489


as we have seen in the instance of poor little children, who, when
dead asleep, were observed still to move their fingers as if at


“ In the case of some operations which are very familiar to us, we find our-
selves unable to attend to, or to recollect, the acts of the will by which they were
preceded ; and accordingly, some philosophers of great eminence have called in
question the existence of such volitions; and have represented our habitual
actions as involuntary and mechanical. But surely the circumstance of our
inability to recollect our volitions, does not authorise us to dispute their possi-
bility ; any more than our inability to attend to the process of the mind, in
estimating the distance of an object from the eye, authorises us to affirm that the
perception is instantaneous. Nor does it add any force to the objection to urge,
that there are instances in which we find it difficult, or perhaps impossible, to
check our habitual actions by a contrary volition. For it must be remembered,
that this contrary volition does not remain with us steadily during the whole
operation; but is merely a general intention or resolution, which is banished
from the mind, as soon as the occasion presents itself, with which the habitual
train of our thoughts and volitions is associated.

«‘ It may indeed be said, that these observations only prove the possibility that
our habitual actions may be voluntary. But if this be admitted, nothing more
can well be required; for surely, if these phenomena are clearly explicable
from the known and acknowledged laws of the human mind, it would be un-
philosophical to devise a new principle, on purpose to account for them. The
doctrine, therefore, which I have laid down with respect to the nature of habits,
is by no means founded on hypothesis, as has been objected to me by some of
my friends; but, on the contrary, the charge of hypothesis falls on those who
attempt to explain them, by saying that they are mechanical or automatic; a
doctrine which, if it is at all intelligible, must be understood as implying the
existence of some law of our constitution, which has been hitherto unobserved
by philosophers ; and to which, I believe, it will be difficult to find any thing
analogous in our constitution.”

* I cannot help thinking it more philosophical to suppose, that those actions
which are originally voluntary, always continue so; although, in the case of
operations which are become habitual in consequence of long practice, we may
not be able to recollect every differect volition. Thus, in the case of a performer
on the harpsichord, I apprehend, that there is an act of the will preceding every
motion of every finger, although he may not be able to recollect these volitions
afterwards ; and although he may, during the time of his performance, be em-
ployed in carrying on a separate train of thought. For, it must be remarked
that the most rapid performer can, when he pleases, play so slowly, as to be able
to attend to, and to recollect, every separate act of his will in the various move~
ments of his fingers; and he can gradually accelerate the rate of his execution,
till he is unable to recollect these acts. Now, in this instance, one of two sup>
positions must be made: the one is, that the operations in the two cases are
earried on precisely in the same manner, and differ only in the degree of rapidity ;
and that when this rapidity exceeds a certain rate, the acts of the will are too


490 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


work after the machinery had all stopped. (supra, p. 460.) There
is nothing surprising in this, if we consider the counterpart in
regard to sensation. For that, on the other hand, we may have
sensations and not be aware of them, is shown by persons falling
asleep at church and remaining so during the sermon, but awaking
as soon as the preacher’s voice is silent. The effect of the cessa-
tion of the stimulus shows that the stimulus was all along felt——
These facts are true of all voluntary muscles: and so likewise
are those of the facility of action where there is no habit but an
instinctive impulse to will certain motions. In one sense all
voluntary motions are instinctive: that is as far as men and
brutes know nothing of their muscles, and do not determine upon
contraction of these fibres or those, or of this combination
of muscles or that, or upon the amount of contraction in each re-
spective muscle, but upon such a movement as they choose of a


momentary to leave any impression on the memory. — The other is, that when

the rapidity exeeeds a certain rate, the operation is taken entirely out of our
hands; and is carried on by some unknown power, of the nature of which we

are as ignorant, as of the cause of the circulation of the blood, or of the motion
of the intestines. The last supposition seems to me to be somewhat similar to
that of a man who should maintain, that, although a body projected with a
moderate velocity, is seen to pass through all the intermediate spaces in moving
from one place to another, yet we are not entitled to conclude, that this happens
when the body moves so quickly as to become invisible to the eye. The former
supposition is supported by the analogy of many other facts in our constitution,
Of some of these, I have already taken notice ; and it would be easy to add to
the number. — An expert accountant, for example, can sum up, almost with a
single glance of his eye, a long column of figures. He can tell the sum, with
unerring certainty ; while, at the same time, he is unable to recollect any one of
the figures of which that sum is composed; and yet nobody doubts, that each
of these figures has passed through his mind, or supposes, that when the rapidity
of the process becomes so great that he is unable to recollect the various steps of
it, he obtains the result by a sort of inspiration.”

The rapidity of the volitions can afford no objection, “ A person playing on
harp, dancing, and singing, at the same time, exercises about three hundred
cles at once, (G. Ent, dAnimadv. in Thrustoni diatribam, p. 130.)” In speak-

ing, fifteen hundred letters may be distinctly pronounced in a minute, each
requiring a separate volition. The rapidity of thought is still quicker. Ra-
pidity, like minuteness, is only relative to what we commonly witness. An ani-
mal millions of times smaller than the minutest known microscopic creature
might have as great a complexity of parts as ourselves; movement might be
millions of times swifter than any thing we ever observed.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 491


moveable part. In another sense all voluntary motions are in-
stinctive, because, on the occurrence of certain wishes, of a cer-
tain strength, we perform certain motions: a person who dances,
dances because his wish is at a certain height ; a man who makes
a machine, cuts and arranges its parts through the same cause.
But some sensations, some states, cause us and brutes to
will certain motions without habit or experience; and yet the
occurrence of will is just as clear. The teat in the young
animal’s mouth causes it directly it is born to will suction. The
only difference in this case is one of time: the particular sens-
ation or state is, without habit or circuitous circumstances, at
once followed by the action. To depress the head, when passing .
on the top of a coach under a low arch, is just as instinctive:
and the action of any muscle may be so willed, or any com-
bination of muscles.

Secondly as to our being forced to inspire. If you cause
strong pain or titillation in a person, he will be compelled, what-
ever restraint he may attempt upon himself, to cry out or laugh,
and to make an effort to remove it by motion of some part,
quite as forcibly as he is compelled to remove the uneasiness
in the chest by inspiration; and while history records innu-.
merable examples of persons, whether Christians or heathens, so
resolute as to remain motionless and silent, by the force of their
faith or innocence or their contempt for their persecutors4, in
the midst of fire till they were consumed, and we ourselves
know the resolution of Hindoo widows every day to perish on
the funeral pile of their husbands, we read of suicides so deter-
mined as to have accomplished their purpose by merely holding
their breath, when deprived of access to instruments of de-
struction. Thus, though some have regarded the muscles of


4 See Lord Bacon, De Augmentis Scientiarwm, 1. iv. cap. 1. Among other in-
stances of resolution he mentions that, in his day, a murderer of Burgundy,
“ when beaten with iron rods and torn with red-hot pincers, did not utter a
groan, and, seeing something break and fall accidentally on the head of a by-.
stander, the rascal laughed in the midst of his torments while being burl
though he had just before cried at having his curly hair cut off.”

© < Seryus barbarus, cum vehementi ira concitatus, mortem sibi consciscere
decrevisset, prostratus humi, respirationeque cohibita, longo tempore immobilis
erat; postea verd paululum volutatus, hoe pacto mortuus est,” (Galen, De Nat.


Musc. lib. ii. c. 6.)
A robber named Coma, when taken before the consul Rupilius, is said by


492 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


respiration as of a mixed character, as both voluntary and
involuntary, they appear to me as voluntary as any voluntary
muscles; but equally, though not more, liable to become in-
voluntary. The orbicularis palpebrarum all allow to be a volun-
tary muscle; yet, if a person suddenly moves his finger towards
one of our eyes, even without touching it, we wink involun-
tarily. Nay, without such motives, some voluntary muscles are in
certain circumstances involuntary. We move our ring finger at
pleasure; yet if we bend our little finger, few can refrain from
bending the ring finger. We experience great difficulty “ in
attempting to move the hand and foot of the same side in
different directions, and in all those motions which, although
voluntary and perfectly easy if produced separately, are found
very difficult if attempted together.” Again, “ few voluntary
motions may not be rendered involuntary by the force of habit,
whose influence upon the mind is immense.” Every action of the
system, mental or corporeal, takes place more readily in pro-
portion to its repetition; and therefore certain actions of volun-
tary muscles may at length occur not only with an almost im-
perceptible exciting cause, but in doing an action we may from
habit be unable to perform it except in one way, and actions of


Valerius Maximus to have so destroyed himself. ‘* Let others,” says the his-
torian, ‘sharpen the sword, mix the poison, take the rope, look for precipices,” —
‘¢ nihil horum Coma, sed intra pectus inclusa anima, finem sui reperit.” (Lib. ix.
cap. xii. externa. 1.)

Few can have so much determination ; and, indeed, success can rarely follow
this attempt at suicide, because, as soon as the brain begins to suffer, the effort
must decline, and the effects cease. Still, from general or partial tenuity, of the
vessels of the head, such congestion may readily occur as may occasion rupture ;
and suicide of this kind is therefore by no means impossible. 1 have known the
sinuses rupture under strong muscular exertions.

Dr. Georget mentions that a M. Bourdon made some experiments upon him-
self, from which it appeared that a person may commit this kind of suicide.

la Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux, &c., t. i. p. 387.)

is said that suicide has frequently been committed by turning the tongue
back, and thus excluding the air from the larynx. In Notices of Brazil, in 1828-9,
the Rey. R. Walsh says that the poor wretched slaves often destroy themselves
thus. “ A friend of mine,” he adds, “was passing when a slave was tied up
and flogged; after a few lashes he hung his. head, appearing lifeless, and when
taken down, was actually dead; his tongue was found wedged in the esophagus;

f « Consult Winslow, Mém, del’ Acad: des Stiences de Paris. 1789,”


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 495


voluntary muscles in which we have indulged may b ‘formed
against our wishes in particular circumstances. ‘
Between the portion of the brain that wills and the muscle,
an intermediate portion of the nervous system exists. The will
is not exerted upon the muscles, but upon the motor nerves of
muscles at their extremity in the brain or spinal chord. Now
this extremity or the nerve in any part cf its course may be
stimulated by other causes than the will, and thus the muscles
ordinarily stimulated by the will may be stimulated without it,
—the will may neither voluntarily nor involuntarily have a share
in stimulating the muscles. Thus it is in chorea’, tetanus, and
other spasmodic diseases of the voluntary muscles. Even in
palsy of motion, we often observe spasms, especially in para-
plegia. Now, when a motion is naturally willed in conse-
quence of a sensation in a particular part, a peculiar relation
exists between the nerves of sensation of that part and its nerves
of motion, so that irritation of the former is communicated to the
latter. Thus at page 420. we saw that in 1788 Sir Gilbert
Blane found the hind legs of a decapitated kitten retract if the
paws were touched with a hot wire, and the tail move if so
touched after division of the chord below the last lumbar
vertebra. In cold blooded animals similar observations had
long before been made. Redi in 1687 found in a large tor-
toise, which lived twenty-three days after losing its head, that
the fore and hind feet were forcibly convulsed whenever they
were pricked. Whytt, in 1745, found that, if the toes of both
feet of a decapitated frog are stimulated, the feet are drawn up


& The exciting cause that influences the nervous system beyond the cerebral
part which wills may be opposed, and temporarily with success, by the will ; and on
the other hand the will may aid the exciting cause, So that under chorea persons
ean frequently arrest the motions for a few seconds, or run when they cannot
walk ; and, again, they often seem to feel a pleasure in co-operating to produce
the morbid movements.

5 T mentioned, supra, p. 421., that, above a century and a half ago, Duverney
found a bird would move after losing its brain; Dr. Kaau. in 1745, observed
a frog move all its limbs for half an hour after decapitation, and for a ¢
siderable time after its body was divided in two. A viper, after losing its
head ard bowels, moved towards a heap of stones where it had been accustomed
to hide itself. (Impetum faciens, No. 331.) edi extracted the brain of a
land tortoise through a hole in the skull, and it lived from November to May,
moving and walking about to the last. (Osservaxiont intorno agli animali viventi,
&e, Napoli. 1667. p. 209. sq. Butterflies copulate and lay eggs after decapitation.


4.94, VOLUNTARY MOTION.


to the b: or, if one foot only, that foot only is drawn up.!
He also found that, if the muscles of the leg of a decapitated frog
are irritated, almost all the muscles of the lower extremities move,
provided the spinal chord is entire; but, if the chord is de-
stroyed, the neighbouring muscles remain still, and the irritated
muscle itself is only excited to a tremulous motion.* He also
noticed that, though the muscles of the thighs were contracted
when pricked or cut, neither they nor the neighbouring muscles
were nearly so strongly convulsed as when the toes were wounded,
— the toes having a much more acute sensibility.

Others have since variously illustrated these facts. Dr. Ma-
gendie mentions that, when the posterior roots of the inner
side .of the spinal nerves are irritated, the signs of extreme
pain are accompanied by convulsions of the muscle of that
same side only: Mr. Mayo, that, if the head of a pigeon is
cut off and all the brain removed except the little to whieh
the common motor nerve of the eye is attached, and the
optic nerve divided and its truncated extremity connected with
the brain pinched, the iris instantly contracts: Dr. Macartney,
that, if the head of a pigeon is cut off, nay, if even the eye is
taken out, light suddenly admitted to the retina produces con-
traction of the iris.

These facts have lately given rise to a speculation that a por-
tion of the nervous system exists independent of will, and solely
for involuntary actions of what are usually considered volun-
tary muscles, by means of impressions, not felt, on nerves usually
considered nerves of sensation. A portion of the chorda ob-
longata and of the chorda spinalis is fancied to be separate and
independent of the rest, and this imaginary part is called by its in-
ventor,— Dr. Marshal Hall', excito-motory. This physician has
made experiments fundamentally the same as those of Sir Gil-
bert Blane and his successors. Instead of separating a portion
of the body with its corresponding portion of encephalo-spinal
substance in which the nerves of sensation and motion meet,
he only stupefied an animal. He struck a horse with a pole-
axe over the anterior lobes of the brain. It fell as if thunder-
struck; was convulsed, and then motionless. But it soon
began to breathe, and continued to breathe freely. When


i Observations on Irritability, sect iv. p. 4 k Ibid.
Phil, Trans. 1833. P. ii. ; and Lectures on the Nervous System. 1836,


VOLUNTARY MOTION. _ 495
lacerated or pricked by a pin or nail on any part of the face or
rest of the surface, it was still motionless, and gave no evidence
of impression. But on touching the eyelash with a straw, the eye
forcibly closed; on touching the cornea, the eye rolled outwards ;
and on touching the verge of the anus, the sphincter contracted,
the tail was raised, and the vulva drawn towards the anus. Now
this only shows what is well known, that tickling certain ex-
quisitely sensible parts with a straw induces a stronger im-
pression than rough usage with a nail or pin. A person who
could bear pain without flinching, could not remain still under
tickling of certain parts: and yet it is only certain parts that are
so ticklish. The sensible ends of the fingers or the back of the
hand may be touched with a straw in vain. Dr. M. Hall himself
shows that a strong impression made any where would equally
excite motion. For he goes on to repeat the very experiment of Sir
Gilbert Blane. He divided the spinal chord of a frog below the occi-
put. The animal was still. He pinched, not tickled, a toe with a pair
of forceps. Both hind extremities moved. He pinched again,
and the motions recurred. Now this was not an eyelash, the
cornea, or verge of the anus, but some other part of the surface,
and it might of course have been any sensible part, and the cor-
responding muscles of the part would have acted. If a corre-
spondently strong impression had been made in the horse, mo-
tion would have equally taken place. Surely, when we wink
on the eyelash being touched, we do this by precisely the same
operation as when we withdraw a hand that is struck. Of course,
when the spinal chord is destroyed, or any portion of the ence-
phalon is destroyed in which are the extremities of the nerves of
sensation that convey the impression, or the extremities of the
nerves of motion that convey the stimulus to the muscles, or in
which they meet, as they probably do, no effect from pricking or
tickling, &c. can ensue. Dr. M. Hall considers that the excitor
nerves of the excito-motory system are the ganglionic portion
of the fifth and of each spinal nerve, and the pneumono-gastric ;
the motor nerves of it, the aganglionic portion of the fifth and of
each of the spinal nerves; the fourth, sixth, seventh, and ninth
encephalic, the pneumono-gastric and its pharyngeal and laryn-
geal branches, the spinal accessory, the phrenic, and Sir C. Bell’s
external respiratory.

Now really the whole truth appears to be what is well known,
Le de


496 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


that an impression made upon any nerve of sensation, or, what
is the same thing, upon any part endowed with sensibility, may in-
duce action of any voluntary muscles calculated to remove it, if
disagreeable, or to be useful in some way to the individual, even
though the brain be prevented from perceiving the impression,
— from having a sensation from the impression. The impression
need not be upon nerves running to the part of the encephalo-
spinal organs where the roots lie of the motor nerves excited,
for a sharp pinch of the toe will make a man not merely draw
away his foot, but raise his arms, make a face and halloa into the
bargain, whether he is asleep or awake. Tickling the sentient
twigs of the fifth pair, the eyelid, and cornea, is not requisite to
cause winking ; if by the optic nerve, one not included in Dr. M.
Hall’s excito-motory class, we see a finger suddenly approach
the eye, instinctive, involuntary winking will as certainly occur.
Winking will occur if a strong light is suddenly admitted through
the lids to the retina of a person asleep. The sun’s glare upon
the retina will excite sneezing.™ Not only are sneezing, vomiting,
sobbing, mentioned as acts of this system, but even deglutition,
which is declared always to be of this nature, and always to
require the presence of some stimulus to the sensible nerves of
the pharynx, it being “ impossible to perform the act of swallow-
ing three or four times in rapid succession, without taking some-
thing into the mouth.” Now if deglutition is always an excited
act, —to use this gentleman’s peculiar language,—is always pro-
duced involuntarily by an impression on the pharynx, it must be
as impossible once or twice, without taking something into
the mouth, as three or four times, and slowly as rapidly. I,
however, can swallow with nothing in my mouth in rapid succes-
sion, as readily as with something, and above fifty times: that is
to say, till the muscles are fatigued. If swallowing is instinctive
when any thing reaches the pharynx, so is the act of opening the
mouth when a sugar-plum is offered to the eyes of a baby: and


m Just as Dr. Fletcher considered the respiratory function of Sir C. Bell’s ima-
ginary respiratory system of nerves, as only a part of its functions, its destination
being for sympathy at large, as well as for the sympathetic respiratory move-
ments, Dr. M. Hall considers Sir C. Bell’s respiratory system of nerves as only
a part of his own peculiar excito-mctory system, which presides over respiration
as well as other excito-motory functions. The views of all these gentlemen
appear to me equally confined and erroneous.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 4:97


indeed the various movements of the extremities, head, and
trunk, which naturally are performed on various circumstances
presenting themselves, are just as instinctive; and we have only
to observe the movements of other animals, especially of those
most like ourselves, and above all of monkeys, to see how instinctive
our voluntary actions are, when we are most apt to regard them as
determined by our reflection. We contract all voluntary muscles
either simply because we think proper, as when we cough at the
request of another, or because a strong motive is given, as
when we withdraw the hand from any thing hot; and the latter
is only such an instance as swallowing, coughing, winking, &c.
when food is in the pharynx, phlegm in the larynx, or strong light
in the eyes. Certain sensations excite a certain desire, and this
may be too strong for us to overcome. But according to the
strength of mind will be the resistance to the strength of the desire
induced by the sensation. Some actions result from certain sens-
ations only, and we can neither perform some without these
sensations, nor when these sensations exist find it possible not
to yield to the desire. With some deglutition is not an act of
this kind. But sneezing is with all. I never knew a person able
to sneeze at pleasure. To be induced to will sneezing we must
have a certain sensation. If our attention is drawn to something
else, though the irritating cause act, we do not feel the sensation,
and do not sneeze. If the sensation is felt forcibly, the impulse
may be too strong for us to resist, and sneezing will be involun-
tary: and we can bring ourselves to sneeze by attending closely
to the sensation, and by increasing it. I have often amused my-
self by looking more or less at the sun, or thinking more or less
of tickling felt at the moment in the nostrils, and so increasing
and lessening the inclination to sneeze. Without the sensation,
and a certain amount of it, the sneezing no more than venereal
convulsion of the ejaculatores takes place. At the same time,
the facts discovered by Sir Gilbert Blane and others show a
connection between motion and impression independent of the
brain. But this is probably intended to assist the will in exciting
motions on the occurrence of impressions on individual parts ; and
the impression may be so strong that the will may be compelled
to determine the motion, and this compulsion will be according
to the strength of the impression and the weakness of opposing
motives and of the resolution to resist the inclination, Nay, these
Bet Z


498 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


facts show that motion will occur when the brain is removed
and there can be no sensation. Yet when the brain exists and
in healthy force, that the will does co-operate with this local
excitement of nerves of voluntary motion by those of sensation,
when we might not be disposed to believe it, appears from the
curious facts mentioned at pages 486-491. showing that sens-
ations may occur, and the will may be exercised, almost uncen-
sciously. While the brain exists and the system is in health,
these motions do not occur without will, or without sensation
should the will be overpowered.

Involuntary muscles have generally a faint red colour,
tolerable firmness, fibres small and rather interwoven together,
blood-vessels and nerves comparatively numerous and small, and
seldom a tendon: while voluntary muscles have generally a deep
colour, comparatively soft consistence, their apparent fibres large
and generally parallel, comparatively few and large blood-vessels
and nerves, and commonly a tendon."

Involuntary muscles are said not to contract suddenly. on
division, and to perform not one sudden but several contractions,
when stimulated; whereas voluntary muscles, when divided or
stimulated, contract suddenly.

Involuntary muscles are said to have more nerves propor-
tionately than the voluntary.

Like all other parts, muscles require a supply of arterial blood ;
and this is proportionate not only to the bulk of a muscle, but to
the force and duration of its action. If venous blood is sent to
the brain, we have seen that death ensues, and the function of
any part is arrested by forcing venous blood into its arteries°:
this not only not supplying the place of arterial blood, but acting
as a poison. Muscles, however, retain their excitability after
their supply of arterial blood is cut off, as when they are se-
parated from the body. “ In the Stenomian P experiment, para-
lysis of the hind legs commonly follows the application of a
ligature upon the abdominal aorta.” But this does not show
the excitability of the muscles to be impaired ; they would doubt-
less contract immediately after the experiment, upon the appli-


. Dr. Fletcher, 1. c. P. 1. p. 109.
° Bichat, Recherches Physiologiques.
P « Steno. Elementar. Myologie Spec. Florent. 1667. 4to. p. 86.”


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 499


cation of a stimulus, as readily as they do after apoplexy, and
after removal of the brain or division of their nerves. In torpid
brutes, after division of the nerves and removal of the brain,
cold and warmth destroy and restore the excitability of mus-
cles, as usual. The ligatures act immediately by depriving the
nerves of the power of stimulating them; for a constant supply
of arterial blood is necessary to the functions of the nervous
system4, and the ligature of the abdominal aorta, repeated by
Courten and Haller", cuts off this from the lower part of the
spinal chord and what originate from it,—the nerves of the
hind legs.’ Another source of loss of motion must ultimately
arise, —the loss of excitability and vitality from the want of cir-
culation in the muscle.

In regard to its composition, muscle is said to be essentially
fibrine, but to contain also albumen, gelatine, lactic acid, fat,
salts, &c. and a substance termed osmazome, upon which
the peculiar taste and smell of soup depends, and which is a
yellowish brown substance, soluble in water and in alcohol hot or
cold, and not forming a jelly when concentrated.

Raspail properly points out that muscle has thus been analysed
on the large scale, with its blood-vessels, lymphatics, nerves, and
fatty cellular membrane; but that the analysis should have been
limited to the muscular cylinder. Gelatine is produced from
cellular texture, skin, tendons, ligaments, cartilages, and bones
by boiling only: osmazome by boiling from muscle, serum, and
mushrooms, and, according to him, is only an impure compound. of
albumen and acetic acid: lactic acid he declares to be merely
acetic acid and albumen: and leucine, a white matter obtained
from muscle by Braconnot through the means of sulphuric acid,
to be only a mixture of oil, and even albumen rendered soluble
by an acid, with sulphite of ammonia. By repeatedly boiling
muscle, and holding it in the air between each boiling, Berthollet
found it at last acquire the smell afd taste of old cheese. The


2 Le Gallois, Sur le Principe de la Vie.

r « W. Courten, Phil. Trans. No. 335. p. 500.” 1678.

“ Haller, Comment. Soc. Sc. Gotting. t. iv. p. 293.’ 1754.

* Sir Astley Cooper has just published the result of obstructing the vertebral
arteries which supply those parts of the spinal chord from which the nerves
chiefly concerned in respiration arise. Dyspncea instantly ensued. (Guy’s
Hospital Reports, No. iii.)


oO


Li 2


500 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


same are perceptible in dried anatomical preparations ; and Ras-
pail by repeated boiling effected them in fecula, converting it into
caseic acid. If fresh muscle is exposed for some time to water,
or kept in moist earth, the fibrine disappears, and a white fatty
matter remains called adipocire : but this is usually ascribed to a
change of the fat in the muscle. Muscle may perhaps be changed
during life into fat, for we possess in University College diseased
muscles, in which each fibre is replaced by a string of fat. Fi-
brine abounds most in the muscles of the old.


Besides the vital movements which probably occur in the vessels and cellular
texture of plants, and those which occur slowly in the stalks and tendrils of
annuals which cling, and in leaves, we observe the flowers and leaves of many
plants stand up open in the day and fall or close at night. On the approach
of a storm, the leaves of most plants with delicate stamina become erect, so that
white flowered meadow trefoil is a barometer to the Swedes. Artificial light will
make the flowers and leaves of some plants expand at night, and removal to a
dark place in the day time make them droop ; while the approach of hot iron to
their upper surface will make some leaves erect. Cold and narcotics lessen or
destroy, while all stimuli augment, these movements, which are more vigorous
in the young than in the old. Even mechanical irritation, perhaps a mere touch,
will cause motions in the leaves of mimose ; and the motion will spread from
the one irritated to other leaves successively, and the petiole, and at last the
foot-stalk itself, descends. The lobes of the leaves of the dionzea muscipula have
stiff hairs on their edge, and close instantly upon a hapless insect which lights upon
them ; and, as each lobe of the leaf has three thorns, the poor thing is not only
imprisoned but impaled on the spot: and, what is still more cruel and corresponds
in design with the craftiness of animals, as that does with their destructiveness,
the leaf is supplied with glands which secrete sugar and thus tempt the instinct
of the poor thing. The small lateral leaves of the hedysarum gyrans and cus-
pidatum are in incessant motion. Some flowers contract on mechanical irri-
tation. The stamina and pistils of flowers, but especially the stamina, perform
many varieties of motion, and also obey external stimuli, and are influenced by
poisons. *

The voluntary motions are the distinguishing characteristics of the animal
from the vegetable kingdom. For no plant has been discovered procuring for
itself food by means of voluntary motion; nor any animal incapable of loco-
motion, or at least of procuring sustenance by the voluntary motion of individual
members.

Muscles exist in animals of all classes, from the mammifera to the radiaria.


* Consult Dr. Tiedemann, |. c, cccelxxiii. sqq.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 501


They have been discovered in agreat number of entozoa, yen in the actinix,
some meduse, and other zoophyta, muscular fasciculi, interwoven with the
external skin, have been perceived ; and Professor Ehrenberg has detected them
in the infusoria.* Their fibres are not always red, but may be white, or
yellowish.

Minute and numerous hair-like processes, called cilia, are observed on the ex-
ternal surface of batrachian larvae, of mollusca, annelida, echinodermata, actiniz,
medusz, polypi, and infusoria; on the surface of the air passages of man and
other mammalia, birds and reptiles, as well as on the external gills of batrachian
larvze, and on the gills of mollusca and annelida; in other annelida, and in
echinodermata and actinie, on the membrane of the external surface of the
viscera and its parietal portion to which water has access ; on the surface of the
mouth and gullet of reptiles, and more or less on the whole of the rest of the
alimentary canal of mollusea, actiniz, annelida, echinodermata, and polypi; in
the pores and canals of sponges ; on the mucous membrane of the Fallopian tubes,
uterus and vagina of mammalia and fish, as well as on the organ of smel}l in the
latter, and the oviduct of birds and reptiles; on the surface of the embryo of
batrachia, mollusca, actiniz, polypi, and sponges. ‘The longest cilia hitherto
measured have proved ‘005 of an inch, the smallest ‘000075 of an inch. The
motion of each cilium is commonly of a fanning character, though sometimes it
is rotatory, or, as the point revolves the most extensively, infundibuli-form ; and
separation of the part, and even death, does not arrest it for a few hours in
mammalia and birds, nor for upwards of a fortnight in the tortoise and river
mussel, — differences corresponding with the varied duration of muscular con-
tractility in the same animals. The purpose of this vibration is to carry the
animal through the fluid in which it lives, or to drive fluids along its surfaces.
For a full account of the cilia, see a paper by my no less excellent than able
colleague Dr. Sharpey, in Dr. Todd’s Cyclopedia of Anatomy and Physiology
Very recently Purkinje has discovered them on the linings of the cerebral cavi-
ties of the foctuses of some mammalia. Miiller’s Archiv fiir Anatomie, Physio-
logie, &e. No. 1. 1836. p. 291. sq.

Sometimes, as in crustacea and insects, they are situated in hollow, calcareous
or horny parts; sometimes in earthy shells, as in bivalve and multivalve mol-
lusca.

A writer says that he “repeatedly placed a common dorr,” the occupation
of which beetle is to heave up the earth, “ under a weight equal to 4796 grains,
319 times its own weight,” the animal being but 15 grains, and the creature
‘heaved it up and withdrew ; and the same pressure, being placed on its leg,
was immediately disengaged by the power of the other.” (Journal of a Naturalist,
p- 305.)

Muscular power is no where more displayed than in some fish. ‘ I have
seen,” says Sir Gilbert Blane, ‘the sword of a swordfish sticking in a plank


* See Dr. Gardiner’s account of Professor Ehrenberg’s discoveries in the
Edin. New Phil. Journ. 1831.
LL 4


502 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


which it had penetrated from side to side; and when it is considered that the
animal was then moving through a medium even a thousand times more dense
than that through which a bird cleaves its course at different heights of the
atmosphere, and that this was performed in the same direction with the ship,
what a conception do we form of this display of muscular power !” (On Mus-
cular Motion. Select Dissertations, p. 281.) Muscular strength is proportion-
ally much greater in smaller animals. “‘ A flea can draw from seventy to eighty
times its own weight, whereas a horse cannot draw with ease more than three
times its own weight.” (1. c. Haller, El. Physiol. L. ix. S. iii.)

A flea weighs less than a grain, and will clear an inch and a half at a leap ;
and Americans have calculated that if a man, weighing about 150 pounds, could
leap in proportion, he would be able to spring 12,800 miles, and so jump with
ease from New York to Cochin China. '

In some animals of very slow motion, as the tardipedes, the chief artery of
the extremities is found split into many parallel trunks, instead of remain -
ing as one and branching forth. (Sir Anthony Carlisle, Phil. Trans. 1810.)
In the fore leg of the lemur tardigradus, sixty brachial arteries exist. The con-
nection between this circumstance and slow motion is unknown.


CHAP, XAT.
VOICE AND SPEECH.


AN important operation of muscular motion is in producing
sounds by means of those parts through which the air passes in
respiration.

The vocal mechanism may be considered as consisting of lungs,
or bellows, capable of transmitting, by means of the connecting
windpipe, or trachea, a current of air passing through an appa-
ratus called the larynx, which is placed on the upper part of the
windpipe. This apparatus, though of very small dimensions, is
capable of producing sounds in great variation of pitch, quality,
and intensity, which are afterwards converted into the articu-
lations of speech by passing through a cavity consisting of the
pharynx, mouth, and nose.

The larynx is the organ of voice. It consists of several carti-
lages united together by ligaments and articulations, and supplied
with a variety of muscles, by which they may be moved together
or separately, according to the modifications of the voice.


KE m CH, the thyroid cartilage ;

TH, its upper horn ;

C, its lower horn, articulated to the cri-
coid ;

An BC, the cricoid cartilage ;

A K, the crico-thyroideus muscle.


504 VOICE AND SPEECH.


Above the pile of cartilaginous rings which compose the wind-
pipe is placed the cricoid cartilage ; the thyroid cartilage embraces
the cricoid, and is articulated to its sides so that its lower horn
turns round on a point as a fulcrum. Two small cartilages
called the arytenoids are articulated to the upper external
edge of the cricoid, and the vocal ligaments are stretched from
the thyroid to the arytenoids. The aperture between the edges


Bird’s-eye view of the larynx from above.


G EH, thyroid cartilage, embracing
the ring of the cricoid ru X w, and
capable of turning on the axis # 2,
which passes through the lower
horns C, seen in the preceeding
figure ;

N F, N F, the arytenoid cartilages ;

T V, T V, the vocal ligaments.

From N to X run the right lateral
crico-arytenoid muscle, the left
having been removed.


of the vocal ligaments is called the glottis; and in all the theo-
ries which have been advanced it has been admitted that the
vocal sound is produced by the breath passing through this
aperture, though different explanations have been offered of the
way in which the voice is produced. Ferrein compared the vocal
ligaments to violin strings, and the current of air which puts
them in motion toa violin bow; the different sounds he attri-
buted to various tensions of the ligaments. Dodart found an
analogy between the glottis and the embouchure of a flute ; the
pitch of the sound he supposed to depend on the size of the
aperture. Biot thought the way in which the sound of the voice
was produced more analogous to a reed, and particularly to that
kind of reed which has but lately been introduced into a variety
of musical instruments. Savart has lately endeavoured to prove
that the sounds of the voice are produced in the same manner
as in a lark-whistle, and that the pitch depends on altering the
tension of the elastic sides of the small conical tube formed by
the part of the larynx immediately before this aperture.

There can be no doubt as to the way in which the sonorous
vibrations are produced in the larynx. If a piece of silk riband,


VOICE AND SPEECH. 505


or a strip of paper, parchment, or any other flexible substance,
be stretched between the fingers or otherwise, and a current of
air either from the mouth or a bellows be directed against one
of its edges, a clear musical sound will be produced, varying in
pitch according to the tension given it; and, if a riband of thin
Indian rubber be employed, the sound will very much resemble
that of the voice, and be capable of an extensive range by varying
the tension, The itinerant exhibiters of Punch employ a silk
riband stretched between two arched pieces of tin, and, placing
this between the tongue and the palate, they without sounding the
voice pronounce all the articulations of speech by whispering, and
imitate the various inflexions of the voice by pressing more or
less on the thin sides, thus increasing or diminishing the tension of
the riband. Dr. Darwin was the first who appears to have re-
cognised the resemblance of this instrument to the ligaments of
the glottis.

The vibrations of an elastic ligament set in motion by the air
being thus sufficient to account for the production of the voice,
we have only to examine the particular disposition of these
ligaments in the larynx, and the precise way in which the air acts
upon them. Each vocal ligament, stretched between the aryte-
noid and the thyroid, presents a sharp edge turned upwards and
inwards. Mr. Willis of Cambridge® has shown that, if a current
of air be made to pass between two stretched surfaces, they will
vibrate only when their free edges are parallel ;—if they be turned
either outwards or inwards, the air will pass without producing
any sound. He hence infers that a certain position of the edges
of the ligaments is necessary for the air issuing from the lungs to
cause them to sound, and this vocalising position is determined
by the twisting motion of the arytenoid cartilages.

“ That every degree of motion in the glottis is directed by the
numerous muscles of the larynx is proved by the beautiful experi-
ment of tying or dividing the recurrent nerves, or the pneumono-
gastric >, and thus weakening or destroying the voice of animals,”


@ Of the Mechanism of the Larynx. Camb. Phil. Trans. 1832.

b « Respecting this celebrated experiment, anciently made by Galen, consult
among others W. Courten, Philos. Trans. No. 335.

Morgagni, Lp. Anatom. xii. No. 20. P. P. Molinelli, Comment. Institut,
Bonon. t. iil.

J. Haighton, Memoirs of the Medical Society of London, t. iii.”


506 VOICE AND SPEECH.


But for the operation of the nerves I refer to my former observ-
ations on the pneumono-gastric nerve at page 433.

« Man and singing-birds have the power of whistling. In the
latter, it is accomplished by a larynx placed at each extremity of
the windpipe and divided into two portions. The former, though
possessing a single and undivided larynx, has probably learned to
imitate birds by the coarctation of his lips,” which, however, serves
only as an embouchure to the column of air contained within the
mouth and larynx. ‘The varieties of intonation entirely depend on
the alterations of the tongue and on the corresponding motions of
the larynx. For the higher sounds the tongue is brought for-
wards and the larynx raised, and for the lower sounds the tongue
recedes and the larynx is depressed.

“ Singing, which is compounded of speech and a musical
modulation of the voice, I conceive to be peculiar to man and
the chief prerogative of his vocal organs. The power of whistling
is innate in birds; many of them may easily be taught to pro-
nounce words, and instances have been known of this even in
dogs. But it is recorded that genuine singing has once or twice
only, and then indeed but indifferently and with the utmost
difficulty, been taught to parrots; while, on the other hand,
scarcely a barbarous nation exists in which singing is not
common.‘

“ Speech is a peculiar modification of the voice, adjusted to the
formation of the sounds of letters by the expiration of air through
the mouth or nostrils, and in a great measure by the assistance
of the tongue, applied and struck against the neighbouring parts,
the palate and front teeth in particular, and by the diversified
action of the lips.°


© « The larynx, even among the most savage people, is capable of imitating
the sounds of brutes. Consult, v.c. Nic. Witsen, Noord en Oost — Tartarye,
ed. 2. Amst. 1705. vol. i. p. 165., respecting the inhabitants of New Guinea
of the southern hemisphere, called Papus. And J. Adair, History of the dme-
rican Indians, p. 309., respecting the Choktah tribe of North America.”

« «] have in my hands the testimony of most respectable travellers, in regard,
for instance, to the inhabitants of Ethiopia, Greenland, Canada, California,
Kamtschatka, &c., and therefore wonder at the assertion of Rousseau, — that
singing is not natural to man. Dictionn. de Musique, t. i. p. 170. Geneva,
1781. 12mo.”

© « See Rich. Payne Knight, dnalytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet. Lond.
17OL. 4tor pcs.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 507


“ The difference between voice and speech is evident. The
former is produced in the larynx; the latter by the peculiar
mechanism of the other organs above described.

“Voice is common to both brutes and man, even immediately
after birth, nor is it absent in those unfortunate infants who are
born deaf. But speech follows only the culture and employment
of reason, and is consequently, like it, the privilege of man in
distinction to the rest of animal nature. For brutes, natural in-
stinectis sufficientf: but man, destitute of this and other means of


I am indebted to the powerful Dr. Conyers Middleton for the knowledge of
two cases of distinct articulation with at least but little tongue. (dn Enquiry into
the Miraculous Powers, §c. Miscellaneous Works, vol.i. p.148. 4to.) In his
exposure of the pious deceptions of weak and wicked Christians during the first
centuries of the Christian era, he notices a pretty tale of an Arian prince cutting
out the tongues of some of the orthodox party and these being as able to talk as
before; nay one (0 hominum impudentia !), who had been dumb from his birth,
gained the faculty of speech by losing his tongue. Granting the fact, and even
that the tongues were completely extirpated, he refers, for the purpose of proving
there was no miracle in the case, to two relations of similar instances by medical
men. (Jussieu, On Speech without a Tongue. Mém. de l Acad. des Sciences,
1718. p. 6.) Professor John Thomson found the speech little impaired after
bullets had carried away more or less of the tongue. (Report of Observations
made in the British Hospitals in Belgium, after the Battle of Waterloo; with some
Remarks on Amputation.) Louis, Richter, Huxham, Bartholin, and Tulpius
mention similar cases. An instance of good articulation after the loss of the
apex and body of the tongue quite down to the os hycides occurred in this
country, and was seen by the Royal Society. (Account of a Woman who spoke
fluently without a Vestige of Tongue. Phil. Trans. 1742. p. 143. Dr. Parson’s
Account of Margaret Cutting, who had lost her Tongue. Phil. Trans. 1747.
p- 621.

f Mr. Herbert, in a note to White’s Natwral History of Selborne, p. 227.
says he saw Col. O’Kelly’s green parrot, about 1799, which sang, perfectly,
about fifty different tunes, solemn psalms, and humorous or-_low ballads, arti-
culating every word as distinctly as a man, without a single mistake, beating
time with its foot, turning round upon the perch, and marking the time as it
turned; if a person sang part of a song, it would take it up where he left off;
and, when moulting and unwilling to sing, turned its back and said, “ Poll’s
sick.” The dog to which Blumenbach alludes was seen and heard by Leibnitz
(Op. vol. ii. p. 180. ii.), who declares it pronounced all the letters of the
alphabet except m, n, x, and thirty German words; was three years old when
it went to school, and required some years for finishing its education, Locke,
however, goes farther than Leibnitz, for he relates a story in his Essay on Human


508 VOICE AND SPEECH.


supporting his existence independently, enjoys the prerogative
of reason and language; and following, by their means, his
social destination, is enabled to form, as it were, and manifest
his ideas, and to communicate his wants to others, by the organs
of speech.”

The elements of which all the spoken languages of mankind
are composed consist of the modifications given sometimes to
the breath, and at other times to the voice, during their passage
through the cavity of the mouth ; these modifications are prin-
cipally effected by the altered positions of the lips and tongue
with respect to the fixed parts of the containing cavity.

The classification of these articulations into vowels and con-
sonants has been generally recognised.

The vowels are formed by the voice, modified, but not inter-
rupted, by the varied positions of the tongue and lips. Their
differences depend on the various proportions between the aper-
ture of the lips and the internal cavity of the mouth, alterable by
the different elevations of the tongue. The vowel aw (as pro-
nounced long in all, and short in got) is formed by augmenting
the internal cavity by the greatest possible depression of the
dorsum of the tongue, and, at the same time, enlarging the se-
paration of the lips. Departing from this sound there are two
series. In one the external aperture remains open, and the
internal cavity gradually diminishes by the successive alter-
ations of the tongue; in the other the positions of the tongue
are successively the same as in the first series, but the aperture
of the lips is diminished. The approximation of the lips produces
amore sensible effect as the inner cavity is more enlarged ; hence
two modifications of the first sounds of the second series are
easily recognised, whilst only one variety of the others is readily
appreciable, as will be shown in the following tables Each of
these vowels may be long or short, according to the duration of
its sound in a syllable.


Understanding, (book ii. p. 27.) on the authority of Prince Maurice, and believes
it too, of an old parrot that held a rational conversation.

® For the more open sounds, the jaws are generally more separated ; but this
is not indispensable.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 509


TABLE OF VOWELS,


First Serres. — The lips || Second Series. — The lips Third Series. — The


fully open. partially open. lips nearly closed.
As pronounced As pronounced As pronounced
Long, in |Short, Long, in | Short Long, | Short,
in in in
1. aw | caught, fall | folly || 6.0 | coat 11. 00} cool full
2. ah | father, car | dull 7.0 | court
3. ae | nae(Scotch) | man || 8. ew| bonheur (Fr.)
4.a | fair® met 9. ew | affreux (Fr.)
5.e | feet, the fit 10. Expressed in


German by ii,
in Danishand
Swedish by 2,
in Dutch and
French by w.


‘pasn JON,


The above table exhibits all the most usually pronounced vowel
sounds, but practised ears might distinguish others intermediate
in each series. When these vowels are sounded, the soft palate
is raised so as to prevent the voice from issuing through the nasal
channels; when, on the contrary, the soft palate is depressed,
the partial escape of the breath through the nostrils modifies all
the preceding sounds in a very evident manner. To distinguish
these two modes of articulating the vowel sounds, we may adopt
Dr. Darwin’s terms, orisonant and narisonant vowels.

Consonants may be divided into continuous (sometimes called
liquids or semi-vowels) and explosive. For the latter, the breath
or voice is stopped in its passage through the mouth; for the
former, it is allowed a free passage, though the apertures are
more narrowed than for the vowels.

But the most comprehensive and important division of these
articulations is into aspirates and sonants; the modifications of
the breath being meant by the former term, and those of the voice
by the latter. In ordinary speaking these are mingled together to
form the elementary syllables of language. The aspirates, or
sounds indicated by the characters p, f, sh, s, th (in thing), t,
k, ll (Welsh), differ from the sonants, or those represented by


h This vowel is much used by the Irish in pronouncing such syllables as bate
ait, &c ., for our English words beat, faith, &c.


510 VOICE AND SPEECH,


b, v, z (in azure, ) 2 (in puzzle), th, (in the), d, g (in gay), J, only
by the latter being accompanied with the vocal sound.

Every sonant has its corresponding aspirate, though many of
the latter are unknown to the English language ; such are the
aspirates corresponding to the sonants 7, m, n, ng (in song), &c.

When forming the component parts of syllables, the aspirates,
as well as the sonants, are always articulated with sonant vowels.
An aspirate vowel, followed by its vocal enunciation, is always
represented by the character h, but it is never pronounced se-
parately, except in whispering.

The consonants, like the vowels, are divided into orisonant and
narisonant. The only narisonant consonants in our language, are
‘those corresponding to the orisonant explosives 4, d, and g (in
gay), — Viz. m, n, and ng (in song). By this mode of pronun-
ciation the sounds are rendered continuous.


TABLE OF CONSONANTS.


Continuous. Explosive. |
Aspirates. | Sonants. Aspirates. | Orisonants.|! Narisonants.
It" ek v 10. p b m
2. = y 1 by be t d n
Be sh Reo) 12. k g ng
in asure. in gold. in song.
4. Ss 8
in zany. |
5s th th
in think in the
6. | (not used) r | ——
ee l |
8. — l
in fille ( Fr.)
9. ch g /
in loch in sagen
(Scotch) | (German) |
nach (Ger. ) | gemis (Sp. ) |
|


This table shows that, for all the consonants employed in the
English language, only ten positions of the mouth are required,
the modifications being effected by other means. Among the
modifications not already described, may be particularised the
reduplication of the 10th, 11th, and 12th sounds; the first occa-
sioned by the vibratory motion of the lips, the others by that of


the tongue.


VOICE AND SPEECH. $11


Observations. Sound, 1.—The lower lip presses on the upper
teeth, but allows the air to escape between them; a similar sound
is produced by allowing the breath to pass through the lips when
nearly closed. 2, 3, 4, 5.—These sounds may be considered as
the continuation of the first series of vowel sounds ; for, by placing
the mouth in the position for e (5.), and continuing to elevate the
back part of the tongue, and, at the same time, to curl its tip,
these sounds will be successively produced. 6,7, 8.—These sounds
differ from the preceding four, inasmuch as that the back part
of the tongue does not approximate tothe palate ; the mouth being
placed for the second vowel, the front of the tongue is elevated
so as to touch the palate just above the teeth; for the x, the
point is drawn back, so as to allow the air to escape; and for the
l, the point is firmly pressed against the palate, and the breath
escapes by the two sides; for the Z (in fille), the air escapes with
more difficulty. 9.— These are used in the Gaelic and German,
but not in English, 10, 11, 12.—These sounds are produced by
the forcible escape of the breath, or voice, after a complete
obstruction by the lips or tongue. The obstruction by the lips
gives p, or b; that by the front of the tongue above the upper
teeth, ¢, ord; and that by the back of the tongue against the
palate, t, or g; these different articulations may therefore be
distinguished as Labial, Dental, and Palatal. When the sound
escapes through the nostrils it becomes continuous; the m, n, and
ng are therefore not explosives. ’

The alphabetic characters, invented as visual and permanent
representations of the articulations of speech, are very inadequate
to effect the purpose intended. In the English language there
are but five characters to indicate all the varieties of the vowels,
Viz. a, €, 2, 0, u. Of these, one only is pronounced, when uncom-
bined, as a pure vowel; this is e, —the 5th sound in the table
of vowels: the other four are diphthongs or combinations of two
vowels; a is the 4th and 5th; 7 is the 3d and 5th; o is the 6th
and 11th; and wis the 5th and 11th. When constituting parts
of syllables, the same character represents many different vowel
sounds.

The consonantal characters are not quite so arbitrary, though
among these there are some simple sounds expressed by two let-
ters, and others which have no character to denote them; and on
the other hand there are several redundant letters representing

MM


512 VOICE AND SPEECH.


two simple sounds: f, », 7, J, p, t, k, b, d, m, and n, are generally
constant in their signification. The simple sounds represented by
two characters are sh, th (in think), th (in the), and ng (in song). The
single characters representing more than one sound are s (in sea,
his, sure, and vision); 2 (in zany and azure); g (in gay and George).
The redundant letters are, c (having the sound either of s or /);
q (k followed by the eleventh vowel); 7 (compounded of d and
the second pronunciation of the z,—the same as the g in George);
and a (standing for 4s, or z). Y, as generally pronounced, and
w, are not consonants ; the first represents the 5th, and the second
the 11th vowel of the table, when immediately succeeded by
another vowel.

The consonants will be best compared by articulating them all,
uniformly preceded or followed by the same vowel; as fe, she, se,
the, pe, te, ke, &c. or ef, esh, es, eth, ep, et, ek, &c.

It is by no means improbable that the progress of modern art
may present us at some future time with mechanical substitutes
for orators and preachers. For, putting aside the magic heads of
Albert the Great and Roger Bacon, Kratzenstein actually con-
structed an instrument to produce the vowels!, and De Kempelin
has published a full account of his celebrated speaking machine
which perfectly imitated the human voice.k The celebrated
French mechanician, the Abbé Mical, also made two heads of
brass which pronounced very distinctly entire phrases; these
heads were colossal, and their voices were powerful and sonorous,
The French government refusing, it is said, in 1782, to purchase
these automata, the unfortunate and too sensitive inventor, in a
paroxysm of despair, destroyed*these masterpieces of scientific
ingenuity. More recently, Mr. Willis of Cambridge has pub-
lished a very interesting essay on the vowel sounds, in which he
describes an instrument for producing them, and at the same
time explaining their physical causes. My excellent and highly
distinguished friend Professor Wheatstone, to whom the analysis
of the elementary sounds I have above given is due, and whose
valuable assistance in this section, as well as those on vision and
hearing, I am proud to acknowledge, has also made many ex-
periments illustrating the mechanism of speech, and succeeded
in reconstructing and improving De Kempelin’s machine.


' Observations sur la Physique, par Rosier, Supplement, 1782. p- 758,
® Ueber den Mechanismus der Menschliohen Sprache. Vienna, 1791.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 5138


As I have now fully explained the various articulations used
in oral language, it only remains for me to investigate the dif-
ference between the inflexions of the voice in singing and in
speaking.

The various muscular adaptations of the larynx render it ca-’
pable of producing every inflexion of musical tone within a certain
compass, seldom exceeding that of two octaves. In singing,
sounds, each constant in its degree of tune, follow each other
according to the rules of melody ; while in speaking, the voice
slides up and down, and “ does not dwell distinctly, for any per-
ceptible space of time, on any certain level or uniform tone,
except the last tone on which the speaker ends or makes a pause.”
Provincial dialects, and even individual modes of speaking, differ
much in the extent and nature of these slides. Steele has en-
deavoured to establish a system of notation for these inflexions,
and other modifications of the voice necessary to be observed by
the orator, and has by this means proposed to perpetuate the
most splendid specimens of histrionic, forensic, and senatorial
eloquence.! To proceed farther with this subject would be an
infringement on the province of philology.

‘We must just mention certain other modifications of the human
voice, of which some, as hiccup and cough, belong more properly
to pathology than to physiology, but are very common in the
most healthy persons; and others, as crying and laughing, appear
peculiar to the human race. .

« Many of these are so closely allied as frequently to be con-
verted into each other; most also are variously modified.

“In laughter there is a succession of short, and, as it were,
abrupt expirations.’™ In it, there is more or less noise at each
little expiration, from a mere sort of rustling sound to loud
peals; the mouth is more or less lengthened, and its angles
drawn up, and in extreme laughter it is opened still more by the
descent of the lower jaw; if hearty, the tears run over, the head,
and even the body, shakes, respiration is interrupted, and


1 Prosodia Rationalis ; or, An Essay towards establishing the Melody and Measure
of Speech, to be expressed and perpetuated by peculiar Symbols. 2d. edit. London,
1779.

™ « Fy, Lupichius, De Risu. Basil. 1738. 4to.

Traité des Causes Physiques et Morales du Rire. Amst. 1788, 8yvo.”’


MM 2


514 VOICE AND SPEECH.


actual pain of the sides and diaphragm is felt." Some of our
comedians have absolutely agonised me. It arises from drollery;
the anticipation of gratification, or actual gratification, or tick-
ling; it is also common in hysteria and insanity. Smiling is the
first degree of the same changes of the mouth.

“ Coughing is a quick, violent, and sonorous expiration, follow-
ing a deep inspiration.”° In coughing, the mouth opens that
the air may rush in that direction, since the current is not re-
quired in the nostrils as in sneezing, and these would not afford
sufficient vent. The glottis lessens just before the expiration,
and the transverse muscular fibres of the trachea Jessen its
diameter and thus increase the force with which the expelled air
rushes.P Coughing is induced by the very slightest irritation of
the larynx. But irritation of any part of the respiratory appa-
ratus may occasion it, as well as irritation of a distant part
influencing the respiratory apparatus sympathetically. It some-
times arises from a morbid sensibility of the nerves, so that I have
known it occur for months at the full distension of every in-
spiration, except during sleep; and in other instances on the
slightest touch of the outside of half the chest. There are many
varieties of the sound and respiratory actions of cough.

“ Snoring is ” said by Blumenbach to be “a deep, sonorous,
and, as it were, tremulous inspiration, from the vibration of the
velum palati during deep sleep.” We can, however, snore volun-
tarily while awake; and, by allowing a portion of the tongue to
rise into contact with the velum, I can snore so that the sound
shall proceed from vibrations of the nose as well as of the velum,
evident both to the ear and to the fingers placed upon the nose.
I can also increase the proportion of the nasal vibrations at plea-
sure, by allowing more of the tongue to rise into contact with the
velum and palate, and cause them only to take place, even if the
mouth is closed: and, if it is closed, snoring is always more or
less nasal. In sleep, snoring may be palatal or nasal, or both in
various proportions. The sound, as well as its situation, varies
accordingly as it is palatal or nasal, or more one than the other.


» « Sport that wrinkled Care derides,
And Laughter holding both his sides.”
DL’ Allegro.
° «J. Melch. Fr. Albrecht, (Pres, Hallero) Experimenta in vivis animalibus
circa tussis organa exploranda instituta. Gotting. 175]. 4to.”
> Sir C. Bell, Phiz. Trans. 1832. p, $00, sqq.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 515


“ Sneezing, generally the consequence of an irritation of the
mucous membrane of the nostrils,” though the glare of the sun
upon the eyes will produce it, “is a violent and almost con-
vulsive expiration, preceded by a short and violent inspiration.” 4
In sneezing, the opening of the fauces is lessened, and the head
bent back, that the current may be directly through the nostrils,
in which the irritation generally exists.

‘© Hiccup, on the contrary, is a sonorous, very short, and
almost convulsive, inspiration, excited by an unusual irritation of”
the stomach, and Blumenbach says only of ‘the cardia.”’* In
hiccup, I think that, after the inspiration has proceeded a certain
length, the glottis closes, and the diaphragm endeavours in vain
to contract farther.

“In crying there are deep inspirations, quickly alternating
with long and occasionally interrupted expirations.s

“ Siohing is a long and deep inspiration, and the subsequent
expiration is sometimes accompanied by groaning. *

« Nearest in relation to sighing is gaping", which is produced
by a full, slow, and long, inspiration, followed by a similar ex-
piration, the jaws at the same time being drawn asunder, so that
the air rushes into the open fauces and the Eustachian tubes.”
We gape chiefly during fatigue or hunger; when we are but half
awake, either before or after sleep; and in ague and hysteria.
“It occurs from the blood passing through the lungs too slowly:
v. c. when the pressure of the air on the body is diminished, as
upon very high mountains.” A peculiar feature of gaping is the
propensity it excites in others to gape likewise. This is uni-
versally remarked. But the fact is included in the more general
fact of gaping being excited by merely thinking of it, whatever
be the means of association by which it enters into our thoughts,
whether by seeing it represented in a picture, by reading of it, or
having it mentioned to us. If this is the case, the view of others
gaping may well be supposed sufficient to excite it.


‘‘ Marc. Beat. L. J. Porta, De Sternutatione. Basil. 1755. 4to.”

“ C. J. Sig. Thiel, De Singultu. Gotting. 1761. 4to.”

$ «J. F. Schreiber, De Fletu. L. B. 1728. Ato.”

t « Day. C. Em. Berdot, De Suspirio. Basil. 1756. 4to.”

" « Just. Godofr. Giinz, (Preside Walthero) De Oscitatione. Lips. 1738.


4to,”


3 .a f


MM 3


516 VOICE AND SPEECH.


Dr. Brachet contends that the muscular power of the extreme
bronchial twigs and air cells operates both in these violent and in
the ordinary degrees of respiration. He divided the spinal chord
in the neck of cats so that respiration ceased and was continued
artificially. He then applied hellebore to their nostrils, and little
expiratory shocks took place, very evident and necessarily inde-
pendent of the respiratory muscles. *

Haller is well worth reading on these auhicette?

Most authors assert that ate opening of the glottis enlarges at
inspiration and lessens at expiration; but Dr. H. Ley makes it
probable that, in simple and undisturbed breathing, the glottis
remains open. In strong muscular efforts the glottis closes, that
the chest may be immovable. Swimming and leaping are shown
by M. Bourdon to be impossible unless it is closed ; for he pre-
vented them by inserting a tube into a wound made by him in
the trachea of poor brutes.


Although, with the exception of mocking birds, brutes make no articulate
sounds, they have a language perfectly intelligible to one another. They
make one noise to express joy, another terror, another to summon their
young, &c., and comprehend the meaning of sounds made by us, not only
of an inarticulate kind, but also articulated. The sagacity of some dogs in
this respect is astonishing. ‘ They learn to understand not merely sepa-
rate words, or articulate sounds, but whole sentences expressing many ideas.
I have often spoken,” continues Gall, “intentionally of objects which
might interest my dog, taking care not to mention his name, or make any
intonation or gesture which might awaken his attention. He, however, showed
no less pleasure or scrrow, as it might be; and, indeed, manifested by his be-
haviour that he had perfectly understood the conversation which concerned him.
I had taken a bitch from Vienna to Paris; in a very short time she compre-
hended French as well as German, of which I satisfied myself by repeating be-
fore her whole sentences in both languages.”* An accurate observer of nature,
and one familiar with brutes, Hogg, the late Ettrick shepherd poet, to substan-
tiate the same opinion, relates the following anecdote. He was going to visit


* 1. ©. p. 298. sq,

y El. Physiol. lib. viii. sect. iv. p. xxx—xl.

* London Medical Gazette, June 27, 1834.

® Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. Vs Pp. 49. 8q.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 517


a friend for a fortnight, but was desirous that a particular dog should not ac-
company him, as it was always “ breeding some uproar.’’ While the animal was
near him he mentioned his intention to his mother in the evening. The dog
was to be locked up till some time after he had started. But in the morning,
when the time came, it was not to be found. ‘* The d—’s in that beast,” said
he, “ I will wager that he heard what we were saying yesternight, and has gone
off for Bowerhope as soon as the door was opened this morning.” A great flood
had taken place in the night, so that the Yarrow was impassable, and Hogg had
to go by St Mary’s Loch, and cross ina boat. But though it appeared impas-
sable by any living creature, the dog had swam it early in the morning, and was
found by Hogg, “sitting, ‘like a drookit hen,’ on a knowl at the east end of his
friend’s house, awaiting his arrival with great impatience.” >

As the exertion of every power is a gratification, brutes take an intense.
pleasure in making the noises of which they are capable. The singing of some
birds, and the chattering and squalling of others, are examples of this.

The voice of some small brutes is, like the muscular powers of others, far
greater than in large animals proportionally, and of some even absolutely. A
grasshopper, weighing an eighth of an ounce, may be heard at the distance of the
sixteenth of a mile; and Americans have calculated that a man, weighing as
much as 1600 grasshoppers, were his voice in proportion, would be audible at
the distance of 1000 miles, and when he sneezed would cause the house to be in
danger of falling, as the walls of Jericho tumbled at the sound of the trumpet.


> Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine. Feb. 1824.


MM 4


518


CHAP. XXII.


THE EXTERNAL SENSES IN GENERAL, AND TOUCH IN
PARTICULAR.


“‘ Tue other office of the nerves we found to consist in com-
municating to the sensorium” (or organ of the mind) “the im-
pressions made by external objects. This is accomplished by the
external senses, which are, as it were, the watchmen of the body
and informers of the mind.”

The external senses are usually considered to be five :—Touch,
taste, smell, sight, and hearing. But our feelings referrible to
sensation or consciousness are very numerous. Besides our
strictly mental feelings, we have a great variety of feelings in the
body at large. To say nothing of hunger and thirst, we may
feel weak or strong, The sensation of weakness is very distressing,
and often complained of in the epigastric region. The removal
of this makes us cognisant of a feeling of which otherwise
we think but little,—a feeling of general support and mutual
elastic resistance, as it were, between all the particles of the
frame: and exhaustion makes us conscious of what was the com-
fort of this feeling. We feel the state of our muscles, whether
they are relaxed or contracted, or at least the position of the
parts which they move. We feel the state of tone or exhaustion
of muscles. We feel heat and cold in their various degrees,
pains, and endless uneasy sensations of distension, weight, prick-
ing, smarting, &c. &c., a large number of which are usually
referred to the sense of touch. But the sensation induced me-
chanically by the contact of something with us is properly called
touch. Forms of sensation may be peculiar to certain parts.

*«* The five external senses alone belong to our present subject.
For to regard, with Gorter, the stimulus which inclines us to
relieve the intestines,” &c., as so many distinct senses, is unne-
cessary minuteness, as Haller long since observed.*


* “J. De Gorter, Ezercitationes Medica, iv. Amst. 1737. 4to.”


EXTERNAL SENSES. 519


‘


By means of the external senses only do we learn the existence
of the world around us. ‘* With every sense an animal discovers
a new world; thus creation is to it increased or diminished ac-
cordingly as its senses are more or less numerous.” ‘ Provided
with senses, it enters into communication with the university of
nature, and associates with surrounding beings ; a continual action
and reaction are established between animate and inanimate na-
ture.”> They are the seat of almost constant gratification. Without
them, indeed, we should not only be ignorant of the surrounding
world, but our mental faculties would never come into operation.
We could not judge of objects of sight, hearing, or touch,
by our lower intellectual faculties; nor would our higher
intellectual faculties come into play, nor our various inclinations
be called forth. Some writers, hardly deserving the name of
philosophers, have been misled by these truths, and declared that
the external senses give rise to our intellectual and moral powers.
Were this the case, persons of acute external sense, and those
numerous savages and brutes which surpass us in one external
sense or other, would be the most eminent in intellect. Gall
found it necessary to refute these errors at length.¢ Not even
can an organ of external sense give rise to a sensation, except in
the brain, or what is tantamount to brain in every brute.

Gall observes that,

“1, Every nerve of sense has its particular origin: no one
arises from the brain, or from another nerve; but the filaments
of each proceed from particular masses of pulpy substance.

‘© 2. Each nerve of sense differs from the others in size, struc-
ture, colour, and consistence.

«© 3, The apparatus of some nerves are more or less compli-
cated, more or less numerous in the different kinds of animals.

«4, There is no proportion, either direct or constantly uni-
form, between the size of the brain and of the nerves.

“5. There is no fixed proportion between the nerves of
sense in the different kinds of animals, nor in individuals of the


same species.
«© 6, The female has not nerves of sense larger or smaller


than the male.


> Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 149.
© Thid, Il. cc. 4to. vol. i. p. 223. sqq. ; also p. 149. sqq. 8vo. t. 1. p.114,sqq.


520 EXTERNAL SENSES:


«7. In different species of animals, and in individuals of the
same species, the nerves of sense are developed and decline at
very different periods.

“8. No decussation of any other nerve than the optic is at
present known, and its decussation is not found in all species of
animals.

«9, The corresponding nerves of each side communicate toge-
ther by commissures, and in other parts of the brain by branches.”

Again, that,

«1, To the functions of the senses, material instruments are
indispensable.

“© 2, That the nerves merely communicate the impression of
the external world to the brain that it may be modified by this.

« 3, Every nerve of sense can. receive but certain impres-
sions, and the functions of one sense cannot be performed by an-
other.

“4. The delicacy of every sense is ordinarily proportionate to
the perfection and development of the apparatus, and probably
also to the number of apparatus.

“<5. The particular functions of the senses have not the same
force in different species of animals, nor in different animals of the
same species: the animal which has acute sight may have dull
hearing.

«6, The nervous system of the senses may, like other systems,
acquire a higher activity by unusual irritants, from inflamma-
tion, &c.

«7, The derangement of the functions of the senses that follow
lesion of the brain do not affect the opposite side any more
than those of the spinal chord, at least according to my present
experience.

“68, The functions of the different senses manifest themselves
at different periods, according to the development of these organs,
It is asked how, and for what purpose, some animals are born
with senses perfectly developed, at least with the eyes and ears
open, and others with them closed. This peculiarity is not
always in relation to the power of using the extremities more or
less promptly ; for the new-born child is as incapable of loco-
motion as the new-born puppy:

«9, All the functions of the senses gradually decline in old
age.” According to some physiologists this is the result only of the


TOUCH. §21


ergans of the senses becoming habituated to external impressions,
so that these are continually less and less strong. But in old age
the functions of the senses grow weak, because the organs of the
senses diminish. The nervous filaments, and their nutrient sub-
stance, waste, as well as the pulpy substance in general, and all
the nerves begin to atrophy. Hence Pinel did not find, in the
labyrinth of deaf old men, the soft substance which exists in men
who hear. Hence the nerves of old persons are much smaller
than of those in the vigour of life. As this diminution does not
occur at the same time in all the nervous system, it follows that all
the functions do not decline equally at the same time, as would
be the case if they declined more and more only by habituation
to impressions. Some even explain by habit the fact of our having
in health no sensation of what is passing within us in our organic
or automatic life. I should ascribe this rather to an original de-
sign of nature, which probably accomplishes it by the tenuity of
the filaments that communicate between the nervous system of
the chest and abdomen and the nervous system of the vertebral
column, the senses, and the brain. ‘

“10. The doubleness of any sense does not prevent our sen-
sation of objects from being simple: in the same manner our
consciousness is single, notwithstanding the five different functions
of the senses.”

A sensation lasts a certain time after the exciting cause has
ceased. ‘Thus, if a piece of wood, with one end ignited, is whirled
round, we see a luminous ring; the sensation produced by the
wood in each point of the circle continuing till the wood arrives at
that point again: arocket formsa train. A sensation is sometimes
renewed, as when, after having looked at the sun, we close our
eyes and its figure returns. According to the law of all vital excite-
ment, sensations are more acute the less they have been excited,
and vice versa. Thus, after having been in a strong light, we at first
see nothing on entering a darkened apartment, but gradually dis-
tinguish objects in it, and, on returning into the light, find the
glare very disagreeable: the same tepid water feels warm to one
hand previously immersed in cold water, and cold to the other
previously placed in warm water.


“ Touch merits our first attention, because it is the first to
manifest itself after birth, its organ is most extensively spread


522 TOUCH.


over the whole surface, and it is affected by many properties of


external objects.”
« Tt is less fallacious than the rest of the senses, and by culture


capable of such perfection as in some measure to supply the
deficiency of others, particularly of vision.4

The direct pleasure of the sense of touch is far more exquisite
than of any other sense, and is therefore employed by nature for
the raptures of sexual intercourse.

«‘ The skin, whose structure we formerly examined, is the
general organ of touch. The immediate seat of the sense is the
papillae of the corium, of various forms in different parts, com-
monly resembling warts‘, in some places fungouss, in others
filamentous." The extremities of all the cutaneous nerves ter-
minate in these under the form of pulpy penicilli.”

The nerves of general sensibility, and as far as we know of
touch in particular, are the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum
and the ganglionic or posterior spinal nerves and all their ramifi-


cations.

© The hands are the principal organs of touch, properly so
called, and regarded as the sense which examines solidity ; and
their skin has many peculiarities. In the palms and on each
side of the joints of the fingers, it is furrowed and free from
hairs, to facilitate the closing of the hand: and the extremities


d « Consult Rol. Martin, Schwed. Abhandl. vol. xxxix. 1777.

G. Bew, Memoirs of the Society of Manchester, vol. i. p. 159.

Ch. Hutton, Mathematical Dictionary, vol. i. p. 214.”

** Lecat speaks of a sculptor, Ganibasius de Volterre, who, being blind, felt
faces, and then modelled them in clay. The man of Puiseaux, born blind,
estimated the distance of the fire by the degree of heat, and of bodies by the
action of air upon his face. Saunderson, by exploring a series of medals with
his hands, distinguished the genuine from the spurious, although the latter were so
well counterfeited as to deceive a connoisseur with good eyes ; and he judged of
the accuracy of mathematical instruments by passing the ends of his fingers upon
their divisions. Like the blind man of Puiseaux, he was affected by the least
vicissitude of the atmosphere, and could perceive, especially in calm weather, the
presence of objects not more than some paces distant.” Gall. 1. 4to. vol. i. p. 222.

e « F, De Riet, De Organo Tactus. LL.B. 1743. 4to. reprinted in Haller’s
Anatomical Collection, t. iv.”

f « Dav. Corn. de Courcelles, Zcones Musculor. Capitis. Tab. i. fig. 2, 3.”

& « B.S. Albinus, dnnotat. Academ. |. iii. tab. iv. fig. 1, 2.”

h « Ruysch, Thesaur. Anat, iii. tab. iv. fig. 1. Thes. vii. tab. ii, fig. 5.

B. S. Albinus, 1. c. L. vi. tab. ii, fig. 3,4.”


TOUCH. 523


of both fingers and toes are ridged internally by very beautiful
lines more or less spirali; and are shielded externally by nails.

“ These scutiform nazlsk are bestowed upon man and a few
other genera of mammalia only (we allude to the quadrumana
which excel in the sense of touch)!, for the’ purpose of resisting
pressure, and thus assisting the action of the fingers, while exa-
mining objects.

“ They are of a horny nature, but on the whole very similar to
the epidermis. For under them lies the reticulum, which in
negroes is black™; and under this again is found the corium,
adhering firmly to the periosteum of the last phalanx. These
constituent parts of the nails are striated lengthwise. The pos-
terior edge, which, in the hands, is remarkable for a little lunated
appearance, is fixed in a furrow of the skin; and the nails, grow-
ing constantly from this, are protruded forwards, so as to be per-
fectly renewed about every six months.”

Dr. Breschet considers that the organ of touch is not a mere
nerve, but that an apparatus exists as in the eye and ear: — that,
like the optic nerve entering the sclerotic, the nerves of touch
lose their neurilema on entering the cutis and derive a new
covering from its outer part, and then, terminating in a round
extremity or projecting papilla, are covered by a thin layer of
epidermis indispensable to the sense of touch.»

Weber has shown that the tactile power of the skin is not pro-
portionate to its sensibility. Thus the mamme are easily tickled,


i « Grew, Phil. Trans. No. 159.”

k « B. S. Albinus, Annotat. Academ. |. ii. tab. vii. fig. 4, 5, 6.”

1 « Namely, simis, papiones, cercopitheci, and lemures, the apices of whose
fingers in their four hands are very soft, and marked, as in the human subject,
with spiral lines.

<‘ Physiologists have disputed whether the sense of touch is bestowed on any
besides man and the guadrumana.” ‘On one side, I would grant to both parties
that the snowy hands of a delicate girl must enjoy a much more exquisite sense
of touch than what I call the fingers of brutes. But, on the other, I have
frequently seen simiz and papiones possessing much softer fingers, and using
these fingers to explore surfaces much more dexterously, than many barbarous
nations and innumerable persons among the lower orders of Europeans whose
hands have been hardened by labour.”

m « B.S. Albinus, De Habitu et Colore Aithiopum, fig. 3.”

" Nouvelles Recherches sur la Structure de la Peau, par M. G. Breschet.
Paris, 1835.


524 TOUCH.


and susceptible of great pain when irritated, and yet are very mo-
derately endowed with the sense of touch. The armpits, flanks,
soles, and other ticklish parts have a comparatively slight power of
distinguishing objects by touch. « Who was ever made to laugh
by tickling the ends of his fingers? and yet they are possessed
of a tactile accuracy far exceeding that of any other portion of
the skin.” Mere sensibility exists in all the surfaces and solids,
and under disease may give sensations; and in some internal
parts, as the upper and lower part of the alimentary canal, we
continually have sensation: but, whatever be the irritation of the

stomach or bowels or larynx, substances within them are felt
very indistinctly.

The different parts of the skin vary exceedingly in their
tactile power. Weber remarks that, if the skin of a person
whose eyes are shut is touched with the two points of a com-
pass an inch asunder, he at once perceives that he is touched
in two places. But, by moving the points nearer and nearer to
each other, the skin feels at length as if touched by simply one
body, and this body feels as if rather longer in the line of junction
of the points of the compass. There is, however, the greatest
difference in different parts as to their power of still feeling that
there are two bodies when these are approximated. ‘The tips of
the fingers and of the tongue distinguish the bodies at the small-
est distance; while the middle of the arm and thigh, the centre
of the cervical and dorsal spine, cease the soonest to distin-
guish at large distances. In himself Weber found the tip of the
tongue distinguish two bodies, as well in their horizontal as per-
pendicular direction, till their distance from each other was with-
in half a French line; the inner surface of the tips of the fingers
within one, &c.

He lays it down as a law, that, the more gifted with touch are
any portions of the skin, the greater will the distance appear of
any two bodies from each other though placed at the very same
distance. Thus, “ if the points of a compass, distant from each
other one or two lines, applied to the cheek, just before the ear,
be then moved successively to several parts of the cheek, we
shall find, on approaching the angle of the mouth, that the points
will appear to recede from each other ;” or, if the ends of the
forefinger and thumb are held together, and their tips passed in a


TOUCH: 525


line from the ear to the upper or under lip, they will feel more
and more distant from each other as they approach these.

If the points of the compass, kept at the same distance from
each other, are applied to two contiguous surfaces, enjoying vo-
Juntary motion, as to the two lips, they will appear more distant
than when applied to one surface: in fact in the case of the lips,
though, when distant from each other half a line, they appear as
two, yet, if applied to one lip only, they appear as one. Nay
the points, though at the same distance from each other, will seem
more distant when applied to two portions of the skin differing in
structure and function, than when applied to portions resembling
each other, even though more sensible. Thus, if the points are
placed one upon the inner surface, and one upon the red outer part
of the lips, they appear more distant from each other than when
both are applied, though at the same distance, on the outer red
surface which is so much more sensible.

When the points of the compass are placed horizontally on the
axis of a limb, they are distinguished as two more clearly than
when placed vertically. But the reverse occurs, if they are placed
on the trunk.°

He finds the left hand more sensible of temperature than
the right in most persons, probably from its epidermis be-
ing thinner through less use. When the hands, being of the
same temperature, were plunged into separate vessels of hot
water, as the person lay in bed, the left hand was believed to
be in hotter water, though the temperature was two degrees
lower than that of the water in the other vessel. A difference of
one third of a degree is readily detected by the hand if placed
successively in two vessels of water. The judgment is more ac-
curate when the temperature is not much above or below the
usual temperature of the body ; water at 98° being more readily
distinguished from water at 100°, than water at 120° from water
at 118°; just as sounds are best discriminated when neither very
acute nor base nor loud. A large surface receives stronger impres-
sions than a smaller. If the forefinger of one hand is immersed


° Thave always been struck with the erroneous judgment I form of the spot
of the trunk, or arms, or legs, in which an itching or tingling is felt. So
satisfied in general am I that I cannot put my finger on the spot where I feel
the tingling, unless I use my eyes, that I have frequently amused my self with
observing what-a blunder I was sure to make,


526 TOUCH.


in water at 104°, and the whole of the other hand in water at
102°, the cooler water will be thought the warmer: and water,
borne by a forefinger, will seem to scald the whole hand.
Minute differences are appreciated by plunging the whole hand
successively into two vessels of hot water, which are impercep-
tible to a single finger.
_ Differences of temperature and weight are best ascertained
when the perceptions are not simultaneous, but successive : just
as is the case with differences in objects of taste, smell, and hear-
ing. Ifan acid and a sweet substance are applied to the tongue
with pencils in rapid succession, they are nicely distinguished :
but not if applied together. It is the same if two vials of odorous
fluids are applied to the nostrils ; and two notes are always better
distinguished if struck in succession than together. Vision is no
exception, because, although we compare two lines best when
placed side by side, we in fact do not view them simultaneously,
but in rapid succession; since nothing is seen accurately unless
its image falls on the retina at the extremity of the optic axis.

Persons differ greatly in their power of estimating weight, and
practice increases it considerably. Men accustomed to estimate
weights by poising them will distinguish a difference of a thirtieth
part in two bodies. They use the same hand for each weight in
instant succession. ‘The intervention of a few seconds does not
prevent accuracy. A true estimate may be made although the
second weight is poised twenty seconds after the first ; but an in-
terval of forty seconds prevents accuracy. The sense of sight is
more accurate, for a well-practised eye will distinguish a differ-
ence of a hundredth part in the length of two lines: and the ear
surpasses the eye, for a well-practised musical ear will distinguish
between two sounds differing only ;15,— the number of vibrations
being calculated that are made by the sounding bodies in a given
time. If two lines differ only 5, in length, the difference may be
perceived although the one is looked at fifty or sixty seconds
after the other. If they differ =, an interval of thirty-five se-
conds may elapse. If they differ .1,, an interval of three seconds
is the longest compatible with accurate judgment.

Not only does touch appear too. general an expression for the

P De Pulsu, Resorptione, Auditu et Tactu. -Annotationes Anatomice et Physio~


logice, auctore Henrico Ernesto Weber. Lipsie, 1834.; and Dr. Grayes’s
Analysis of it, in the Dubdlin Journal of Medical Science, March 1836.


TOUCH. 527


endless feelings of which we are susceptible, but some feelings,
apparently referred with justice to this’ sense, are considered by
many writers as referrible to: other modes of sensation.’ Dr.
Spurzheim4 says, “ It may still be asked whether feeling produces
ideas of consistency, of hardness, of softness, of solidity and
fluidity, of weight and resistance? I think it does not. For the
mind to examine these qualities employs the muscular system-
rather than the sense of feeling properly so called.” This opi
nion accords with that of Dr. Brown', who states, ‘“‘ The feelii 1g
of resistance” (of which he considers the qualities enumerated
above as modifications) “ is, I conceive, to be ascribed, not to
our organ of touch, but to our muscular frame, to which I have —
already directed your attention, as forming a distinct organ of
sense ; the affections of which, particularly as existing in com-
bination with other feelings, and modifying our judgments con-
cerning these (as in the case of distant vision, for example), are
not less important than those of our other sensitive organs. The
sensations of this class are, indeed, in common circumstances, so
obscure as to be scarcely heeded or remembered by us; but there
is probably no contraction, even of a single muscle, which is not
attended with some faint degree of sensation that distinguishes it
from the contractions of other muscles, or from other degrees of
contraction of the same muscle.”

This opinion was originally advanced by the profoundest phy-
sician’ among my predecessors at St. Thomas’s Hospital,—Dr.
Wells’, in the following words : — “ What is there within us to
indicate these positions of the body? ‘To me it appears evident,
that, since they are occasioned and preserved by combinations of
the actions of various voluntary muscles, some feeling must attend
every such combination, which suggests, from experience, per-
haps, the particular position produced by it. But in almost all
the positions of the body, the chief part of our muscular efforts
is directed toward sustaining it against the influence of its own
gravity. Each position, therefore, in which this takes place,
must be attended with a feeling which serves to indicate its re-
lation to the horizontal plane of the earth.”

Sir C. Bell has repeated these opinions, but without any refer-


_ 4 Phrenology.


* Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind. 2d edit. 1824, p- 480,
* Essays, 1818, p. 70.


NN


528 TOUCH.


ence to Dr. Wells or the other two physicians, although he shows
himself acquainted with Dr. Wells’s writings.'

« Why are nerves, whose office is to convey sensation, profusely
given to muscles, in addition to those motor nerves which are
given to excite their motions? To solve this question, we must
etermine whether muscles have any other purpose to serve
merely to contract under the influence of motor nerves.
"they have reflective influence, and if their condition is to
t or conceived, it will presently appear that the motor nerves
e not suitable internuncii betwixt them and the sensorium. I
shall first inquire if it be necessary to the governance of the mus-
cular frame, that there be a consciousness of the state or degree
of action of the muscles? That we have a sense of the condition
of the muscles appears from this: that we feel the effects of over-
exertion or weariness, and are excruciated by spasms, and feel
the irksomeness of continued position. We possess a power of
weighing in the hand; what is this but estimating the muscular
force? Weare sensible of the most minute changes of muscular
exertion, by which we know the position of the body and limbs,
when there is no other means of knowledge opentous. Ifa rope.
dancer measures his steps by the eye, yet, on the other hand, a
blind man can balance his body. In standing, walking, and run-
ning, every effort of voluntary power which gives motion to the
body is directed by a sense of the condition of the muscles, and
without this sense we could not regulate their actions, and a very
principal inlet to knowledge would be cut off.""

Weber illustrates this opinion of Dr. Wells, by supporting the
hands of a blindfolded person on cushions, and placing unequal
weights upon them, If the difference is great, it will be felt. But, if
it is small, it will not be noticed till the hands are raised, —tilk
the muscles feel what resistance they have to act against. Weber
found in most men a more accurate sense of the amount of pres-
sure on the left side than on the right. A minute substance in
contact with the skin is always judged to be perpendicularly
situated in regard to it, as rays of light are always seen in g


‘ The British Association has allowed the compiler of the report on the Phy-
siology of the Nervous System, to refer to Sir C. Bell alone on this point, with-
out any allusion to the previous writings of Dr. Wells, Dr. Brown, or Dr.
Spurzheim,

° Phil. Trans. 1826.


TOUCH. 529


direction perpendicular to the point at which they impinge on the
retina. It may be said, that, if ahair is pulled, we do not conceive
it to be pulled perpendicularly whatever be the direction. But
Weber replies that we judge here of the direction by the direc-
tion of the muscular effort necessary to keep the head steady at
the time. If muscles are not called into play, but the head is hee
steady by one person while another presses firmly around the hai
the direction, whatever it be, in which the hair is pulled, cannot
be judged of. +?

We have seen that Dr. Spurzheim thought he had established
a cerebral organ for judging of these sensations of weight or re-
sistance. *


The varieties of the feelings both of consciousness and sensation in the animal
kingdom must be infinite. Brutes probably have sensations from the external
world of which we are insusceptible, and those especially which are minute
are no doubt sensible to external circumstances, which are far too delicate to
produce an impression upon us. Every animal is destined for a certain pecu-
liarity and amount of sensation from certain substances and circumstances, in
accordance with the destination of its mode of existence. Brutes will feel the
approach of changes in the weather long before we are aware of what is coming ;
and know even the direction of a coming storm.

All brutes most probably have the sense of touch: and the more delicate
and soft the external parts which come in contact with surrounding substances,


wn tebe ee ee ee ee SS ee Se


* Gall is very philosophical and eloquent in overthrowing the doctrine of ex-
cellence of touch being the source of superiority of intellect, and of this sense
especially rectifying others and giving us a better knowledge of the external
world, ll, cc. 4to. p. 208. sqq. 8vo. t.i. p. 85. sqq- Those who have not read both
his large and octavo work may not be aware for what absurdities he had to oppose
Buffon, Condillac, Cuvier, Herder, Richerand, Vicq d’Azyr, blind followers of
Anaxagoras and Galen.

As philosophers have ascribed the superiority of man’s intellect to his hand, and
of the elephant’s to its trunk, the constructiveness of the beaver to its tail, and the
ferocity of the tiger to its teeth and claws, the poor man may be excused who was
lately executed at Chelmsford, and left the following directions ; — “ I, Edward
Clarke, now in a few hours expecting to die, do sincerely wish, as my last re-
qnest, that three of my fingers be given to my three children, as a warning to
them, as my fingers were the cause of bringing myself to the gallows and my
children to poverty.” The request was complied with by the surgeon, Ja
aminer. April 23. 1837.

NN 2


530 TOUCH.


- the more delicate and acute, with an equal supply of nerves, will be the sense.
Many without hands, as organs of touch, have other organs to compensate . ‘for
their absence. “‘ We observe, even from the polygastric animalcules, that organs
are developed at the anterior part of the body, which appear to be adapted to
communicate sensations corresponding with those of touch in the higher animals.
They haye long cilia, almost already developed into tentacula; and those ten-
tacula, so common in the class of zoophytes, appear to be endowed with great:
delicacy of feeling. ‘Those fleshy and sensitive tentacula and tubular feet of the
radiated animals continue up through many of the succeeding classes of animals,
becoming jointed in the articulated classes, where they form palpi and antenne ;
and in the soft molluscous classes they again assume the form and name of
tentacula, —soft, sensitive, and fleshy, without any jointed appearance. We ob-
serve remnants of those sensitive organs even in the class of fishes in the form of
processes or filaments still disposed as organs of touch around the mouth.”
« Many fishes and higher animals are covered with dense scales which must
deaden the general sense of touch over the surface of their bodies: other fishes
have the lower part of the head, the lower part of the abdomen, the circum-
ference of the mouth, and other exposed parts, covered with a naked, delicate,
and soft integument, which will compensate for the want of development of the
arms and hands as organs of touch. But in the land amphibious animals, and
in all the higher vertebrata, we observe the anterior extremities to become more
delicately organised, and fit for communicating delicate impressions of the forms,
densities, and other physical qualities of external bodies; and in proportion to
the high nervous sensibility, the vascularity, the flexibility, and the softness of the
hands and other external cutaneous parts, will that common sense of touch become
increased as we pass up through the vertebrated classes to man, who surpasses
all inferior animals in the exquisite and equal development of all his organs of
sense, and in the perfection of all those higher organs of relation by which
animals are more immediately connected with outward nature.” (Dr. Grant’s
Lectures. Lancet, No. 569.)

_1 presume that the tongue must be considered as an organ of touch as well as of
taste ; and the snout in the mole and pig; the moist upper lip in the rhinoceros ;
the proboscis of the elephant ; and the lower end of the tails of apes called sapajous.
The whiskers of the ‘feline and other mammalia probably serve to. make the
proximity of bodies known to the animal. The seal has a very long infra-orbital
branch of the fifth pair, with about forty branches, which are distributed to
the upper lip, and many of which have been traced by Blumenbach to the roots


of the strong whiskers.” (Manual of Comparative Anatomy, translated by Messrs.
Laurence and Coulson, p. 259. sq.)


531


CHAP. XXIII.


TASTE. Hira
spire

‘W = perceive tastes by the tongue, and in some degree,” says
Blumenbach, in conformity with the common opinion, “ by the
other neighbouring internal cutaneous parts of the mouth, espe-
cially by the soft palate, the fauces, the interior of the cheeks,
and lips; by them, however, we taste only what is acrid and very
bitter# :”. and Dr. Vimont says that, on touching the lips, inside of
the cheeks, and the palate, with a very concentrated solution of
common salt, with strong vinegar, and pure alcohol, their respec-
tive tastes were not experienced, while he instantly had the taste
of each when brought in contact with the upper surface of the
tongue. » ’ ;

The most careful and extensive experiments have been made
by M.M. Guyot and Admyrauld¢, and they declare the lips,
the internal surface of the cheeks, the hard palate, and the pha-
rynx, to be utterly destitute of taste ; the soft palate to be also
destitute, except at one spot, commencing about a line below its
union with the hard palate, descending to within three or four
lines of the base of the uvula, and extending indefinitely on each
side till lost insensibly ; and the tongue to be destitute at its lower
part and all its dorsal surface. So that the only seats of taste
are the small space in the soft palate, that portion of the base
of the tongue behind a curved line drawn with its concavity for-
wards and passing through the blind foramen, and the whole of the
circumference of the organ, on the upper part of which the sense
extends a little farther towards the middle of the organ, espe-
cially near the apex, than on the lower; and the portion at the

® « Grew, Anatomy of Plants, p. 284. sq. )

Petr. Luchtmans, De Saporibus et Gustu. L.B. 1758. 4to. p. 58. sqq.

J. Gottl. Leidenfrost, De sensu qui in fuucibus est, ab eo quiin lingua exvercetur,
diverso. Duisb. 1771. 4to.”’~' ;

> Traité de Phrin. vol. ii. p- 138. sq-

° Mémoire sur le Siége du Gout, chez U Homme, Paris, 1830,

NN 8


§32 TASTE.


apex has a more acute taste than the rest of the circumference.
These gentlemen remark that the seats of taste, as ascertained by
them, are the most favourably placed for the exercise of the sense.
Substances have the apex of the tongue applied to them as soon
as they are moistened by the lips; the softer portions fall during
mastication, some within the alveolar arch in contact with the cir-
cumference of the tongue, and others without it, but these are im-
mediately pressed over to the circumference of the tongue by the
cheeks; while the food is compressed between the dorsum of the
tongue and hard palate, going through a kind of mastication for
which the firmness and moderate sensibility of the dorsum render
it peculiarly fit, the fluid portions are expressed and run over to
the circumference; and, finally, the bolus, when properly moistened
and fit for deglutition, is pressed between the base of the tongue
and the central gustatory space in the soft palate.

‘‘ The chief organ of taste is the tongue“, agile, extremely
ready, changeable in form ; in its remarkably fleshy nature, not
unlike the heart ; and endowed with far more excitability than any
other voluntary muscle.°

“Its integuments resemble the skin. They are, an epithelium,
performing the office of cuticle; the reticulum Malpighianum ;
and a papillary membrane, but little different from the corium.

“ The integuments of the tongue differ from the skin chiefly
in these respects — in the epithelium being moistened, not by the
oily fluid of the skin, but by a mucus which proceeds from the
foramen cecum of Meibomius¢ and the rest of the glandular ex-
pansion of Morgagni®, and, secondly, in the conformation of
the papillae, which are commonly divided into petiolated, obtuse,
and conical.i The first are in very small number and situated in


4 « Sommerring, Icones Organorum Humanorum Gustus. Francof. 1808.
ol.”

¢ « This fact, contrary to the opinion of others, I have proved by dissection
of living animals, and by pathological observation. Specimen Historie Naturalis
ex auctoribus classicis illustrate. Gotting. 1816. 4to. p. 4. sqq.”

f «‘ In dogs and sheep with variegated skin, I have commonly found the reti-
culum of the tongue and fauces also variegated.”

& « Consult Just. Schrader, Observat. et Histor. from Harvey’s book De Gene-
ratione Animalium. p. 18*.”

h « Morgagni, Adversar. Anat. Prima. Tab. 1.”

i « Ruysch, Thesaur. Anat. 1. tab. iv. fig. 6.

B.S. Albinus, Annotat. Acad, 1. i. tab. 1. fig. 611.”


ee


TASTE. 533


a lunated series at the root of the tongue; the others, of various
magnitudes, lie promiscuously upon the back of the tongue, and
chiefly upon its edges and apex.* The tongue is furnished with
nerves by the lingual branch of the fifth pair !,” by the hypoglossal,
and the glosso-pharyngeal. The first gives common sensibility ;
the second, motion; the latter, the sense of taste: as is shown by
Dr. Panizza. ™

The glosso-pharyngeal or gustatory nerve commences by two,
three, or more filaments, from the chorda oblongata, at a part
of Sir C. Bell's respiratory tract, unluckily, and emerges between
the corpora olivaria and restiformia.” It has no communication
with the other nerves of the tongue: and gives off no muscular
filaments. It is distributed to the mucous membrane of the
tongue, epiglottis, tonsils, and upper part of the pharynx. It com-
municates both with the vidian or recurrent pterygoid nerve of
the spheno-palatine ganglion, or at least a branch of it runs some
way with a branch of this, and with a branch of the facial, or
at least runs also with this; for I cannot conceive nerves of sen
sation and motion really to mingle in their course and form a
third nerve, however they may mingle in ganglia or the en-
cephalo-spinal mass or in plexuses, in order that the nerve of
sensation may influence the nerve of motion, which must still run
on, I imagine, afterwards distinct, as before: it communicates
with the pneumono-gastric, superior cervical ganglion, and with
the pharyngeal plexus, in all probability for influencing these
parts: and we know how great is the sympathy of the organs
of taste with the pharynx and stomach, &c.

Blumenbach correctly states that “the ninth paire,” «which also
supplies the tongue?, appears intended rather for the various move-


* “ Consult Haller’s excellent description of the tongue of a living man, in
the Dictionn. Encyclopédigue. Yverdon, vol. xxii. p- 28.”

1c J, Fr. Meckel, De Quinto Pare Nervorum Cerebri. Gotting. 1748. 4to.
p. 97. fig. 8. n. 80.”

™ Ricerche sperimentali sopra i nervi. Lettera del Professore Bartolomeo Panizza
al Professore Maurizio Bufalini. Pavia, 1834.

" Gall, l.c. 4to. vol. i. p. 102.

* «J. F. W. Bohmer, De Nono Pare Nervorum Cerebri. Gotting. 1777.
4to.”

P “ See Haller, Icon. Anatom. fasc. ii. tab. 1. letter g.

Monro, On the Nervous System. Tab. xxvi.”

NN 4


534 TASTE.


ments of the organ, in manducation, deglutition, speaking, &c.4:
But, like most others, he believes that the lingual branch of the
fifth pair is for taste ; and the glosso-pharyngeal, as well as hypo-
glossal, for motion. —

Professor Panizza has lately demonstrated that the lingual is
for common sensibility, and the glosso-pharyngeal for - taste.’
When the hypoglossal was divided by him in a dog or sheep,
the: tongue instantly lost:all motion, If milk was offered, the
animal hastily advanced and made the movements of lapping
with the head and lower jaw, but the tongue lay motionless:
in the mouth, and the animal at last gave up all attempts to lap.’
If soaked bread was offered, he took it into his mouth, and
attenipted to masticate, but suddenly laid it down, scarcely
divided into two pieces, one of which he tock up again, subdivided,’
and‘treated in the same way, till the fragments were on the ground
and abandoned by him. If his tongue rolled out of his mouth,’
it so remained, and was bitten till he howled again. The tongue
no more assisted in the process of deglutition than of mastication.
If solid food was placed on the tongue, and did not fall off into
the pharynx, between the tongue and the teeth, or out of the
mouth, by the motion of the head and lower jaw, it was found
there after many hours. If by these motions it tumbled into the
pharynx and was swallowed, deglutition was still imperfect, because


4 Besides the well-known ganglion petrosum of the glosso-pharyngeal nerve,
Dr. Miiller of Berlin has discovered another ganglion on this nervein the human
subject. He describes it as situated within the cavity of the cranium near the
jugular foramen, as being very inconsideraLle in size (not more than a milli-
metre, J, inch, in length), and as belonging, not to the whole root of the
nerve, but only to one of its fasciculi, which fasciculus, he adds, arises from the
same region of the chorda oblongata as the rest of the nerves.

Dr. Mayer of Bonn has observed two small ganglia on the root of the glosso-
pharyngeal nerve of the ox. Each is placed on a separate fasciculus of the nerve
near to but within the place where it pierces the dura mater.

Dr. Mayer has also discovered that the hypoglossal in the ox, dog, and pig
has a posterior as well as an anterior roct. The posterior root, which is
very delicate, arises from the posterior surface of the chorda oblongata, passes
over the accessory nerve (without, however, being connected with it) forms a
small ganglion, from which it emerges augmented in size, and joins the anterior
root. Dr. Mayer has once, but only once, observed this posterior root and its
ganglion in the human subject. Dr. Muller could never discover it in man, but
has seen it distinctly inthe ox. See Miiller’s Handbuch der Physiologie, p.589.,
and Dr. Mayer in the Acta Acad. Cas. Leop. Nat. Cur. vol. xvi. p. il.


TASTE. 535


the mass, when squeezed by the superior pharyngeal muscle,
partly returned into the mouth from the tongue being unable to
close the isthmus of the fauces and thus compel it to take alto-
gether a downward course. There was the same difficulty if fluid
was poured into the fauces. If the sheep took vegetable substances
between its teeth or lips, he could not draw them into his mouth,
and his bleat became hoarse and feeble. That the sensibility of
the tongue was unimpaired, was shown, if it was pricked near the
tip, or base, or at the centre, by the animal howling if he bit it,
by the efforts, already mentioned, to dislodge a morsel placed
upon it, by his shaking his head with his mouth open to reinstate
it if in making the experiments it had been folded back, and by
his efforts to vomit, as well as by his expressions of pain, whenever
the tongue was pricked at the base. That taste continued, was
shown by the disgust expressed whenever a solution of colocynth,
which is neither acrid nor odorous, was placed upon the tongue.

When the two lingual branches of the fifth pair had been di-
vided; the animal licked, lapped, ate, and drank as before; and colo-
cynth placed upon its tongue carefully, so as to touch no other part,
instantly excited disgust; so that motion and taste were unim-
paired, but the tongue might be burnt and wounded in all ways
without the animal expressing pain. )

If both the hypoglossal and lingual branches were divided,
motion and sensibility were lost, but taste still remained perfect.

If the glosso-pharyngeal pair was divided, motion and sensibility
were unimpaired, but colocynth and any other nauseous sub-
stance that had no smell produced no disgust, and was swallowed
with the same avidity as the most agreeable, and the vessel which
contained it was licked out clean. <A dog, in which the lingual
nerves only had been divided, and which was swallowing some
meat, swallowed hastily also a piece made bitter, but was seized
with vomiting and compelled to disgorge it as soon as it reached
the gullet: but the dog in which the glosso-pharyngeal had been
divided, ate up the very piece instantly, and gave no sign of
finding it disagreeable. Yet this same dog expressed great suffer-
ing if his tongue was pricked with a needle.

If the hypoglossal was pinched immediately after death, the
tongue moved: but no such effect resulted from pinching the
lingual or glosso-pharyngeal nerve. The glosso-pharyngeal,
Professor Panizza observes, both in man and brutes, gives no


536 TASTE.


filaments to the muscles among which it passes, but is wholly
distributed to the nervous membrane of the tongue and other
parts which are likewise the seat of taste; and its filaments are
the most abundant at the base of the tongue, where taste is the
most acute.

We are thus gratified at witnessing an uniformity with the other
organs of sense. They have one set of nerves for their muscles ;
another for their common sensibility or touch, and this is the same
as that possessed by the tongue, or the trigeminus ; and a distinct
nerve for their specific sense. Sir C. Bell, having found the glosso-
pharyngeal arise in his respiratory tract, called it a respiratory
nerve, and made it preside over deglutition ; while he considered
the lingual to be the nerve of the specific sense, though it does
not arise distinctly like the olfactory, optic, and acoustic, but is
a mere branch of a nerve of touch — of the trigeminus, which he
very properly classes with the double spinal nerves. “ The extra-
ordinary part of this speculation is,” Dr. Panizza remarks, ‘* that,
among the arguments by which the various opinions were sup-
ported, the anatomical distribution of each nerve was uniformly
adduced ; so true it is that prejudice obscures the observation as
well as warps the judgment.”

« Tor the tongue to taste properly, it must be moist, and the
substance to be tasted must,” according to common opinion, * be
liquid." For if either is in a dry state, we may perceive the presence
of the substances by the common sense of touch, which the tongue
possesses in great acuteness, but cannot discover their sapid
qualities.” It is by no means proved, however, that the moisture
indispensable for taste is requisite to dissolve the substance tasted,
and not to fit the papilla for their office; for moisture is secured
to the nerves of every sense.

“ When the tongue tastes very acutely, the papilla around its
apex and margins seem to be in some degree erected.”

Dr. Nehemiah Grew, in a discourse read before the Royal So-
ciety in 1675 8, endeavoured to show that there are at least sixteen
different simple tastes, which he enumerates. All these, he avers,
have various degrees of intensity and weakness, and may be


¥ « Bellini, Gustus Organum novissimé deprehensum. Bonon. 1665. 12mo.”
* A discourse of the diversitiesand causes of tastes, chiefly in plants, published with
all his Lectures, by the Royal Society, in one folio volume.


TASTE. 537


combined together in an innumerable variety of proportions.
Many of these have other modifications; “in some the taste is more
quickly perceived upon the application of the sapid body, in others
more slowly; in some the sensation is more permanent, in others
more transient; in some it seems to undulate or return after cer-
tain intervals, in others it is constant. All these, and other va-
rieties of tastes, Dr. Grew illustrates by a number of examples.” t
The various parts of the organ, as the lips, the tip of the tongue,
the root of the tongue, the fauces, the uvula, and the throat,
are some of them chiefly affected by one sapid body, and others
by another.

Taste is rendered stronger by pressing the tongue firmly against
the sapid substance and moving it. The impression made bya
sapid substance is often much influenced by the taste just expe-
rienced. The taste of a second substance may be improved or
spoiled by the impression of the first: the taste of malt liquor
is greatly improved by first tasting cheese. Gall argues against
the common opinion, that indulgence deadens the taste, and
contends that this renders it more discriminating. He asks if our
cooks distinguish sapid articles lessperfectly than savages; and
if the instances of poisoning among peasants by eating hemlock,
belladonna, or poisonous mushrooms, do not prove that their
taste is not superior to that of voluptuous citizens? It varies
in different persons; at least what is agreeable to one person is
disagreeable or indifferent to another; even in regard to mere
taste, it is true that “ one man’s meat is another man’s poison.”
It differs in the sexes, at different ages, and under the influence of
habit and of diseases : — men like stronger articles of taste than
women ; children love sugar more than adults, and dislike fat, which
is agreeable to adults ; the lower orders enjoy food which would
make the higher sick; and chlorotic girls are often fond of
mortar and cinders,

Taste is not an unerring index of the wholesomeness of food :
for noxious articles are sometimes eaten with pleasure, and whole-
some substances disliked.


* Dr. Reid, Inquiry into the Human Mind, c«. 3.

M. M. Guyot and Admyrauld have just published a second memoir in which
they illustrate Dr. Grew’s remark respecting the effect of different savours on
different parts of the gustatory apparatus, and show that its different parts are
affected differently by the same sapid body.


538 TASTE,


When the tongue or interior of the mouth or throat is rather
dry, we experience thirst. But, if the dryness is extreme, the
nerves may not feel the want of fluid, being apparently disquali-
fied for their office; and merely the roughness of the parts may
be complained of. The most intense thirst is felt when the ex-
terior of the tongue and interior of the mouth and throat are
covered with a sticky substance : — viscid secretion or jelly will
give intense thirst, there being insufficient fluidity and yet no
disqualifying aridity.


All animals having a mouth and stomach have probably taste. To disprove
a common opinion that birds have but little taste, Gall mentions that Blumen-
bach finds the organ much larger proportionally in the duck than in the goose ;
that the palate of many are supplied with very strong and Jarge nervous papille ;
that many birds bruise insects and grains; and many, if different kinds of food
are given them, select the most agreeable ; that, if whole ants are given to fresh
caught nightingales, the birds usually reject them, but if they are bruised they are
swallowed with avidity; that those birds which swallow their food whole dis-
tinguish different berries and grains with their beak, so that, although all may be
taken into the mouth indifferently, the unsuitable are presently rejected ; that
swans will crush and greedily swallow rats and frogs, but instantly refuse to
swallow toads; and that swallows, and all birds that feed on insects, devour bees
and large flies, but reject various insects: he reproves M. Duméril for supposing,
before the Institute of France, that Nature has supplied fishes with a tongue
possessed of a fine membrane, and not given it the sense of taste. Different
animals are differently affected by sapid substances: what is disgusting to some
is delightful to others; what would make us sick is often a dainty to certain
brutes, Gall refutes the absurd opinion of Professor Akerman, that the per-
fection of man’s intellect arises from the perfection of his senses and that man
has a finer taste than brutes, by stating that the papille of the tongue, pharynx,
palate, &c. are proportionally larger and more numerous in Lrutes; that, to *
increase the surface of taste, many brutes have the membrane of their palate
furrowed and sprinkled with a multitude of nervous papilla; and that the
eating apparatus is in most of them larger than in man; that the dog, bear, and
monkey have their tongue covered with as fine a membrane as that of man; and
that the enjoyment of taste appears the greatest and most enduring of all in
many, as they are eating and ruminating almost constantly while awake.


l.c. 4to. vol. 1. p. 151. sqq.


539


CHAP. XXIV.


SMELL.


“‘ WHILE taste and smell are closely related by the proximity of
their organs, they are not less so by the analogy of their stimuli
and by some other circumstances. For this reason they have
been generally classed together under the name of chemical or
subjective senses.

*‘ By smell we perceive odorous effluvia received by inspiration
and applied principally to that part of the Schneiderian* mem-
brane which invests both sides of the septum narium and the
convexities of the turbinated bones.

' “ Although the same moist membrane lines the nostrils» and
their sinuses", its nature appears different in different parts.

“‘ Near the external openings it is more similar to the skin
and beset with sebaceous follicles, from which arise hairs known
by the name of vibrissz.

«On the septum and the turbinated bones it is fungous and
abounds in mucous crypte.

“ In the frontal, sphenoidal, ethmoidal, and maxillary sinuses,
it is extremely delicate, and supplied with an infinite number of
blood-vessels which exhale an aqueous dew.


* « Conr. Vict. Schneider, De Osse Cribriformi et Sensu ac Organo Odoratus.
Witteb. 1655. 12mo.

This classical work forms an epoch in physiological history, not only because
it was the first accurate treatise on the function of smell, but because it put an
end to the visionary doctrine of the organ of smell being the emunctory of the
brain.” . fl
> « Sommerring, Icones Organorum Humanorum Olfactus. Francof. 1810.
fol.” .

» © « Haller, Icones Anat. fase. iv. tab. ii.

Duverney, @uvres Anatom. vol. i. tab. xiv.

‘Santorini, Tab. Posthum. iv.

Cc. J. M. eeapebeeky Neue Dibl. fiir Chirurgie, vol. FP. iL By ole
tab, Hee


540 SMELL.


“‘ It appears the principal, not to say the sole, use of the si-
nuses4, to supply this watery fluid, which is perhaps first con-
veyed to the three meatus of the nostrils and afterwards to the
neighbouring parts of the organ of smell, preserving them in that
constant state of moisture which is indispensable to the perfection
of smell.

« The sinuses are so placed, that, in every position of the head,
moisture can pass from one or other of them into the organ of
smell.

«The principal seat of smell, —the fungous portion of the
nasal membrane, besides numerous blood-vessels, remarkable for
being more liable to spontaneous hemorrhage than any others in
the body, is supplied by nerves, chiefly the first pair ®, which are
distributed on both sides of the septum narium, and also by two
branches of the fifth pair. The former appear to be the seat of
smell f: the latter to serve for the common feeling of the part,
that excites sneezing, &c.”

The olfactory nerves arise from the pulpy substance at the
anterior part of the internal convolutions of the middle lobes,—of
course at the base of the cerebrum. The filaments are surrounded
along way with pulpy substance, approach each other, and usually
form three roots, which also unite, and where they unite a trian-
gular enlargement is produced: but the nerve soon contracts
and runs in a triangular groove at the inferior surface of the an-
terior lobe on the upper surface of the sphenoid bone. The
two nerves converge as they approach the ethmoid, and at last
form an oval bulbous expansion, containing a great deal of grey
pulpy substance on the cribriform plates. From this soft bulb


é «In my Prolus. de Sinibus Frontal., Gotting. 1779. 4to., I have brought
forward many arguments from osteogeny, comparative anatomy, and pathological
phenomena, to prove that these sinuses contribute indeed to the smell, but little
or nothing to voice and speech, as was believed by many physiologists.”

e « Metzger, Nervorwm Primi Paris Historia. Argent. 1766. 4to. reprinted
in Sandifort’s Thesawrus, vol. iii.

Scarpa, dnatomic, Annotat. 1 ii, “tabs teal.”

f « This is shown by pathological dissection and comparative anatomy. Thus
in Loder’s Observ. Tumoris Scirrhosi in Basi Cranii reperti, Jen. 1779. 4to. is a
case of anosmia, following a compression of the first pair by a scirrhus. We
learn, from comparative anatomy, that in the most sagacious mammalia, v. c.
elephants, bears, dogs, bisulcous ruminants, hedgehogs, &c., the horizontal plate
of the cribriform bone is very large, and perforated by an infinity of small canals,
each of which contains a filament of the olfactory nerve.”


SMELL. 541


numerous fine branches proceed through the foramina of the


bone.
“The extreme filaments of the first pair do not terminate


in papillz, like the nerves of touch and taste, but deliquesce, as
it were, into the spongy and regular parenchyma of the nasal
membrane.

“The organ of smell is very imperfect and small at birth.
The sinuses scarcely exist. Smell consequently takes place but
late, —as the internal nostrils are gradually evolved ; and it is
more acute in proportion to their size and perfection, ¢

“* No external sense is so intimately connected with the sen-
sorium and internal senses, nor possess such influence over them,
as the sense of smell. 4

‘* No other is so liable to idiosyncrasies, nor so powerful in ex-
citing and removing syncope.

** Nor is any other capable of receiving more delicate and de-
lightful impressions; for which reason, Rousseau very aptly called
smell, the sense of imagination. i


& « While animals of the most acute smell, as those just mentioned, have the
nasal organs most extensively evolved, precisely the same holds in regard to some
barbarous nations.

Thus, in the head of the North American Indian (a leader of his nation, and
executed at Philadelphia about fifty years ago), which I have given in my
Decas prima Collectionis Cranioruwm diversarum Gentium illustrate, tab. ix., the
internal nares are of an extraordinary size, so that the middle of the ossa spon«
giosa, for example, are inflated into immense bullz, and the sinuses, first de»
scribed by Santorini, which are contained in them, larger than I have found them
in any other instance.

The nearest to these, in point of magnitude, are the internal nares of the
Ethiopians, from among whom I have eight heads, now before me, very different
from each other, but each possessing a nasal organ much larger than we find it
described to be in that nation by Sommerring, iiber die kirperl. Verschiedenh.
des Negers, &c. p. 22.

These anatomical observations accord with the accounts given by most respect-
able travellers concerning the wonderful acuteness of smell possessed by those
Savages,

Respecting, v, c, the North American Indians, consult, among others, Urls-
perger, Nachr. von der Grossbritann. Colonie Salzburg. Emigranten in America,
vol. i. p. 862.

Respecting the Ethiopians, Jowrnal des Scavans. 1667. p. 60.”

" See Alibert on the medical power of odours, Mém, de la Soc, Médicale,
ti. p. 44,”

16 Emile, t.i. p. 367.”


542 SMELL.


- “ No sensations can be remembered in so lively a manner as
those which are recalled by peculiar odours.” sj

‘HaJler mentions that less ‘than'the two billionth ie ofa Brin
of camphor has been distinctly odorous. !

The causes of the sensation of smelling are, as yet, unknown,
and in the absence of positive knowledge on this subject philo-
sophers have either avowed their ignorance or contented them-
selves with hypotheses destitute of proof. Among the opinions
respecting these recondite phenomena which have at various
times been advanced, three may merit our consideration. The
advocates of the first designate by spiritus rector, or aroma, a
principle independent of the substances which contain it, very
volatile and expansible, imponderable, and imperceptible to every
sense excepting that of smell: and to the various modifications of
this immaterial substance they attribute the varieties of odour.
The second, and most generally received theory, is that odours
are particles which evaporate from the odorous substance itself,
and that the cause of the sensation of smell is therefore inherent
in, and inseparable from, the odorous body. The third opinion,
which is maintained by Professor Walther, is, that olfaction is
independent of the emanations of material particles and is a simple
dynamic action of the odorous body upon the organs of smelling,
similar to the action of sound on the hearing.

However this may be, odours, to become objects of sensation,
must pass the pituitary expansion of the olfactory nerve during
the respiratory process. When the breath is held, the most
odorous substances may be spread in the interior of the nostrils
‘without their perfume being perceived; this observation was first
made by Galen. It has been frequently remarked that odours are
smelt only during inspiration, the same air when returned through
the nostrils always proving inodorous.- But this is true only ie
the odour has been admitted from without by the nostrils, for,
when it is admitted by the mouth, as in combination with
articles of nutrition, it can be perceived only during expir-
ation. A proof of this may be readily obtained by placing
the open neck of a small phial, containing an an oil, in


k « Respecting the power ‘of smell over male an® propensities, consult Benj,
Rush, Medical Inquiries and Observations, vol. ii. p. 34.”
' El Physiol., vol. v. p. 157.


SMELL. | 548


the mouth during the acts of inspiration and subsequent expir-
ation.

It was first observed by Willis ™ that, on placing a sapid sub-
stance in the mouth, and at the same time closing the nostrils,
the sensation of taste is suspended. This observation has since
been frequently repeated, and has given rise to the generally
prevailing opinion that a very intimate relation exists between
the sensations of smelling and tasting, and that the same qualities
of bodies simultaneously affect both these senses. The fact is that
the causes of taste and smell are totally distinct in their nature.
Tastes, properly so called, affect only the gustatory expansion,
and are, consequently, unaltered by closing the nostrils; but, as
most sapid substances have also an odour, and expiration takes
place frequently during mastication and generally directly after
deglutition, the odorous emanations are made to pass over the pi-
tuitary membrane. Odour, which thus accompanies taste, is
termed flavour.

Sugar, salt, and vinegar, have each areal taste, which can be
affected neither by catarrh, palsy of the olfactory nerves, nor by
stopping the nostrils ; but the flavour and odour of roast meats, of
spices, of liqueurs, &c., are identical, and they are affected equally
by the same conditions.

Dr. Prout, I believe, was the first who pointed out the distinc-
tion between taste and flavour. He conceived, however, that
flavour was intermediate between taste and smell.

I have seen instances of the loss of smell from a fall on the
head, and other violent causes. Whatever had no odour could be
tasted as usual: but the mechanical and pungent qualities only of
simply odorous bodies habitually taken into the mouth could be
perceived ; and bodies both odorous and sapid were tasted only,
and therefore but imperfectly judged of.°

Some tribes of uncivilised men far surpass us in the power of
smell. The American Indians have distinguished men of differ-
ent nations by this sense. Dogs readily distinguish individuals
by its means, and in many brutes of prey it is very powerful.


_ ™ De anima brutorum. By Thos. Willis, M. D. 1672.
" London Med. and Physical Journal. 1812.
® I was consulted by a tea-broker who lost his smell from a fall on his head,
and could no longer judge of teas. He went through the form of tasting teas
at the East India House, that his inability might not be suspected, but he was
totally insensible to their flavour. He tasted salt and sugar as well as ever,
00


544 SMELL.


Angelo Poliziano says that after a battle a flock of famished
vultures arrived the next day from a distance of 166 leagues
to devour the bodies. But Mr. Audubon relates two experiments
to show that vultures are indebted to acuteness of sight rather
than of smell. He stuffed a deer’s skin with hay, allowed it to be-
come as dry as leather, and placed it in a field: in a few minutes
a vulture made for it, attacked it, tore open the stitches, and
pulled out the hay. He then put a large dead hog into a ravine,
and concealed it with cane; it putrefied and gave forth an intoler-
able stench, but the vultures which were sailing about in all
directions in search of food never discovered it, although several
dogs had been attracted and had fed plentifully on it. He next
stuck a young pig and covered it closely with leaves : vultures
soon saw the blood, descended to it, and by its means discovered
the pig, which they devoured while still fresh.

Whenever smell is naturally powerful, the organ and olfac-
tory nerves are greatly developed. In disease it may become
surprisingly acute. T. Bartholin mentions an individual, labour-
ing under dropsy, who could name the individuals in the next
room by smell.” The boy Mitchel, deaf and blind from his birth,
is described by Mr. Wardrop as having, probably from great use
and attention, so powerful a sense of smell, that, ** when a stranger
approached him, he eagerly began to touch some part of his
body, commonly taking hold of the arm, which he held near his
nose, and after two or three strong inspirations, appeared to
form a sudden opinion regarding him. If this was favourable, he
showed a disposition to become more intimate, examined more
minutely his dress, and expressed by his countenance more or less
satisfaction : but, if it happened to be unfavourable, be suddenly
went off to a distance, with expressions of carelessness or of dis-
gust.”4


» Acta Hafniensia. However, in the same work (vol. i.) it is related by a
Dr. Marcus Marci, on his own testimony, that a priest at Prague could distinguish
incorrect from correct ladies by his nose. Yet this was not worse than the declar-
ation in London, a few years ago, of a once extensively employed insanity
doctor, that he could distinguish madmen by his nose, — that madmen do not
smell like other people.

1 History of James Mitchel, &c. By James Wardrop. London, 1813.


SMELL. 545


All animals exposed to the air have perhaps the sense of smell. Its seat has
been referred in the air-breathing annelides and insects to the mouths or lateral
pores of the air sacs; or in the latter “to the delicate extremities of their long
flexible antennz, and the inner pair of those organs in the crustacea have been
considered as the seat of the same sense. The labial appendices of the conchi-
fera, the entrance to the respiratory sacs of pulmonated gasteropods, the highly
sensitive tentacula covered with a delicate mucous membrane, and even the
whole surface of the skin in the more elevated molluscous classes, have been
considered as the organs through which these animals receive impressions from’
odorous emanations. In the class of fishes, we observe the organ of smell to be
only a depression excavated on the anterior part ef the face, but it does not
communicate behind with the mouth, or the respiratory organs, or the interior of
the body.” « By the motions of fishes through the water they are sufficiently
exposed to receive impressions of odorous substances diffused through that
medium, without drawing dense water through those delicate organs for the
purposes of smell. Perhaps the volumes of water necessary to be carried con-
tinually through the mouth of fishes for respiration are too great, and would
prove too powerful a stimulus to have passed through such an organ of smell,
and to have allowed that organ to preserve its necessary delicacy, and therefore
it is quite apart from the passage through which that element is taken for re-
spiration in al] water-breathing animals. It is, obviously, however, in fishes an
organ of great delicacy and importance, and is of great’size, provided with very
large olfactory nerves, and large olfactory tubercles, coming off alone from the
hemispheres of the brain.” ‘* In the amphibious animals, where the respiration
of air begins to take place through the nostrils, the olfactory apparatus begins to
be more complicated and concealed.” In fish a plate of cartilage sometimes
divided the impervious olfactory cavity into two: in the ampbibia this “ begins
to assume now the more compact and convoluted form which the osseous plates
in the higher animals present. The surface of the organ thus increases in
extent, as we ascend through the reptiles and through the birds to the mam-
malia. In the perenni-branchiate amphibia the nostrils form still on each side
a simple sac, scarcely complicated internally, and having their posterior opening
so far formed in the mouth as to be immediately under the upper lip. In the
salamanders and frogs the nostrils are still, in the larva state, confined to the
exterior of the head, as in fishes ; but in the adult form, the posterior openings,
though within the cavity of the mouth, are still much advanced in their position,
and remote from the median line.” In the serpents the internal surface is
extended by the rudimentary turbinated bones, and by an enlarged nasal cavity,
opening posteriorly by a common orifice on the median line.” “ In the sauria
the turbinated bones begin to be strengthened by ossific matter and to assume
4 more complicated form : both the anterior and posterior openings of the nares
present enlarged dimensions, and the whole organ is more internal and more
protected by the expanded nasal bones. The organs of smell are more protected
and concealed in the solid head of the chelonian reptiles, where their surface is
increased in extent and their posterior openings are placed further back from
their primitive anterior aspect. The anterior openings of the nostrils are here


oo 2


546 SMELL.


very small, The olfactory nerves, and the whole organs of smell, are small in
birds. The anterior openings are large and oblique for respiration during their
rapid movements, and the various forms and positions of these apertures present
useful characters for the distinction of species. The turbinated bones are larger
than in reptiles, though still but partially ossified, and the olfactory nerves pass
through the orbits into the nose. The defective development of this organ is
compensated for in some by the extensive distribution of its fifth or trifacial
nerves, on the upper and lower jaws, and in most by the great development of
the organs of vision. All the internal parts of the organs of smell become more
complex and elaborate in quadrupeds, new cavities open into their interior, as
the frontal, maxillary, and frontal sinuses, and the exterior nares assume a more
lengthened and expanded form. Most of these animals we observe to have all
the nasal cancellated bones of great size and presenting an immense surface,
both on the ethmoid and turbinated bones, for the distribution of the olfactory
nerves, and we perceive in them a corresponding increase of power in their sense
of smell.” (Dr. Grant’s Lectures. Lancet, No. 569.) Gall refuted the asser-
tion of Cuvier and others, that carnivorous brutes have a more acute smell and
larger olfactory nerves than the herbivorous; and thus replies to M. Duméril’s
opinion of odours not being transmissible by water, and of the organ of touch
occupying that of smell in the cetacea. “ Nature then has made a mistake in
placing one of the special organs of animals that live in water, and amused her-
self with this prank when she formed otters, seals, and all fish, and henceforth
all attempts to catch fish and crabs with odorous bait will be fruitless.” 1. c. 4to.
vol. i. p. 158. sq.


CHAP. AXY,
HEARING.


By Hearing we are able to appreciate the vibratory motions
of elastic bodies, when their frequency is within certain limits.
Some experiments by Dr. Wollaston prove that these limits
vary in different individuals ; but the average extent of the scale
of sounds perceptible to the human ear has been estimated to
be between 30 and 12,000 vibrations of the sonorous body per
second.

The undulations to which these vibrations give rise may be
transmitted through any substance, either aériform, liquid, or
solid: but the air is the ordinary medium by which they reach
the ear. The velocity of transmission depends on the specific
elasticity of the substance ; according to the latest experiments,
sound travels through air at the rate of about 1142 feet per
second.

With regard to the sensation of sound, three independent qua-
lities must be distinguished : 4

Ist. The tune, or pitch ; which depends on the frequency with
which the vibrations succeed each other.

2d. The loudness, or intensity; which is determined by the
amplitudes of the vibrations.

3d. The timbre: — For this word, adopted in France to express
the specific differences of sound which are not comprehended in
any of the preceding definitions, there is no analogous term in
our language; nor have we at present the least idea of the true
causes of these modifications of sound. In some cases the inde-
finite expression quality of tone is employed.

When two or more sounds are heard simultaneously, or succes-
sively, the mind by a peculiar faculty perceives the relative fre-


® C. Wheatstone, Experiments on Sound. Annals of Philosophy. New Series,
vol. vi. p. 81.
OO go


548 HEARING.


quency and coincidences of the vibrations. Two sounds are
regarded as consonant, when the ratio of their vibrations is very
simple ; and as dissonant, when the ratio is more complex. The
rules which determine the most agreeable successions and com-
binations of sounds constitute the science of music.

The power of appreciating musical combinations, and conse-
quently the pleasure of listening to them, depends upon a mental
faculty seated in a particular portion of the brain, and not upon
the acuteness of hearing. A person of the quickest ears may have
no music in his soul, and persons of dull ears have often a good
ear for music. Many authors have ascribed perception of the
musical qualities of sounds to the ear, although there is no relation
between acuteness of hearing and musical talents. The ear
merely presents the sounds, an inward sense perceives their
musical qualities. This inward sense resides in a particular por-
tion of the brain, and is proportionate to the perfection of its
organisation and size. In all the cases, which I have examined,
of flatness or depression of the part of the forehead corre-
sponding to this, the perception of music has been defective ;
and, in all instances of good musical talent, this part has been
full or prominent. The examination of singing birds proves the
same thing. Others have with equal absurdity ascribed the idiotism
of some persons born deaf to their defect of hearing. Persons
may be both idiotic and deaf: but the defect of intellect depends
upon the defect of the superior anterior parts of the brain, in
quality or quantity.»

The organs of hearing are situated at the two sides of the head,
in a portion of the temporal bone, which is considered the hardest
in the human body. ‘The parts which constitute these organs
are the external ear, the meatus auditorius, the tympanum, and
the labyrinth. The last named part is, there can be little
doubt, the seat of sensation, and the other parts serve only to
communicate to the labyrinth the impressions from the sonorous
agitations of the air.

The external ear is a shell-formed cartilage having various
elevations and depressions. This appears destined to collect and


b On both these errors, see Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. i. 161. sqq. See also l.c.
8vo. t. v. p. 96. sqq.

© « Sommerring, Icones Organor. Humanor. Auditus, Francof. 1806, fol,”

4 « B.S. Albinus, Annotat. Academ. |. vi. tab. iv.”


HEARING. 549


reinforce the sound. It is furnished with several muscles for the
purpose of changing its form; but few individuals have the power
of using them. It is generally supposed that the habit has been
lost in most persons from the earliest infancy, on account of the
pressure of the coverings of the head. Be this as it may, some
persons preserve the power of controlling these muscles, and I
have myself seen an individual in whom the motions arising from
their action were perfectly voluntary.°

The meatus auditorius is partly cartilaginous and partly bony. It
is lined by a bitter cerumen.f The external ear becomes tubular,
and thus continues to the osseous part, where it is terminated by
the membrane of the tympanum, the office of which is to receive im-
pressions from the agitations of the air, in order to transmit them
to the internal ear.¢ The membrane of the tympanum is of an
irregular conical form, something like a Chinese hat; its con-
cavity is on the outside, and its projecting point on the inside.
It is fixed to a bony rim which is called its frame.

The cavity of the tympanum occupies the space between the
membrane and the labyrinth. It is an irregular cavity, nearly
hemispherical ; it is filled with air and communicates with the
back part of the mouth by means of a canal called the Bustachian
tube." The side which is opposite the membrane presents an ob-


¢ « V. J. Rhodius ad Scribon. Largum. p. 44. sq.

J. Alb. Fabricius, De Hominibus ortu non differentibus. Opuscul. p. 441.

Ch. Collignon, Miscellaneous Works. Cambridge. 1786. 4to. p. 25. sq.”

f « Consult J. Haygarth, Med. Obs. and Inquiries, vol. iv. p. 198. sq.”

The cerumen consists, according to Vauquelin, of albumen, which, when
burnt, yields soda and phosphate of lime, a colouring matter, and a very bitter
inspissated oil strongly resembling the peculiar matter of bile. Cicero explains
one use of the cerumen :— “ Provisum etiam, ut, si qua minima bestiola co-
naretur irrumpere, in sordibus aurium, tanquam in visco, inheeresceret.” (De
Natura Deorum, 1.ii.) The same applies to particles of dust. Its extreme
bitterness, too, deters insects from advancing.

& « See the distinguished Himly’s acute comparison of the organs of hearing
and vision, Bibliothek fiir Opthalmologie, vol.i. p.6. sqq.”’

h «& Saunders, Anatomy of the Human Ear, Lond. 1806. fol. tab. i. ii.”

‘< Comparative anatomy renders it most probable that the Eustachian tube
is subservient to the action of the membrana tympani. It is found in all red-
blooded animals which possess a membrana tympani, but is wantitig in fishes
which are destitute of this membrane. The different opinions of the moderns
respecting its use may be found in Reil’s Archiv fiir die Physiol, t.ii, p. 18.,
iii, p.165.,iv. p.105., viii. p. 67., ix. p. 320.”

oo 4


550 HEARING.


lique projection, called the promontory; above this projection
there is an opening of the labyrinth called the fenestra rotunda’,
and which is shut by a membrane; below, there is another aper-
ture of the labyrinth, the fenestra ovalis, where the impressions of
the vibrations upon the membrana tympani are communicated to
the labyrinth, by a very flexible intermediate apparatus, consist-
ing of a chain of four small bones *, —the malleus or hammer, the
incus or anvil, the lenticular bone, and the stapes or stirrup.

_ The hammer consists of a long and thin handle, the extremity
of which adheres to the membrane of the tympanum ; and of a
head, which forms an angle with the handle and is articulated with
the anvil. It is united to the bony rim of the membrane by its
spinous process, which may be regarded as the fixed point of the
lever. The anvil is on one side articulated with the head of the
hammer ; and the opposite part has two processes, one of which
serves as a resting point, and the other is articulated by means of
the lenticular bone with the stirrup. The stirrup, which is so
called from its close resemblance in form to that object, makes
almost a right angle with the anvil, and its moveable base closes the
fenestris ovalis of the labyrinth, the interior of which it agitates


]. External ear.

A part of it called concha ; and orifice
of the meatus externus.

Meatus externus.

. Membrana tympani.

. Malleus.

Incus.

Stapes and os lenticulare.

. Vestibule.

. Three semicircular canals.

Cochlea.


to


SEHPNaAnayS


i « Scarpa, De Structura Fenestra Rotunda, &c. Mutin. 1772. 8vo.”

k « The existence of a fourth bone (called lenticular), commonly admitted
since the time of Franc. Sylvius, I have disproved at large in my Osteology,
p. 155. sq. edit. 2. It is wanting in the greater number of perfect examples
from adults.”


HEARING. 551


by its pressure. The hammer is provided with three muscles
the stirrup only with one, and the anvil has none.!

There can be no doubt that the use of this apparatus is to
enable us to hear more perfectly: but there are instances in which
the hearing has remained after the destruction of these organs. Sir
A. Cooper has recorded such cases ™; and deafness has even been
suspended, for a short time, by perforating the membrana tympani-
In these cases the sound appears to be transmitted to the laby-


-


aad, first turn or gyration of the cochlea.
6b b, second turn.


c, third turn.

d, very short canals for the entrance of nerves.

ee, other holes for the passage of nerves and blood-vessels to the internal ears,

fi canal in the base of the cochlea for the passage of a nervous twig to the
infundibulum.

g, portion of the aqueduct of the cochlea.

h, canal for the passage of the nerves of the elliptic vesicles of the superior
vertical and horizontal semicircular canal.

i, opening for the passage of the nerves of the inferior semicircular canal, and
the nervous flabelliform expansion.

k, aqueduct of the vestibule.

I, superior vertical semicircular canal.

n, inferior vertical semicircular canal.

u, canal produced by the junction of the two vertical semicircular canals.

0, horizontal semicircular canal.


1 « B.S. Albinus, Tabule Muscul. tab. xi. fig, 29.”
™ Phil. Trans. 1800.


552 HEARING.


rinth by the immediate action of the air upon the membrane of
the fenestra rotunda, which Scarpa calls the secondary membrane
of the tympanum,

The labyrinth, so called on account of its complicated canals,
s the internal part of the organs of hearing, and is hewn out of
the hardest portion of the temporal bone. It contains the sub-
stance of the auditory nerves, variously spread as layers and fibres
in a gelatinous water. Its parts are the three semicircular
canals, the vestibule, and the cochlea.

The semicircular canals, two of which are vertical, and the
third nearly horizontal, contain similar membranous canals, each
of which has a swelling at its extremity. These canals terminate
by their extremities in the vestibule or central cavity. The
cochlea, in part osseous and partly membranous, winds round a
conical axis, in a spiral which makes two turns and a half and
which diminishes so that the cochlea approaches to the globular
form. One of its two gyrations terminates at the fenestra rotunda,
which communicates with the cavity of the tympanum; the other
proceeds to the vestibule, which itself communicates with the same
cavity by means of the fenestra ovalis.

“The vestibule and semicircular canals loosely contain very
delicate membranous bags, discovered by the celebrated Scarpa :
viz., two sacs which lie in the vestibule, and three semicircular
ducts in the canals of the same name.” |

‘«« These sacs, as well as the cavity of the cochlea, contain a very
limpid fluid, bearing the name of Cotugno, who showed it to be
absorbed by two canals, which are by him denominated aque-
ducts®, and by Meckel diverticula ?: the one arises from the vesti-
bule, the other from the inferior scala of the cochlea.

‘“‘ The portio mollis of the seventh” pair or acoustic nerve arises
from the fore-part of the floor of the fourth ventricle, is at first
soft, but soon becomes firmer and more fibrous, and, “ having, to-
gether with the portio dura (which afterwards runs along the
aqueduct of Fallopius 4), entered the internal acoustic opening,
transmits its medullary filaments into the lower and cribriform


" « Scarpa, Disquisitiones Anatomice de Auditu et Olfactu, tab. iv. fig. 5,
tab. vii. fig. 3.”

© “ Cotunni, De Agueductibus auris humane. Neap. 1761. 4to.”

Pp « Ph. Fr, Meckel, De Labyrinthi auris contentis. Argent. 1777. 4to.”

1 «© Fallopius, Observ. Anat. p. 27. b. sq. WVenet. 1561. 8vo.”


HEARING. 553


part of it." These filaments run partly to the vestibule and semi-
circular canals, but especially to the base of the cochlea, where,
in the form of a medullary zonula, marked by very elegant
plexiform striz, they pass between the two laminz of the sep-
tum cochlee s,” forming according to Mr. Swan, a net-work, and
beautifully terminating in a still more fibrous expansion than the
optic nerve.

The facial nerve enters the internal auditory canal in company
with the acoustic, which it leaves, and passes through the aqueduct
of Fallopius to come out at the foramen stylo-mastoideum. In the
aqueduct it gives a filament to the little muscles within the ear.
The posterior branch or Vidian nerve of the superior maxillary
of the trigeminum, after entering the aqueduct of Fallopius and
lying in contact, but not anatomosing with, the facial, gives off a
nerve which traverses the tympanum under the name of chorda
tympani, and leaves the cranium at the glenoidal fissure. Thus
the ear, like the eye and the tongue, has nerves of special sense,
of simple sensibility, and of motion.

Notwithstanding the scrupulous examination of the construc-
tion of the organs of hearing by anatomists, very little that is
certain is known with regard to the uses of the various parts. It
is true that many theories have been advanced, but they have for
the most part been founded upon analogies which in the present
state of acoustic science will not bear investigation.

The hypotheses of M. Savart, which have in general been sug-
gested by accurate experiments, are the most rational which have
hitherto been proposed, and the following are the conclusions at
which he has arrived from his experiments.

Ist. That it is not necessary to suppose, as hitherto has been
done, the existence of a peculiar mechanism to bring the mem-
brane of the tympanum continually in unison with the sonorous
bodies which act upon it; since it is obviously always in those
conditions which render it capable of being influenced by any
number of vibrations whatever. Q2dly. That its tension pro-
bably only varies to augment or diminish the amplitude of its
excursions, as Bichat had conjectured: this eminent physiologist,

* « Consult Brendel, Analecta de Concha auris humane. Gotting. 1747. 4to,

The same, De Auditu in apice conchae, Ib. eod. 4to.”


* “ Consult Zinn, Observ. Botan. Gotting. 1753. 4to. p.31. sq.
Scarpa, l.c. tab. viii. fig. 1, 2.”


554 HEARING.


however, supposed that it was stretched for intense impressions,
and relaxed for the weaker, which is contrary to what is de-
monstrated by experiment. 3dly. That its vibrations are com-
municated without alteration ‘to the labyrinth by means of the
chain of small bones, in the same manner as the vibrations of the
belly of a violin are communicated to the back by means of the
sound post. 4thly. That the small bones have also for their func-
tion to modify the amplitude of the excursions of the vibrating
parts of the organs contained within the labyrinth. And lastly,
That the cavity of the tympanum probably serves to maintain,
near the openings of the labyrinth and the internal surface of
the membrana tympani, an air the physical properties of which
are constant.

Weber has endeavoured to explain the use of the cochlea.
He remarks that sound is propagated through, not only the meatus
auditorius externus, but the bones of the head ; and, indeed, more
distinctly through them. If both ears are stopped firmly with the
fingers, our own voice becomes more loud and distinct. If we re-
move one finger immediately, we hear our own voice stronger with
the other ear. If a musical sounding fork under vibration is placed
between the teeth, the lips closed and both ears stopped, its
tones are heard louder than if the ears were open: open one
ear, and the sound is lessened to that ear. If the fork is applied
to the left temple and the right ear only closed, the sound is
fouder to the right ear than to the left which is open. Now
sounds propagated through one uniform medium, fluid or solid,
lose but little of their force ; whereas in passing from one medium
to another, as from a fluid to a solid or vice versd, they lose much
of their force. In the shaft of a mine the sound of a hammer in
a neighbouring shaft is heard very well if the ear is placed in con-
tact with the rock; if this is not done it is heard less, and the
sound of voices in the other shaft not at all. Sounds transmitted
through water may be heard at great distances if the head is under
water ; and are inaudible as soon as the head emerges. The effect
of a window in lessening the noises of the street is a similar instance
Now the sonorous vibrations which pass from the air through the
bones of the head to the internal ear will act on the cochlea, be-
cause it is the nearest and has its share of the acoustic nerve in
intimate contact with itself, and is both osseous and forms a portion
of the osseous communication between the mouth and the internal


HEARING. 555


ear. The vibrations proceeding from the air within the mouth
cannot be transmitted so easily to the branches of the acoustic
nerve distributed to the vestibule and semicircular canals, because
these, spread out as a sacculated and tubular membrane, are stu-
diously separated from the bones by a liquid secretion or loose
cellular membrane. Weber therefore concludes that the cochlea
is intended to place the extremities of the acoustic nerve in con-
nection with a vibrating solid. On the other hand, he concludes
that the use of the semicircular canals is to be in connection
with a vibrating fluid and receive the impulses of the air through
the meatus auditorius. Because, 1. the vestibule and semicircular
canals have a solid communication by the chain of bones with the
membrana tympani, whose vibrations are at once imparted by
them to the membrana of the fenestra ovalis ; whereas there is no
such direct communication between the membrana tympani and the
fenestra rotunda. 2. The membrane of the semicircular canals
and vestibule seem more easily thrown into vibrations by the fluid
around them than the lamina spiralis of the cochlea. The latter
also, however, is enabled to receive impulses from the air, by the
membrane of the fenestra rotunda communicating the vibrations
which occur in the tympanum, and by the opening of the cochlea
into the vestibule causing the vibrations of the fluid of the vesti-
bule to be at once propagated to the cochlea.

Weber states that Scarpa was the first to discover the remark-
able difference in consistence and texture which exists between
that portion of the acoustic nerve which supplies the cochlea, and
that which is distributed to the vestibule and semicircular canals.
The latter, surrounded on all sides by a fluid, are soft and pulpy,
evidently fitted to receive impulses from a fluid: the former, on
the contrary, fine and ramified, as evidently adapted to the re-
ception of vibrations from a solid.

I must state that Professor Wheatstone above ten years ago
made experiments similar to those of Weber and with the same
results.t His views respecting the functions of the semicircular
canals differ from those advanced by Weber. He maintains that


* See his Experiments on Audition in the Journal of Science, New Series,
vol. ii, p.67. 1827. Some curious and original observations and experiments
will be found in a paper by Dr. Wollaston, Phil. Trans. 1820; and some inter-
esting facts in Savart’s Memoir.


556 HEARING.


sounds are transmitted to the internal organs of hearing in two
manners ; first, in the manner ordinarily understood, and secondly
by the solid part of the head.

The perception that we have of the direction of sounds he sup-
poses to arise solely from the portion which is transmitted through
the solid parts of the head, and which, affecting the three semi-
circular canals, situated in planes at right angles with each other,
with different degrees of intensity according to the direction in
which the sound is transmitted, suggests to the mind the corre-
sponding direction. If the sound is transmitted in the plane of
either of the semicircular canals, the nervous matter in that canal
will be more strongly acted on than that in either of the other
two; and if it be transmitted in any plane intermediate between
any two of the rectangular planes, the relative intensities in these
two canals corresponding therewith will vary with the direction of
the intermediate plane. The ordinary notion respecting our per-
ception of the direction of sound is that we compare the relative
intensity of the sensation in the two ears, and thus judge of its
direction. Were this true, a sound produced any where in the
prolongation of the mesial plane, whether before, behind, or
above the head, should suggest no difference of direction ;
whereas we know from experience the contrary to be the case.
The views of Professor Wheatstone were first announced in Mr,
Mayo’s lectures at the College of Surgeons.


As most of the lower invertebrate animals live in water, the percussions of
which must powerfully effect their surface, naturalists do not find a special
organ for hearing among them, till they ascend as high as the air-breathing
insects. In these it is more complicated than in any other invertebrata, for
many of them emit sounds intended to be heard by their kind. Some have hard
instruments for this purpose which they rub against each other, and thus the
male and female correspond in the dark for their amours. Insects have not only
the first elements of an ear,—the auditory nerve and vestibule, but the rudi-
ments of two semicircular canals: fluid exists within, and the vestibule has a
fenestra ovalis covered with a thin membrane. But in the aquatic invertebrata,
as the lobster, cray-fish, and crab, the nerve and vestibule with its fenestra ovalis
and membrane only are found. In those which have long tails and swim briskly,
like the two former, the membrane is delicate and vibratile, whereas in those


HEARING. 557


which move slowly and have all their organs of sense dull, like the latter, it is
dense, and in the crab distinctly ossified. The fixed and slow moving mollusca,
as the oyster, barnacle, muscle, slug, snail, have dull senses in general; and their
organ of hearing has not been detected, but some appear to hear, and one, — the
tritonia arborescens, emits audible sounds, intended no doubt to be heard by its
own kind. The cephalopods, however, as the cuttle-fish and nautilus, ap-
proaching to fishes in complexity of structure, quickness of motion, and acute-
ness of sight, have also a higher development of the organ of hearing. We first
find a calcareous substance in the fluid of the vestibule, acting probably like the
clapper of a bell. “ In passing up through the vertebrated classes, we observe
the organ gradually developing the semicircular canals and cochlea, and becoming
enveloped in the solid parietes of the cranium; it acquires a tympanic cavity
communicating with the fauces by the Eustachian tube, and containing the ossicula
auditus, which convey the vibrations of the membrana tympani to the vestibule
and the whole internal labyrinth ; and in the highest forms of the organ a still
more exterior meatus auditorius, and complicated moveable concha are added to
complete the instrument.” Thus, although in the lowest cyclostome or cartilagi-
nous fishes, as the lamprey, the ear is of no higher order than in the cephalepodous
mollusca, without canals or calcareous substance, the osseous fishes have cal-
careous bodies in the vestibule, and large semicircular canals ending in considerable
ampullz. Still the organ is in the common cranial cavity, and not enclosed in
the temporal hone, nor are there usually a meatus and external opening. In the
large cartilaginous fishes, as the sturgeon and the rays, the ear is imbedded in
the cartilaginous temporal bone: in the former the semicircular canals only, the
vestibule being still in the cranial cavity; in the latter the whole: andthe
vestibule has sacs which are the rudiments of a cochlea. The lowest reptiles
resident in water, — the perenni-branchiate species, as the newt, have ears like
those of fishes, and sounds are equally communicated through the solid walls
only of their cranium. The same structure exists in the larva of the caduci-
branchiate, as tadpoles ; but, when the animal loses its gills and becomes a frog,
the semicircular canals are imbedded in a distinct cavity of the temporal bone,
atympanum, Eustachian tube, and three soft ossicula united are seen, and the skin
forms a membrana tympani ona level with the surface of the head, In the serpents
the ear is much the same. In the saurian reptiles the tympanum is much larger.
In the crocodile there is an appendage like a rudiment of a cochlea, and on the
margin of the membrana tympani two folds of skin, like eyelids, are found, which
appear like the rudiments of a concha. In the chelonia, as the tortoise, the
tympanum and united bones are of greater length, and a cochlea is more dis-
tinctly developed. In birds, the organ is greatly advanced, and large in pro-
portion to the head. It is completely enveloped in bone of rocky hardness; the
semicircular canals are smaller than in fishes, but with larger ampulle ; the
vestibule is lengthened ; the cochlea begins to assume a spiral form, though it
still has a remnant of the calcareous bodies found in the labyrinth of fishes ; the
tympanum is lengthened, and numerous cranial cells communicate with it;
a short meatus externus appears; and in nocturnal predaceous birds, which much
require the sense of hearing, a high crescentic fold of skin is found at the upper


558 HEARING.


and back part,—as a rudimentary concha ; and the feathers are so arranged around
as to serve the purpose of a concha: and this feature is very characteristic in owls.
In mammalia all the parts acquire their full development. The cochlea, the
size of which bears a pretty constant proportion to the acuteness of hearing, is
greatly developed, turbinated, and divided: the ampulle are often small: the
ossicula are first completely developed, are articulated, and supplied with
muscles; the Eustachian tube is lengthened; so likewise is the meatus externus,
and provided with hairs and a disagreeable secretion for defence; and the
concha, the size and mobility of which indicate acute hearing, is developed in this
class only, though frequently small or absent in the inferior species and the
aquatic, as whales, beavers, and seals. In the timid, which are to be pursued,
both it and the meatus are directed backwards ; in the predaceous, which are to
pursue, forwards: in the former too it is large, and the brain is small; in the
latter smal], and the brain is large: in the quadrumana, and especially in the
oran-outang, it becomes short, round, and motionless as in us. In the aquatic
mammalia, in order to prevent the entrance of water, the meatus is narrow and
winding, and the orifice very small; and in quadrupeds which dive or burrow,
a double membrane is provided, which can accurately close it. The hippopo-
tamus, which feeds at the bottom of rivers, has an apparatus for the same
purpose. (See Dr. Grant, Lancet, No. 569., and Outlines of Comparative Anatomy.
Dr. Roget, Bridgewater Treatise. )

Many animals surpass us in acuteness of hearing. The common birds about
us hear the faintest sound. ‘ Not only,” says Gall, “ are the vestibule and
semicircular canals proportionally larger in many brutes, but the acoustic
nerve and all its apparatus are more perfect. This nerve originates in a more
considerable mass of grey substance, and is consequently considerably larger, as
any one will find in the sheep, ox, horse, &c. The external concha is much
more developed in most brutes, and the great osseous cavities surrounding the
Jabyrinth in many produce a similar effect in augmenting the sound of the solid
and elastic vaults. These cavities, which must not be confounded with the mas-
toid processes, contain, in many brutes, for instance, in the calf, concentric canals
which unite into a common cavity, and must evidently increase the sound.”
(1. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 161.)


CHAP. XXVI.
SIGHT.


“THE instruments of vision, —the eyes®, are two moveable
globes, fixed to the optic nerves, whose decussation we formerly
noticed, as it were to stalks, in such a manner that their insertion
is not exactly opposite the centre of the cornea and iris, but on
one side of this imaginary axis, — rather nearer to the nose.

** They consist of various coats containing pellucid humours
of different densities, so placed that the rays of light can pass
from the transparent anterior segment of the bulb to the opposite
part of the fundus.

“« The external coat is called sclerotic. It is deficient in the
centre, and that part is filled up by the cornea, which is trans-
parent, lamellated (lined internally by the membrane of the aqueous
humour, or of Demours), more or less convex, and projects like
the segment of a small globe from one of rather larger size. »

“« The interior of the sclerotic is lined by the chorioid, which
abounds in blood-vessels¢, especially vorticose veins, and is
covered on each side by a black pigment, which adheres but
loosely to its concave surface in the form of mucus.4


* « Sam. Th. Sommerring (the father), Icones oculi humani. Francof. 1801.
fol.

Detm. W. Sommerring (the son), De oculorum sectione horizontali Comment-
arius. Gotting. 1818. fol.”

b«G, H. Gerson, De forma cornee deque singulari visus phenomeno.
Gotting. 1810. 4to.

Al. Clemens, Tunice cornee et hwmoris aquei monographia. Gotting.
i816. 4to.

M. J. Chelius, Ueber die durchsichtige Hornhaut. Carlsr. 1818. 8vo.”

“ «Sam. Th. Von Sommerring, in the Denkschr. der Akad, der Wiss. xu
Miinchen. 1817. tab. 1.”

* « C. Mundini, in the Comm. Instit. Bononiens. t. vii. p. 29.

H, F. Elsaesser (pres. G. C. Ch. Storr), De pigmento oculi nigro. Tubing.
1800, 8yo,”’


oe


560 SIGHT.


“ The chorioid is internally coated by the retina®e —an ex-
pansion of the optic nerve after this has passed through the
sclerotic and chorioid‘, of most beautiful textures, and per-
forated, in the imaginary axis of the eye, between the two prin-
cipal twigs of the central artery”, by the singular central foramen
of Sommerring', which is surrounded by a yellow edge.” *

A delicate transparent membrane has been discovered by Dr.
Jacob of Dublin between the retina and chorioid, and adherent
to both.!

‘¢ The anterior edge of the chorioid is terminated by a cellular
belt, called orbiculus ciliaris, by which it adheres firmly to a cor-
responding groove in the sclerotic, and from which two other
membranes of a different kind, viz. the iris and ciliary processes,
are expanded in a circular form.


e « B, S. Albinus, dnnotat. Academ. |, iii. p. 59. sq. liv. p. 75. sq. L v.
p- 66. sq.”

f « Walter, De venis oculi, &c. TBerol. 1778. 4to. tab, i. fig. 2. tab. ii.
fig, 2.”

& « The extremely beautiful blood-vessels of the retina were first discovered by
J. Mery to be visible in a living cat plunged under water, Mém. de I’ dead. des
Sc. de Paris, avant 1699, t. x. p. 650.; and 1704, p. 265.

The most beautifully radiated surface of the retina in the hare was displayed
by Zinn in an admirable engraving. Comm. Soc. Scient, Gotting. t. iv. 1754,
tab. viii. fig. 3.

By Fontana, in the rabbit, Swr le vénin de la vipere, vol. ii. tab. v. fig. 12.”

h « A plate accurately representing the course of these branches will be found
in the @uvres de Mariorrr, p. 527. fig. 1.”

i « Sommerring, De Ioramine centrali limbo luteo cincto retine humane : in
the Comment. Soc. Reg. Scient. Gotting. t. xiii.

Ph. Michaelis, Journal der Erfindungen in der Natur-und Arzneywiss,
Py xv”

k « As I have discovered this central aperture in the eye of no animal besides
man, except the guadrumana, the axes of whose eyes are, like the human, parallel
to each other, I think its wse connected with this parallel direction of the eyes,
and have endeavoured to explain the connection at large, in my Handbuch der
vergleichenden Anatomie, p. 402. sq. 2d edit.

As, on the one hand, this direction of the eyes renders one object visible to
both at the same time, and therefore more distinctly visible; so, on the other,
this foramen prevents the inconvenience of too intense a light, if there is a pro-
bability that it expands and dilates a little under this circumstance, and thus
removes the principal focus from the yery sensible centre of the retina.”

1 Phil, Trans, 1819. Also, on various other points in the anatomy of the eye,
Med, Chirurg. Trans, vol. xii. P. 2.


SIGHT. 561


«‘ The iris (whose posterior surface is lined by a brown pig-
ment, and termed wvea) lies anteriorly to the ciliary processes,
is flat, and washed on all sides by the aqueous humour ; narrower
towards the nose, broader towards the temples. Its texture is
dense and cellular, and contains no vestige of muscular fibre.
We must regard it, with Zinn™, as a membrane sui generis, and
not as a prolongation of the chorioid. The anterior surface is
differently coloured in different persons, and, during life, has a
flocculent appearance.®

“ The blood-vessels of the iris run chiefly on its anterior sur-
face, and in the feetus are continued into the membrana pupillaris®,
which begins to open in its centre at the seventh or eighth month
of pregnancy,—when the eyes have acquired some degree of size,
and when, probably, the elliptic arches of its vessels begin to be
gradually retracted into the inner ring of the iris, which ring I
have never been able to perceive distinctly before that period.

‘‘ The posterior of the two circular membranes bears the
name of ligamentum or corpus ciliare; and, inclining backwards,
lies at a distance from the iris. Its external edge is thickp and
adheres to the ciliary circle: the internal is thin, and, to-
gether with the adjacent zonwla of Zinn4, surrounds the margin
of the capsule of the lens. The brown pigment is copiously dif-
fused over it.

“ Its anterior surface, lying opposite to the uvea, is striated.

‘¢ The posterior, lying upon the vitreous humour, is marked
by about seventy plice, which are beautifully flocculent, and re-
markable for a set of indescribably minute and elegant blood-


m ¢ Comment. Soc. Scient, Gotting. t. ive p. 199.”

" ¢¢ On the remarkable mutual relation of the arteries and nerves of the internal
parts of the eye, and especially of the iris, see Diet. G. Kieser, De Anamorphosi
ocul, Gotting. 1804. 4to.”

° « This beautiful membrane was first discovered by Francis Sandys—a cele-
brated maker of anatomical preparations: it was first described and exhibited in
an engraving by Ever. J. Wachendorf, Commerc. litter. Nor. 1740, hebd. 18.”

P « The ciliary canal, discovered by Fel. Fontana, (Sur le vénin de la vipére,
vol. ii. tab. vii. fig. 8, 9, 10.) and afterwards described more accurately by
Adolp. Murray (Nov. act. Upsaliens. vol. iii.), runs, in bisulcous animals, along
this thick edge.”

1 « Doellinger, Nov. Act. de. N. C. t. ix. p. 267. sqq. tab. vil.

C. J. M. Langenbeck, Neue Bibl. fiir die Chirurgie, ili. B, 1, St. tab. 1, 11,”

PP 2


562 ; SIGHT.


vessels. These flocculi are named ciliary processes, and their use
is still an object of inquiry. *

« In the bulb of the eye, whose coats we have now described,
are contained the humours, of three principal kinds.

“ The posterior, and by far the greater, part of the globe is
filled by the vitreous humour, which is in larger quantity pro-
portionally in the human subject, especially after puberty, than
in other animals, and so dispersed in innumerable drops through-
out the cells of the delicate hyaloid membrane that this membra-
naceo-lymphatic body has the singular appearance of a tremulous
jelly.

« Anteriorly it adheres to, and the zonula just mentioned sur-
rounds, the capsule containing the crystalline lens, immediately
around which lies the water of Morgagni.” :


a, point of junction of the sclerotic and cornea.
b, c, d, the sclerotic; growing thicker and thicker posteriorly.
e, opening of the sclerotic through which the optic nerve runs.
jf, anterior surface of the crystalline lens, bounding the anterior chamber of the
eye.
g, iris.
h, anterior chamber of the eye.
i, posterior surface of the crystalline.
kk, anterior termination of the retina.
1, m, fibrous covering of the optic nerve, continuous with the sclerotic.
my proper covering of the optic nerve.
0, section of the optic nerve.


“ The lens, itself also very pellucid, is cellular, but so much
more dense than the vitreous humour that in the hand it seems


¥ « Consult, among others, Brandis, Pathologie, p. 253.
And J. Aug. Hegar, De Oculi partibus quibusdam. Gotting. 1818. 8vo,
p- 25. sqq.”’


SIGHT: 563


like a very tenacious, although an amazingly clear, glue. Its
nucleus is more dense than the exterior lamine. The laminz may
be reduced into extremely delicate fibres, converging from the
circumference to the centre.*

“Tn an adult man the lens is proportionally to the whole body
smaller than in quadruped mammalia; also less convex, especially
on its anterior surface.

«© The remaining space of the eye is filled by the aqueous hu-
mour, which is very limpid, and divided by the iris into two cham-
bers : — the anterior and larger separating the cornea and iris;
and the posterior, in which the uvea lies towards the corpus ci-
liare, so small as scarcely believed by some to exist.

« These most valuable parts are defended from injury both by
the depth of their situation in the orbits and by the valvular
coverings of the eye-lids,

«In the duplicature of the palpebra, lie the sebaceous follicles
of Meibomiust, thickly distributed: and their edges are fringed
by atriple or quadruple series of cilia"; the cartilaginous éarsz
serve for their support and expansion, and also facilitate their mo-
tion upon the eye-ball.

« Above the eyelids, to use the language of Cicero, are placed
the supercilia, which preserve the eyes from the sweat flowing
from the head and forehead, and in some measure screen them
from too strong a light.

« To lubricate the eyes, to preserve their brightness, and to
wash away foreign matters, is the office of the tears ; the chief
source of which is a conglomerate gland placed in the upper and
exterior part of the orbit. It has numerous but very fine excre-
tory ducts, which are said to discharge about two ounces of
tears upon each eye during the twenty-four hours : the tears are
afterwards absorbed by the puncta lachrymalia, the function of
which may, in a certain sense, be compared to that of the lacteals
in the villous coat of the small intestines ; from the puncta they
are conveyed through the snail’s horns, as they are called, into


s « Th, Young, Phil. Trans. 1795, tab. xx. fig. 2, 3.

Dav. Hosack, ib. 1794, tab. xvii. fig. 4.

J. C. Reil, De lentis crystalline structura fibrosa. Hal. 1748. 8vo.”

t « Ef. Meibomius, De vasis palpebrarum novis ep. Helmst. 1666. 4to.”
-u « B, §, Albinus, Annotat, dcadem. |. iii, tab, iil, fig. 4,”


PP 3


564 SIGHT,


the lachrymal sac, and thence pass into the lower meatus of the
nostrils.” *

The tears appear to me to pass over the ball of the eye as
low as the edge of the superior tarsus, which is so applied to the
ball as not ordinarily to allow of their ready escape under it.” As
the upper lid descends and nearly covers the front of the eye
during sleep, for the lower has but little motion and the fine inner
edges of both meet, the whole of the ball is at this time readily
preserved moist. But, when the eyes are open, the front of the
eye between the lids would not be moistened unless the upper
tarsus occasionally descended with the fluid contained behind it.
A portion of the fluid, thus brought down upon the front of the
eye, remains after the upper lid rises again after winking, and
trickles by its gravity as far as the inferior tarsus, which, ascend-
ing a little as often as the superior descends, raises it somewhat.
Winking thus preserves the front of the eye constantly moist
during the waking state. The under eyelid in rising moves to-
wards the nose, as Sir C. Bell pointed out, and thus directs the
tears towards the puncta, and extraneous matters are both pushed
and washed towards the inner canthus, where the tears are always
seen to run over first.

It may be also observed that, when the tarsi approximate, as
they drive before them the moisture of the front of the eye-ball,
and the lower at the same time moves it somewhat towards the nose,
they quite inundate the puncta lachrymalia, by which circumstance
the puncta are, of course, enabled to carry off a large quantity of
the secretion, and ordinarily to prevent its overflow, which would
occur at the centre of the lower tarsus. During sleep the puncta
are not so copiously supplied, as they have only the same share
of tears as the eye in general; and there is less occasion for it,
because the removal of the stimulus of air and light by the closure
of the eyelids lessens the secretion.


x «J. Chr. Rosenmiiler, Organor. lachrymalium partiumque externarum
oculi humani Descriptio Anatomica, Lips. 1797. 4to.

Y The object of this firm application of the tarsi to the eye must be the exclu-
sion of foreign matters from the orbit. Sir C. Bell says that the margins of the
eyelids touch at their outer edges only, and leave a gutter between them and the
cornea. I cannot conceive this, as the inner edge of the tarsi appears firmly
applied to the eye. Phil, Trans. 1823. ;


SIGHT. 565


Dr. Magendie has found the matter of the tarsal or Meibomian
glands to be not sebaceous but albuminous, and soluble in the
tears : hence we discover why, during sleep, it accumulates on
the tarsi, —because its solvent, the tears, are not sufficiently
abundant to remove it.


« Thus much it was necessary to premise upon the structure
of the organ of vision. We now come to the function of the
organ, — to the explanation of vision.”

Sir D. Brewster, the best authority upon this subject, gives
the following data respecting the dimensions, motions, and re-
fractions of the eye. The total length of the axis of the eye
is about 0-91 inch; the principal focal distance of the crystal-
line lens is 1°73; and the range of the moving eyeball, which
determines the field of distinct vision, is 110°. The eye be-
ing stationary, its field of vision is 120° in the vertical plane,
50° being above the horizontal line and 70° below it. In the
horizontal plane its field is 150°, having 60° inwards and 90°
outwards.

The refractive powers of the different humours of the eye are
as follows ; the ray of light being incident upon them from air :—


’


Aqueous Crystalline Lens. . Vitreous
humour. Surface. Centre. Mean. humour.
1°336 1:3767  1°3990 1°3839 13394.


The refractive index of the aqueous humour, it will be ob-
served, is almost precisely that of pure water; and the indices of
the other media do not greatly differ from it.

As the rays refracted by the aqueous humour pass into the
crystalline, and those from the crystalline into the vitreous hu-
mour, the indices of refraction of each separating surface of these
humours will be


From aqueous humour to outer coat of the crystalline - - 1°:0466
From ditto to crystalline, the mean index being used = ~ 10353
From vitreous to crystalline outer coat - - - - 1°0446
From ditto to ditto, the mean index being used 0 - 1:0332


“ Rays of light, falling upon the cornea at an angle more acute
pl ee |


566 SIGHT.


than forty-eight degrees, pass through it, and, from both its den-
sity and figure, are considerably refracted towards the axis of the
eye, and on entering the aqueous humour-they experience rather
a less degree of refraction.

“‘ Those rays which penetrate the pupil, and are received by
the lens, are still more refracted on account of the greater den-
sity of this medium.

“‘ The less density of the vitreous humour. prevents the focus
of rays from being too short, and allows it to fall upon the retina
and exhibit the image of objects, though, from the laws of light,
necessarily inverted.”

By means of the indices of refraction above given, and the
known dimensions of the eye, it is easy to determine the path
which the rays of light travel through the humours of the eye,
whether they fall upon it in a parallel or a diverging condition.

_ Let a 6c be the eye, and d e an object at a considerable


This figure shows how the images of external objects are formed on the retina.


—S ~


This figure shows how the rays of light issuing from a point fall divergingly on
sa cornea, and are afterwards refracted so as to meet again in a single point on
the retina,


SIGHT. 567


distance from it. The rays which diverge from d and e will,
after undergoing the various refractions, converge to the points
d‘ e upon the retina, and will there form an inverted image of it,
precisely in the same manner as a convex lens forms an image
upon a sheet of white paper placed at its focus.

That an image or picture is actually thus formed on the retina,
may be shown by scraping away the sclerotic coat of the eye of
an ox, until it is sufficiently transparent for the image to be seen
through it.

*« Although the whole of the retina is sensible, it is not through-
out equally calculated to receive the images of objects.

“In the first place, the true axis of the human? eye, where
the optic nerve enters, is proved, by the well-known experiment
of Mariotte, to be nearly insensible to light.

“ The principal focus of the rest of the retina, and which must
be considered as the chief instrument of distinct vision, falls upon
an imaginary axis of the globe, corresponding with the’ centre
of the cornea and of the whole eye. This, however, as Kaestner
observes in opposition to Boerhaave, is not to be understood as
if only one point of an object could be seen distinctly at once,
the eye being fixed, and that, to behold another point, the axis
of the eye must be changed; for the sensation of an entire object
is simple and complete.»

‘‘ The habit of directing the axes of the eyes rapidly towards
objects is acquired by practice. This is proved by the example
of persons who were born blind but recovered their sight after
puberty ¢; and of children, who seldom acquire this facility of
motion before the third month.

«¢ An object can never be seen unless the angle of vision ex-
ceeds 34 seconds. "This was proved by the very beautiful expe-
riments of the acute Tob. Mayer, who formerly was one of our
number: and he demonstrated the great perfection of the human


z « T say the human eye; for in some animals now before me, the seal and
porcupine, for instance, the true and imaginary axes are the same, the optic nerve
lying exactly opposite the centre of the cornea and pupil.”

a « Troxler speaks of this at large, 1. c. t. ii. P.ii. p. 1.”

b « In Optica Quedam Boerhaavii et Halleri Commentatur Abr. Gotth.
Kaestner. Lips. 1785. 8vo. p. 7.”

© « See Gioy. Bortolazzi, Sopra una cieca nata guarita, Verona, 1781, 8vo.
p- 99. sq.”


568 SIGHT.


sight, by showing that this still remained the limit of vision in
any light, — in the splendour of the meridian sun and the faint
light of a lantern; so that vision remains almost equally distinct,
although the light be considerably diminished. ¢

«« We may hence infer the extreme minuteness of the images
of objects projected upon the retina ®, and nevertheless impressed
so forcibly upon it, that, under certain circumstances, their ves-
tiges remain after the removal of the objects from before the
eye.f

It has frequently been a question among philosophers, why
objects are seen erect, when the images which suggest them to
the mind are thus inverted. Some have supposed that infants at
first see objects upside down, and afterwards learn to correct
their erroneous sensation by comparing the information acquired
by touch with that obtained by sight. This opinion, held by Locke,
Lecat, Diderot, Buffon, &c., as well as that of our originally seeing
objects double and all as at the same distance and correcting these
errors by experience and the sense of touch, was amply refuted by
Bishop Berkley, and subsequently by Gall and others. The law
of visible direction affords the true explanation. The simple state-
ment of this law is that each point of an object is seen in a line
perpendicular to the point of the retina on which its image falls.
The surface of the retina being concave and nearly as possible
spherical, these lines of visible direction meet and cross at a point
within the eye which is called the centre of visible direction: the
lines from the upper part of the image go to the lower part of
the object, and those from the lower part of the image proceed
to the upper part of the object. An inverted image thus neces-
sarily produces an erect object, and the external object is the


a Tob. Mayer, Experimenia circa visus aciem, in the Commentar. Soc. Scient.
Gotting. t.iv.”’

© « De Ja Hire, Accidens de la Vue, p. 875.”

f « Gassendi, Vita Peireskii, p. 175. sq. Hague, 1655. 4to.

Franklin, Letters on Philosophical Subjects, at the end of his Expts. on Elec-
tricity, Lond. 1769. 4to. p. 469. sq.

Rob. War. Darwin, Experimenta nova de spectris s. imaginibus ocularibus, que
objectis lucidioribus antea visis, in oculo clauso vel averso percipiuntur. Lugd. Bat.
1785. Ato.

Dr. Darwin, Zoonomia, t.i.

C. Himly, Biblioth. Ophthalmolog. t.i. P.ii. p. 1.”

® 1. c. 4to, p. 180. sqq.


SIGHT, 569


thing to which the mind attends, and not the picture on the
retina. The mind is not placed behind the eye to look at this
image, as an observer is placed behind a camera obscura:
neither does it in this case, more than in any other concerning
perception, attend to the sensations themselves, which serve solely
to suggest to it the causes which produce them.

«‘ Since many conditions are requisite for distinct vision, the
Creator has wonderfully ordered the functions of these organs.

‘“‘ A sufficient, but, at the same time, a definite, quantity of
light, not too intense for distinct vision, is provided in two
modes: — First, according to the greater or less intensity of
the rays, a greater or less number of them pass to the lens ; —
Secondly, that portion which is superabundant and injurious to
vision is absorbed.

“ The first point is effected by the motion of the iris; the se-
cond, by the pigmentum nigrum.

“ The iris is endowed with remarkable mobility, and thus ac-
commodates itself to the intensity and distance of light, so that,
when exposed to a strong light or to near objects, it-may ex-
pand itself and contract the pupil, but, when to a weaker light
or more remote objects, it may contract itself and dilate that
opening."

‘* Physiologists have given different explanations of this mo-
tion. Some ascribe it to the varied impulses of blood into the
vessels ; others to contraction of the imaginary muscular fibres
of the iris. I have shown, in a particular treatise, that both
these circumstances are impossible, and that its proximate cause
may be sought for with more probability and reason in the
vita propria of the iris; the more remote cause, as we formerly
hinted, can be solely the reaction of the sensorium. i

‘“‘ The function of the dark pigment, so frequently mentioned,
viz. to absorb the superfluous rays, and, consequently, its im-
portance to the perfection of vision, are demonstrated, among
other modes, by the dissection of different kinds of animals, and
by the diseased condition of Albinos, whose eyes are very


nh « Zinn, De Motu Uvee, 1757, in the Comment. Soc. Scient. Gotting. t. i.

Fel. Fontana, Dei Moti dell’ Iride. Lucca. 1765. 8vo.”

‘ « For other explanations consult Troxler in Himly’s Ophthalmol, Biblioth. t. i.
nil, p. 21,”


570 SIGHT,


tender and impatient of light from the” absence of this pig-
ment.” k

Adaptation of the eye.— When the eye is directed to objects at
a distance, it is unable, at the same time, to see distinctly objects
which arenear. Some change is therefore requisite to accommo-
date the eye to see perfectly at different distances. ‘That the eye
thus adapts itself to distinct vision by a voluntary act, is evident
from the following simple experiment. If you hold a pencil near
the eye and direct the attention steadfastly to it, distant objects
will appear confused ; but if, without changing the position of the
eye, the attention be transferred to these distant objects, they will
become distinct and the pencil will appear confused. Many hy-
potheses have been proposed to explain the actions by which this
adaptation of the eye is effected, but none yet advanced has been
deemed entirely satisfactory. Kepler supposed that the eye
elongates itself in the direction of its axis in proportion as the ob-
ject to be viewed is nearer. Dr. Jurin, Sir E. Home, Ramsden,
and others, regarded the cornea as capable of changing its form
and curvature, — becoming more convex when the eye is adjusted
to see nearer objects. Descartes, Pemberton, Albinus, Hunter,
Olbers, and Dr. Young have endeavoured to prove that the crys-
talline lens is capable of moving in the direction of the axis of the
eye so as to vary its distance from the retina, — that it advances
to see near objects, and recedes to become fit for seeing distant ob-
jects. Ia Hire and Le Roy supposed that the mobility of the
pupil is alone sufficient to account for the phenomena. Dr. Ma-
gendie hastily denies that any adaptation is necessary, “ because,”
says he, “‘ the picture seen at the back of the eye of an ox, when
the sclerotic is scraped away, is equally distinct at whatever dis-
tance the object is placed before it.”

On paying attention to the phenomena, it will be observed that
the effort of adapting the eye to a near object is invariably at-
tended by the contraction of the pupil. Several eminent writers
have hence considered the motion which causes the adaptation to
be a consequence of the mobility of the iris. Dr. Knox thinks
that the contraction of the iris alters the curvature of the crys-
talline lens; Sir D. Brewster, that it displaces the crystalline;


k « T have spoken of Albinos at large in my work, De Generis Humani
Varietate Nativa, ed. 8, p.274,; and in my dissertation, De Oculis Leuce-
thiopum.”


SIGHT. 571


and Prof. Mile of Warsaw, that it changes the curvature of the
cornea.

Prof. Mile, by a great number of accurate and satisfactory
experiments, for which I refer the reader to the original memoir !,
has arrived at the following conclusions. Their truth is inde-
pendent of his hypothesis of the dependence of the curvature of
the cornea on the contraction of the iris, and the opinion of Sir
D. Brewster or Dr. Knox might be substituted for it with equal
propriety.

The eye does not see with equal distinctness objects at all dis-
tances, but only when they are within a certain distance. This
does not depend on external causes, such as the diminution of the
optic angle, and the obscuration of the object by the intermediate
air; for, to see clearly and to see distinctly are not identical.
The causes of distinct vision are internal, and situated in the eye
itself. They are two in number: one disposes the eye for the con-
tinuous distinct vision, and the other for the transient distinct
vision of objects at different distances ; but neither of them can
act except within certain limits. These limits are greater for
the presbyope, or shortsighted, than for the myope, or long-
sighted, person. These adaptations both depend on the action
of the iris, which can at the same time act in two ways to pro-
duce two effects: first, by the contraction of its aperture, and,

‘secondly, by the flexion of the cornea; the alteration of the size
of the pupil only, however, is visible. ‘The adaptation of the eye
for the continuous distinct vision of objects contained within
certain limits is owing to the diffraction of the rays of light near
the edge of the aperture of the iris, in consequence of which there
are formed, by a single external luminous point, several foci instead
of one successively ranged in a line of a certain length; so that

- the object may change its distance within certain limits, and yet

one of its foci shall always fall on the bottom of the eye. This
focal length is inversely as the magnitude of the pupil. The
borders of indistinct objects appear radiated, and to the pheno-
menon of confusion is added the motion and multiplication of the


1 Dela cause qui dispose (ail pour voir distinctement les oljéts places & dif-
férentes distances : par Jean Mile (traduit du Polonais). Magendie, Jowrnal de


Physiologie, t, vi. p» 166.


572 SIGHT.


image when the edges of bodies are brought near the side of the
fasciculus of rays which enter the eye: prismatic colours also
appear. All these phenomena, which are observed in an eye
performing its functions, may be produced by an apparatus, the
structure of which resembles that of the eye ; and even by a com-
mon lens, if we substitute for the motion of the pupil diaphragms
of different sizes. The nature of all these phenomena proves that
diffraction is their common origin, and they may be considered as
constituting a separate kind of optical illusions resulting from
diffraction. The second cause which adapts the eye for the mo-
mentaneous distinct vision of objects depends neither on the
action of the external muscles of the eye, the advancement of the
bottom of the eye, nor on any alteration of the form or position
of the crystalline lens; but appears to be owing rather to the
change of the curvature of the cornea by the contraction of the
iris, which occurs only when the eye adapts itself to see very
near objects, as is proved by the simultaneous approximation of
the pupil.

Besides the motions of the pupil which accompany the adapt-
ation of the eye to different distances, it also varies with the in-
tensity of the light to which the eye is exposed, contracting in a
strong light, and dilating in a faint light. This effect is particularly
observable in persons whose pupils are large. ‘The sympathetic
action of the pupils of both eyes is worthy of remark: while the
same light is regarded, the pupil of one eye will dilate imme-
diately the other eye is covered, and again contract when the
hand is removed and both organs are equally exposed to the
light.

Correction of spherical aberration in the eye. — In ordinary lenses
the rays which pass through them at different distances from the
centre are not refracted to tlie same point or focus, and the images
they form are consequently indistinct. This defect, which is
called spherical aberration, is, according to Sir D. Brewster, re-
medied in the eye by means of the variable density of the crys-
talline lens. The refractive power of this body being greatest at
its centre, and decreasing towards its circumference, the central
and extreme rays are both refracted to the same point. Ac-
cording to the experiments of M. Chossat, the ellipsoidal figure
of the cornea is sufficient to effect this correction.

Chromatic aberration. — In consequence of each differently


SIGHT. 573


coloured ray possessing a different index of refraction in the same
medium, a lens refracts these variously coloured rays to different
points ‘or foci. This effect, which is called chromatic aberration,
is another cause of indistinctness in images formed by lenses, for
from this cause they appear surrounded with coloured fringes.
When the eye, however, is adjusted to the proper focal distance,
an object appears perfectly colourless. It is evident, therefore,
that either the eye, when thus adjusted, is by some contrivance
rendered achromatic, or that the aberration is so small as to be
insensible. Sir D. Brewster is of the latter opinion, which was
also held by Dr. Maskelyne. Of those who maintain that there
exists a correction for chromatic aberration, Euler, Coddington,
and Professor Powell assert that a compensation takes place be-
tween the refractions of the different media of the eye, each giving
a different explanation ; while D’Alembert supposes that the agita-
tion, occasioned at any one point of the retina, extends itself into
the adjacent points, and, each point being thus influenced by the
sum of the effects due to all the coloured rays at once, perfect
vision is the result. When the rays do not converge accurately on
the retina, the dispersion is sensible ; and, from this cause, objects,
seen either within or beyond the proper focal distance, are seen
with coloured borders.

Single. vision with two eyes. — When we look at an object, an
image is formed on the retina of each eye, and yet we see only a
single object. Two different opinions have been maintained re-
specting the cause of this singleness of vision with both eyes.
Several distinguished philosophers, and among others Dr. Reid,
suppose that there is a physiological connection between certain
points of the two retinz, and that objects are only perceived as
single when their images fall on corresponding parts of the re-
tine: the decussation of the optic nerve is brought as an argu-
ment in support of this opinion. Others, including Dr. Smith and
Sir D. Brewster, do not admit this supposed necessary connection
between corresponding points of the expansion of the optic nerve,
but assert that objects are seen single merely because they are
seen by both eyes in the same place; single vision is, according
to this opinion, a necessary consequence of the law of visible
direction.

Insensible spot of the retina. — The retina, from its being an
expansion of the optic nerve, has generally been regarded as the


574 SIGHT.


seat of vision. But Mariotte, having found that images which fall
on that part of the retina where the optic nerve enters it are
invisible, concluded, because where there is no chorioid there is
no vision, that the chorioid performs the functions attributed by
most physiologists to the retina.

Mariotte performed his well-known experiment in the following
manner :— He made two spots in the same horizontal line upon the
wall of a room, and, having closed the left eye, placed the right
eye opposite the left spot, and gradually moved backwards until the
right hand spot disappeared, — a circumstance which occurs when
the image falls on the place where the optic nerve enters the retina.
The experiment succeeds very well when two wafers are placed
on the wall about three inches apart, and the observer commences
to recede when at the distance of twelve inches from them. A
very ready mode of trying this experiment is the following : —
Place two coloured wafers upon a sheet of white paper, close
one eye and fix the other opposite one of the wafers, then move
the outside wafer, always in the same straight line, until it is
invisible ; when in this situation, if the wafer be moved to a
right, to the left, above, or beneath, it is again seen.

Purkinje has remarked that the spot of the retina is not insensi-
ble to the stimulus of light, as it is generally stated to be; for, if a
candle be substituted for the moving wafer of the preceding expe-
riment, though the flame is not seen, a red glare is perceived. It can
scarcely be doubted that the insensible point is the place occu-
pied by the central artery of the retina, and the chief argument
for the chorioid being the seat of vision therefore falls to the
ground.

We are indebted to Purkinje for a most beautiful experiment,
by which a person may see the blood-vessels of his own retina.
The experiment succeeds best in a dark room, when one eye is
shaded from the light, and the flame of a candle is placed by the
side of the unshaded eye, but so as not to occupy any of the
central part of the field of view. So long as the flame of the
candle remains stationary, nothing further occurs than a diminu-
tion of the sensibility of the retina to light: but, after the fame
has been moved upwards and downwards, through a small space,
for a length of time, varying with the susceptibility of the person
on whom the experiment is tried, the phenomenon presents itself.
The blood-vessels of the retina, exactly as represented in the


SIGHT. 575


engravings of Sommerring, are distinctly seen greatly magnified
and projected apparently on a plane before the eye. The image
continues only so long as the flame is in motion: when the flame
becomes stationary, it immediately dissolves into fragments and
soon after disappears. Prof. Wheatstone finds that the sus-
ceptibility of seeing it depends upon the size of the pupil: the
image readily appears to those whose pupils are large, while,
on the contrary, the experiment rarely succeeds with a person
whose pupil is small. I can see the blood-vessels of my own
retina and the blood circulating through them, just as in a frog’s
web under the microscope, by merely closing my eyes and ex-
cluding the light by placing my hand before them. The phe-
nomenon occurs in this way more readily at one time than at
another: and some persons say they never perceive it.


A view of the retina, with the ramification of its central
artery. In the centre is seen its central hole, surrounded
by a circle. To one side of this is the bulb of the optie
nerve.


Purkinje has attempted no explanation of this phenomenon, but
contented himself with simply stating the fact. Prof. Wheat-
stone considers that it is a shadow, resulting from the obstruction
of light by the blood-vessels spread over the retina. The difficulty,
he observes, is not to account for the appearance of the image,
but to explain why this shadow is not always visible. He adduces
a number of facts observed by Pictet, Sir D. Brewster, and others,
which tend to prove that an object, either more or less Juminous
than the ground on which it is placed, becomes invisible when
continuously presented to the same point of the retina, the ra-
pidity of its disappearance being greater as the difference of
luminous intensity between the object and the ground is less:
but, by continually shifting the place of the object on the retina,
or by making it act intermittingly on the same point, the object
may be rendered permanently visible. To apply this explanation to
Purkinje’s experiment, Prof. Wheatstone observes that, whenever
the flame of the candle changes its place, the shadows of the
vessels fall on different parts of the retina; as is evident from

QQ


576 SIGHT.


the motion of the figure, which, while the eye remains at rest, is
always in a contrary direction to that of the flame. Hence the
shadow, being thus made to change its place on the retina, re-
mains, according to the law above stated, permanently visible ;
but, instantly the flame is at rest, the shadow also becomes sta-
tionary and consequently disappears.

Sir D. Brewster offers a different explanation. He considers that
the light is propagated from the luminous image of the candle to
other parts of the retina, and that, though the retina, in contact
with the blood-vessels, is sensible to direct light, it is insensible
to propagated light, and therefore the blood-vessels are delineated
in obscure lines. This explanation does not agree with the fact
that the vessels continue to be seen only while the flame is in
motion.

Prof. Wheatstone has described several original and instructive
variations of the experiment, for which we must refer to his own
account.™

Duration of luminous impressions on the retina. — The effect of
light upon the eye continues for some time after the light itself
has ceased to act. Ifa red-hot coal be rapidly whirled round so
as to return to the precise point from which it started, it will
produce a perfect ring of light, although the coal can be at one
point only of the circle at the same instant. Chevalier D'Arcy
was the first who made this experiment the subject of philosophical
consideration : he ascertained that the impression on the retina
remained about the eighth of a second. Prof. Wheatstone has
devised a very instructive experiment to illustrate this property
of vision. A narrow slit is made in a disc from the centre to the
circumference: when this dise is stationary and held before a
window blind or a strongly illuminated picture, a very limited
portion only of the object is seen through the linear aperture ;
but, on causing it to revolve rapidly on its centre, the different
portions of the picture, which are seen through the disc in its
successive positions, remaining on the eye, the entire object is
visible at the same time and the solid disc appears perfectly
transparent.

The stationary appearances of moving wheels as observed by
Drs. Roget and Faraday, Dr. Paris’s thaumatrope, Professor


™ Contributions to the Physiology of Vision. Journal of the Royal Institution,
Nos. 1. and 3.


SIGHT: 577


Plateau’s well known optical illusion —the phantascope, Prof.
Wheatstone’s kaleidophone, and the revolving mirror by which
he has measured the velocity of electricity and the duration of
the electric spark, are all applications of this physiological law.

Ocular spectra. —When the eye has been fatigued by looking
at any particular kind of coloured light, and is afterwards directed
to a white surface, the surface will not appear white, but of a
different colour, which is called the accidental colour of the colour
which was first regarded by the eye. This fact may be proved
by placing a ved wafer on a sheet of white paper, and fixing the
eye for some time steadily to a dot at its centre: when the eye is
turned aside to an uncovered part of the paper, a circular spot of
the same size as the wafer will be seen, but its colour will be
green. ‘This image changes its position as the eye moves, and is
called an ocular spectrum.

To determine the accidental colour of any colour originally
presented to the eye, the following remarks must be attended to.
There are three primary and distinct colours, red, yellow, and
blue; and all the compound colours that exist in nature are dif-
ferent combinations of these. Orange is a compound of red and
yellow; green, of yellow and blue; purple, of blue and red ; and
white is a neutral combination of the three primary colours. An
accidental colour is always found to be that which, added to the
original colour, produces white; and these two colours are hence
said to be complementary.

The theories which have been advanced to account for the
phenomena of ocular spectra may be reduced to two.

The most usual theory in its most general form supposes that,
when any simple or compound colour is continuously presented
to the eye, the part of the retina where the image falls becomes
less sensible to impressions of the same kind, but retains its sus-
ceptibility for other kinds of impressions: if, therefore, while the
retina is in this state, the eye is transferred to a white surface,
the spectrum will appear as if the colour originally seen were
subtracted from the white. This explanation agrees with a great
many observed facts, but there is one which seems in direct con-
tradiction to it. A complementary spectrum is seen when the
eye is shut, and when, consequently, there is no white light to
furnish the complementary colour. This phenomenon has given
rise to another explanation as to the origin of ocular spectra,

QaQqa2


578 SIGHT.


which assumes that any colour presented to the retina stimulates
it and excites it to a reverse action which produces the comple-
mentary colour. Professor Plateau has supported this theory
with much ingenuity, but there are numerous facts which do not
accord with it.

- Longsightedness and shortsightedness. — That case of defective
vision which is called longsightedness arises from the crystalline
lens being too flat; the rays proceeding from near objects, instead
of converging to distinct foci on the retina, converge behind it,
and therefore form no distinct image. This defect, which is an
ordinary effect of old age, may be remedied by the use of a
convex lens, which enables the eye to converge the rays so as to
form a perfect image on the retina.”

Shortsighted persons are unable to see at a distance, and are
obliged to bring small objects very near the eye to see them
distinctly. This defect, which often occurs in young persons,
arises from the eye being too convex, from which cause the rays
of distant objects converge to foci before they fall on the retina.
The imperfection may be remedied by using a concave lens,
-which renders the rays less converging and enables them to form
a distinct picture at the bottom of the eye. There are other
cases of defective vision arising from the malformation of the
organ, but these are of the most common occurrence.


" In hemiplegia, a sense sometimes becomes morbidly acute. Dr. Heberden
(Comment. p. 292.) mentions a hemiplegic person whose smell became greatly
heightened. Frequently we find such patients sensible to the crawling of the
minutest insect on the arm. I lately attended a gentleman about forty years of
age, who had suddenly been attacked with hemiplegia, and in bed he heard the
least sound at the bottom of the house with an acuteness which surprised him,
and could tell the hour by a watch placed on a table at such a distance from his
bed as to have rendered it impossible for him to distinguish the hands when he was
in health. Dr. Brachet relates that, when he was interne at the Bicétre in 1811,
the infirmier of the surgical ward one day astonished him by the extent which
his vision had acquired since the day before. The man could distinguish the
most minute objects at an enormous distance. Five hours afterwards he felt a
slight headach, and in a few hours more was seized with a thundering apoplexy
(une apoplexie foudroyante), and died the next night. <A fresh coagulum was
found in the right optic thalamus. The inflammation which had preceded this
effusion had irritated by its proximity a part of the brain concerned in vision.
These were instances of longsightedness; but not of mere longsightedness, but
general acuteness of sight, as the persons saw well not only at great distances,
but at small distances likewise.


SIGHT. 579


Optic nerves. — Such facts have been thought a reason for be-
lieving the decussation of the optic nerves partial, and some say
that the outer portion of the tractus optici goes to the outer part
of the corresponding nerves, and the inner to the inner portion of
the opposite. But Dr. Magendie divided from before backwards
the junction of the optic nerves, and found blindness induced. ©

The decussation of the optic nerves is shown by blindness of
one eye being induced if the nerve on the same side is divided
anteriorly to the union, and of the opposite eye if the division is
made posteriorly to the union: or by destruction of an eye caus-
ing the nerve of the same side to waste as far as the union, and
of the opposite side beyond the union.P Yet cases are on record
where the wasting of the nerve in loss of sight continued through-
out on the same side, but such are probably suspicious.

The thalami optici are improperly named, as they do not give
origin to the optic nerves. These may be traced to the anterior
corpora quadrigemina, pressure or disease of which produces
blindness, and which waste if the nerves waste.4 Sommerring
first noticed this in blind horses. Gall confirmed his observations.
Dr. Vimont states that, on examining fourteen old blind horses,
he found the anterior quadrigeminum opposite the blind eye
lessened in all, and completely atrophied in two. He then
cruelly took out the left eye of four rabbits, the right of four
others, and both eyes of another. At the expiration of ten months
he killed them all, and found the right anterior quadrigeminum
much smaller than the left in the first four, the reverse in the
second four; and both the anterior and posterior much smaller in
the rabbit deprived of both eyes than the healthy tubercles of the
other eight. The optic nerve of all the blind eyes had lost 4 of
its volume, and looked like the horn of a lantern. Dr. Magendie
informed Dr. Vimont that the atrophy of the tubercle occurs
much more quickly in birds, and Dr. Vimont found this to be the
fact.* .

Drs. Carus and Tiedemann make Gall consider the posterior
quadrigemina as the roots of the olfactory pair, whereas he has


° Précis de Physiologie, t.i. p.71.

P Dr. Magendie, 1. c. ibid.

1 On the optic nerve consult Gall, I.c, 4to. t.i. p, 113. sqq-
l.c¢. t. 1. p. 296. sq.


a@g Ss


580 SIGHT.


declared the opposite opinion on account of the existence of the
posterior quadrigemina in animals apparently destitute of olfac-
tory nerves. He believed that the posterior reinforced and pro-
tected the optic nerve as well as the anterior, but in a different
manner, since in different animals they are in different propor-
tions, and the posterior scarcely perceptible, if not absent, in
some whose vision is perfect. Nay, he believed that the greater
part of the corpora quadrigemina have other offices relating to
the spinal chord below and to other cerebral parts than those con-
cerned in vision above. If the surface either of their anterior part,
of the bulb of the olfactory nerve, of the grey band on the sides
of the fourth ventricle, or of the ganglion of the acoustic nerve, is
touched, no contraction ensues ; but injure them to a certain depth,
and convulsions take place.s The optic nerve is certainly not
derived, he says, from the tubercles only; the internal and ex-
ternal corpora geniculata, &c. give it many filaments.

Many recorded cases, as well as many in my own practice,
prove that one half of the retina may be paralysed, while the
other half remains unaffected; and this effect may be common
to both eyes, or peculiar to one. Dr. Wollaston relates that
it twice occurred to him not to be able to see but on one side
of the axis of vision. The first time, the left side of each eye
was affected; he saw but the half of a man’s face or of any
object he looked at ; and, in attempting to read the name JOHN-
SON over a door, he saw only....SON, the commencement
of the name being totally obliterated from his view: the com-
plaint was of short duration. About nineteen years afterwards
the phenomenon recurred: this time, the right side of the eye,
about three degrees from the centre of the retina, was affected,
and its duration was ten minutes. Two analogous cases are also
mentioned by Dr. Wollaston. Desmoulins" states that M. Arago
has experienced this affection of vision three times: the first two
times, objects situated to the right of the axis of vision were in-
visible ; the third time he saw objects on the right only of this
axis. ‘The same author notices also the following remarkable
case. In consequence of a cerebral fever, the external side of the
left retina of M. de M became insensible: with this eye he


® lc. 8vo. vi. p. 253. Phil. Trans. 1824.
“ Anatomie des systémes nerveux des animaux @ vertebres, t.ii, p. 673s


SIGHT. 581


saw objects only situate to the left of the centre of vision, and,
as at the same time there was an outward deviation of the axis of
this eye, through a paralysis of the nerve of the third pair, when
he employed both eyes, he saw objects double; but, what was
still more singular, the right eye being closed, he saw with the
left eye the objects removed from twenty to twenty-five degrees
to the right of their real position.

If the fifth pair, which gives sensibility to the face, is divided,
the eye, nose, and tongue, lose their sense of touch, — ordinary
sensibility,—in common with the skin, and are not excited by me-
chanical or acrid stimulus as before.* In this experiment, the
pupil becomes greatly contracted in rabbits and guinea-pigs,
and dilated in cats and dogs.” The retina has very little ordinary
sensibility, as Dr. Magendie showed by pricking and tearing it
with little or no pain; whence contraction of the pupil does not
follow the application of any stimulus excepting light. The third
pair, which is a nerve of motion, supplies, in common with the
fifth pair, the iris, and therefore Mr. Mayo found that division of
it, at least in cats and pigeons, causes dilatation of the pupil, like
division of the optic nerve; the dilatation arising in the former
case from the cerebral influence being no longer conveyed, and
in the latter from the cerebral influence being no longer excited.
On stimulating the ocular end of the third pair, divided in pigeons,
after removing the brain, he says that the iris suddenly acts: and,
on stimulating not the ocular, but the cerebral, end of a divided
optic nerve, the same thing happens. M. Fleurens says that
irritation of the superior quadrigemina causes contraction of the
iris, and extirpation of them its dilatation.

Judgment of colour.—Persons, all having excellent eyes, and see-
ing perfectly well, differ much in their powers of recognising per-
sons, finding their way, &c. In none of these points is the difference
so striking as with respect to judging of colours. It is by no means
uncommon to meet with individuals whose eyes appear excellent,
and whose sight is excellent, and who may judge of form and dis-
tance correctly, but who cannot distinguish certain colours. Dr.
Nicholi describes a boy who confounded green with red, and called


* Dr. Magendie, 1.c.
¥ Dr. Magendie, l.c. Mr. Mayo informs us that, after death, in the cat and
pigeon the pupil is always dilated, and in the rabbit contracted. Outlines, &c,


QQ 4


582 SIGHT.


light red and pink, blue. His maternal grandfather, and one uncle,
had the same imperfection. This uncle was in the navy, and,
having a blue uniform coat and waistcoat, purchased a pair of
red breeches to match.4. Dr. Nicholl mentions a gentleman who
could not distinguish green from red. The grass in full verdure
always appeared to him what others call red; and ripe fruit on
trees he could not distinguish from the leaves ; a cucumber and
a boiled lobster were of the same colour in his sight ; and a Jeek
resembled a stick of sealing-wax. This person had a brother and
a niece — the daughter of another brother, in a similar pre-
dicament.2 Indeed, the defect has frequently occurred in several
members of the same family, and frequently has been hereditary,
sometimes passing over a generation, like other peculiarities of
structure. It is observed more frequently, perhaps, in men. In
the rarest and most extreme cases no colour is distinguished, all
objects appearing in this respect alike. In all the cases in which
the point has been examined, the part of the cranium under which,


* Med. Chir. Trans. vol. vii.

4 1. c. vol. ix. A case communicated to Dr. Priestley will be found in the
Phil. Trans. 1777. The man had two brothers with the same defect. Another
will be found in the vo). of 1778. The gentleman’s father, maternal uncle, one
of his sisters, and two of her sons, had the same defect. In the Phrenol. Trans. is
another by Dr. Butter. Inthe Manchester Memoirs, vol. v., are others. One such
person painted a man’s head with a green beard and blue cheeks. In Mr. G.
Combe’s System of Phrenology, and the Edinburgh Phrenological Transactions, are
meuitioned one of three brothers and a cousin, who inherited it from their maternal
grandfather, the intervening generation not having it. Professor Dugald Stewart,
and Mr. Troughton, as well as many of his family, could not distinguish colours ;
and the celebrated instrument-maker was therefore prevented from applying
himself to execute any thing in which it was necessary to distinguish them.
Dr. Dalton has the same defect. A case of this defect is recorded in the Edin.
Phren. Trans. by Dr. Butter of Plymouth ; and, to show what irrational hostility
is offered to phrenology by men of whom we might expect better things, I
must mention that the paper was sent to the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal,
but that the editor, Sir David Brewster, choosing that it should not sup-
port phrenology, altered the title, without consulting the author, to Remarks
on the Insensibility of the Eye to certain Colours, and suppressed the phrenologi-
cal comments, ‘ for obvious reasons,” he says, viz. that phrenology is not a
‘ substantial science.” Yet Sir David Brewster would wish to be considered a
philosopher in all his intellectual and moral doings. Still more lamentable and
very recent conduct with the view of suppressing phrenological truth may be
seen, in the case of The Edin. Med. and Surgical Journal. See The Edinburgh
Phrenological Journal, December, 1836; and June, 1837, p. 632.


SIGHT. 583


according to Gall, the organ for judging of the harmony of colours
is placed, is flat or depressed. I have seen several of these cases,
and in all this was the fact. In painters, remarkable for their ex-
cellence of colouring, this part is full or prominent. The con-
trast between this part of the forehead in a person who has the
defect, and in another excelling in the power of colouring, placed
side by side, is very striking.

Professor Dugald Stewart remarks that, “ in the power of con-
ceiving colours there are striking differences among individuals ;”
and he does not ascribe the difference to the eyes. “ Iam inclined
to suspect,” he says, ‘ that in the greater number of instances the
supposed defects of sight ought to be rather ascribed to a defect
in the power of conception.”» Mr. Stewart is correct in exempt-
ing the eye from blame, and ascribing the defect to a defect in
conception ; but, since he has no idea of a distinct faculty for
colours, he means conception in general. Yet, as the individuals
are not deficient in other conceptions, some reason must be given
for the deficiency of conception in this one point. He thinks it
arises “ probably in consequence of some early habit of inatten-
tion.” Now this is sad trifling in a philosopher. What particular
attention do children, who distinguish colours accurately, bestow ?
They distinguish without effort; and those who cannot, are not
only not proved to have been inattentive, but have, most probably,
been often extraordinarily attentive, in the hope of seeing what
others can see. How should want of attention to this one point
run in families and be hereditary, passing through a generation,
&c.? This isa specimen of the errors of metaphysicians. They
see, and generally acknowledge, that the brain is the organ of the
mind ; yet they observe the faculties of the mind without even
once considering the organ which possesses, or is employed inthe
working of, these faculties. Gall examined the two together, and
we now know through him that local deficiency of brain both
exists where the power of distinguishing colours is deficient, and
is hereditary with this deficiency.

Motion of the eyes. — The eye is moved by six voluntary
muscles, —four straight, a superior, inferior, external, and in-
ternal; and two oblique, a superior, with its tendon running round
a pulley, and an inferior.


> Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, ch. iii.


584 SIGHT.


Left eye, seen outside, the outer part of the orbit having been removed.


1,1. Portion of the upper part of the orbit belonging to the frontal bone.

2. Section passing through the malar bone and the malar process of the supe-
rior maxillary.

3. Globe.

4. External rectus muscle.

5. One of its two posterior insertions, running to the small wing of the sphenoid.

6. The other of these insertions, running inwards to the cavernous grove.

7. Inferior rectus.

8. Its posterior insertion.

9. Superior rectus.

10. Its posterior insertion in the small wing of the sphenoid,

11. Superior oblique.

12. Its reflected tendon.

13. Inferior oblique.

14. Internal rectus.

15. Levator palpebre superioris.

16. Its posterior insertion.

17. Optic nerve.

18. Part of the sphenoid.


The motions of the eyes which result from the actions of these
muscles were investigated, and the mental perceptions attending
them analysed, with considerable success, by Dr. Wells. Sir
Charles Bell long afterwards took up the subject, and published
some opinions which appear to me altogether groundless.© He
fancies that the pair of pathetic or internal motor nerves belong to


© Phil. Trans, 1823.


SIGHT. 585


his respiratory set and are for expression, and that the two oblique
muscles have the same destination, and are not voluntary ; while
the four recti muscles and their common motor and abducent
pairs of nerves are voluntary. Now, in the first place, all the
objections that I formerly made to his views of a respiratory set
of nerves for expression (p. 459. sqq. supra) hold good in the
present case, which is merely a particular instance of those views.
The absurdity of applying the term respiratory to nerves and
muscles of the eye is too manifest to require comment. In the
next place, he conceives that the two oblique muscles are never
voluntary ; and he contends that the superior draws the pupil
downwards and outwards, the inferior upwards and inwards.
Other writers¢ say downwards and inwards, and upwards and
outwards; but he agrees with all, that their combined action
draws the eye towards the nose, though I hardly understand
how, on either supposition, such a motion inwards can result.
Now, we can move the eyes downwards and outwards, and up-
wards and inwards, at pleasure: we can also make them approach
each other at pleasure, and it is a mere assumption, and a very
improbable assumption, that we do this by the internal straight
muscles, and not by the combined action of the two obliques.
He mentions experiments in which he divided the superior oblique,
and another in which he divided the inferior oblique; and he asserts
that the voluntary motions were unaffected. The poor animal no
doubt moved its eye upwards and downwards, inwards and outwards,
as it had four muscles left for these purposes: but we, of course,
have no information given us that an attempt was made to in-
duce the animal to approximate both eyes together, as in looking
now at a distant and now at a near object in the same line; and
this I believe to be the use of the oblique muscles, just as it is
of the straight to act when we look in different directions. He
divided the superior oblique of the right eye, held open the
eyes, waved the hand before them, and found the right eye
move upwards and inwards, and the other scarcely so in that
direction, and the dog ‘‘ seemed to have a difficulty in bringing
it down again.” But this did not show that the muscle was
involuntary. If the superior oblique moves the eye downwards
and outwards, its division explained, on his own views of the
effects of these mnscles, why the animal could not move the eye


¢ Manuel d’ Anatomie comparée, par Jules Cloquet, p. 139. sq.


586 SIGHT.


simply inwards; and why the inferior pulled it inwards and
upwards, being no longer antagonised by the upper; just as
the muscles of one half the face draw the features to their side
if their antagonists of the other half are paralysed. Not one
experiment mentioned by him shows the oblique muscles to be
involuntary. He says that when we wink, we draw the eyes up
under the upper lid. Now we can wink voluntarily: and, if the
eyes do ascend in winking, which I do not believe ¢, why should
they not ascend by the superior straight muscles? His ideas on
the action of the oblique muscles seem all confusion. At one
time he says that the superior oblique moves the pupil downwards
and outwards, the inferior upwards and inwards, and that “ their
combined action draws the eye-ball towards the nose” (p. $12.):f
at another (p. 327. sq.), that the eye rolls wpwards and inwards,
when they are balanced : at another (p. 314.), that, if the superior
is prevented from acting by being divided, the eye equally
turns upwards and inwards; and, indeed, (p. 315.) that the inferior
gains in power of elevating the eye-ball by the division of its
opponent the superior, and that is its own proper action. In
many places (pp. 294. sq. 298. 303. 316. 326.) he speaks simply
of the eyes turning upwards in winking and sleeping, and refers
this to the combined action of the two obliques, neither of which,
nor both together, are able, or are supposed by him, to simply
elevate the eye. He is farther confused, for, although he con-
tends that the obliques are involuntary muscles and act in wink-
ing and for expression in the waking state, he says “ that in
sleep, faintness, and insensibility, the eye-ball is given up to the
one (the oblique), and in watchfulness, and the full exercise of
the organ, it is given up to the influence of the other (the
straight) class of muscles.” (p. 292.)

Again, I presume that, when the cornea moves straight under the


* To show that, in winking, the eye turns up as the eyelids close, he mentions
a case of inflammation of the cornea through the immobility of the eyes and
eyelids. Ifthe eye could have moved, the immobility of the eyelids would not
have had this effect: nor would it have resulted if the eyelids only could have
moved, But this case is no proof that the eye naturally turns up in winking,
and that the motion of the lids alone is not sufficient to preserve the eye moist
and prevent inflammation.

* I make the references to the paper as printed with others by him in one
octavo volume, under the title of An Exposition of the Natural System of the
Nerves of the Human Body. 1824.


SIGHT. 587


upper or lower eyelid on the sudden approach of any thing to it,
the motion is from fear, and as instinctive, and expressive, and
respiratory! as any motion can be: yet it is accomplished by
the superior or inferior straight muscle of the organ, — both
voluntary muscles.

Not only do the motions of the straight muscles continually
express the passions, but the abducent or external is actually
the antagonist of the two obliques when, in Sir C. Bell’s own
words, “‘ their combined action draws the eye-ball towards the
nose ;”” just as the two obliques when acting separately are the
antagonists of each other: and the circumstance of this muscle
antagonising not only the internal straight muscle but the com-
bined action of the two obliques may explain why it has a dis-
tinct nerve.

He further contends that the eye-ball moves so that the
cornea always rises under the upper lid the moment that the
eyelids close (p. 294.), and in some places he says it not only
rises but moves inwards. (p. 328.) 1 have raised the upper eye-
lid of persons whose eyes were shut, and found the cornea
sometimes raised under the upper lid, but as often depressed
under the lower lid. I have often looked at persons whose
eyes were closed, and seen the cornea projecting at the centre
of the upper eyelid, in the same line as when the eyes were open.
He states that, “ if we fix one eye upon an object, and close the
other with the finger in such a manner as to feel the convexity
of the cornea through the eyelid, when we shut the eye that is
open, we shall feel that the cornea of the other eye is instantly
elevated ; and that it thus rises and falls in sympathy with the
eye that is closed and opened.” I have made this experiment
repeatedly, and not found my closed eye ascend when I closed
the other: nor have my friends, who observed the. cornea pro-
jecting at the closed eye, seen any ascent of it on my closing
the other. Indeed, according to him, the closed eye ought
already to have ascended when it was closed, and thus could not
be felt or seen ascending when the other eye was closed. He says
that, if, closing the eyes opposite a window and still seeing the
light through the lids, we attempt to close them farther, we shall
be in momentary darkness, because during the effort the eye-
balls are then turning up. But there is sufficient reason for our
darkness in the circumstance of the eyelids becoming thickly


588 SIGHT.
folded during the attempt to close them farther. In fact, if my
cornea is felt at this moment, it is found just where it was
before ; and the circumstance of light being seen, although the
eyes were shut at first, disproves Sir C. Bell’s statement, that,
‘at the instant in which the eyelids are closed, the eye-ball
makes a movement which raises the cornea under the upper
lid.” He also says that, if the eyelid is prevented from closing
by palsy or adhesion, the sudden approach of any thing to the
eye causes the cornea to ascend. Ihave no doubt that it will
ascend or descend, in order to get out of danger from the ap-
proaching body.

But the crowning wonder of the whole is that one of the ob-
liques is not supplied by a nerve of the respiratory set. The
superior oblique is supplied by the fourth —the pathetic or in-
ternal motor —a pair evidently of voluntary motion, but which
is called by Sir C. Bell respiratory. Neither this, however,
nor any other respiratory nerve goes to the inferior oblique,
which is most unluckily supplied by the third only.s Further, the
oblique muscle, which is not supplied by the fourth or any
other respiratory (I'am really ashamed of thus repeating the
word in so absurd a sense) nerve, but by a nerve of volun-
tary motion, is the more important muscle of the two in turn-
ing the .eye upwards and inwards. For, not only does he con-
tend that this is its proper action (p. 312.), but that, when the
superior oblique is divided and it and its nerve rendered useless,


® Sir C. Bell does not allude to this difficulty ; but quietly advances an opinion
which he may at any time adduce as his means of getting over it, should others
discover it. He fancies that nerves relax as well as contract muscles; and
‘* that the influence of the fourth nerve is, on certain occasions, to cause a re-
laxation of the muscle to which it goes,” in which case the eye-ball must be
rolled upwards. Thus the inferior oblique muscle acts because the fourth pair
has relaxed the superior. The plain answer to this is, first, that the inferior
oblique muscle acts not only when it is unopposed, but when the superior oblique
is in action. Sir C. Bell speaks of their combined action, and it must move in
this by the positive stimulus of some nerve. Secondly, it of course is furnished
with a nerve, and this is a branch of the third — not a respiratory pair, but a
pair of voluntary motion that supplies the straight muscles of the eye. In
fact, to suppose a muscle, not belonging to a cavity or canal, to move without
an exciting nerve, would be impossible; and, were such a muscle to have no
nerve, its ‘muscular structure would be useless —a merely elastic substance
would have answered the purpose of lengthening under opposition and short-
ening when no longer stretched.


SIGHT. 589


the lower gains in its power of elevating the ball, which turns
upwards and inwards so forcibly as to be brought down again
with difficulty by an animal (p. 314.sq.); and, although he had,
throughout his paper, ascribed the elevation of the eyes, when
closed, to the two obliques (p. 317.), he, at the end of it (p. 332.),
ascribes the elevation to the inferior oblique only, and refers to
the page in which he had ascribed it to both, as if he had there
ascribed it to the inferior alone.

The straight and oblique muscles, there can be no doubt, are
equally voluntary. The straight are clearly for the direction of
the eyes, and we become acquainted with the distances, magni-
tudes, and positions of objects, by the sensations which accom-
pany the motions of the muscles of the eye, or, in other words,
from the consciousness of muscular effort. We owe this important
principle to Bishop Berkeley, who, in his excellent essay on this sub-
ject 4, thus expressed himself more than a century ago: — “ Now,
it being already shown that distance is suggested to the mind by
the mediation of some other idea, which is itself perceived in the
act of seeing; it remains that we inquire what zdeas or sensations
there be that attend viszon, unto which we may suppose the ideas
of distance are connected, and by which they are introduced
into the mind. And first, it is certain by experience, that when
we look at a near object with both eyes, according as it approaches
or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our eyes, by
lessening or widening the distance between the pupils. This
disposition or turn of the eyes is attended with a sensation, which
seems to me to be that which in this case brings the zdea of
greater or lesser distance into the mind. Not that there is any
natural or necessary connection between the sensation we per-
ceive by the turn of the eyes, and greater or lesser distance: but
because the mind has, by constant experience, found the different
sensations corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes,
to be attended each with a different degree of distance in the
object: there has grown an habitual or customary connection
between these two sorts of ideas: so that the mind no sooner
perceives the sensation arising from the different turn it gives the
eyes, in order to bring the pupils nearer, or farther asunder, but
it withal perceives the different idea of distance which was wont
to be connected with that sensation. Just as upon hearing a


» An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, sect. 16. sqq- 1709.


590 SIGHT.


certain sound, the zdea is immediately suggested to the un-
derstanding, which custom had united with it.” Dr. Wells, in
1792', extended this principle of Berkeley’s, and proved that
the apparent direction also of an object which sends its picture
to any given point of the retina depends upon the state of
action existing at the same time in the muscles of the eye;
and he adduced many and convincing proofs that it cannot be
altered except by a change in the state of that action. Thus,
an ocular spectrum impressed on any part of the retina does
not appear to alter its position, when it is forcibly pressed aside
in any direction; but, whenever the voluntary muscles act,
it is referred by the mind to a different point of external space.
That the apparent distances and positions of objects are sug-
gested to the mind by sensations accompanying the motion of
the muscles of the eyes, is a principle then clearly stated both
by Berkeley and Wells. It has, however, by many been con-
sidered the discovery of Sir C. Bell, because he reproduced it,
in 1823, above a century after Berkeley and thirty years after
Wells, though he has not advanced a single original argument in
its favour, and has unpardonably suppressed all reference to the
philosophers by whose reasonings and researches it had been
established. k

Prof. Wheatstone has recently made a series of curious expe-
riments, from which it appears that the sensations which accom-
pany the converging and the parallel motions of the eyes are so
dissimilar, that it is highly improbable that these two sets of
motions are effected by the same muscles. He is of opinion that
the parallel motions of the eyes are governed by the straight


' An Essay upon Single Vision with Two Eyes. 1792. p. 56. sq. p. 70. sqq- of
an edition of this and some other writings, with his autobiography, 1818.

* Let any one read Wells (pp. 55—57.) and Sir C. Bell (pp. 318—323, ),
and his eyes will rise most expressively, by the action, I presume, of the superior
straight muscles.

Too many of the anatomical and physiological papers in the Philosophical
Transactions, from the time of the first contributions of the glorious burner of
Jobn Hunter’s precious and voluminous manuscripts to the present, reflect no
credit upon those medical members of the council of the Royal Society who re-
commended their publication. But the poverty or errors of papers disfigure
the Transactions, to my view, less than the parade of old facts and opinions as
new, without the slightest reference to their authors; and this is a greater
reflection upon the medical members of the council, when the real authors
were distinguished Fellows of the Royal Society.


SIGHT. 591


muscles, while the converging motions are regulated by the
oblique. The experiments from which Sir C. Bell infers that
the oblique are not voluntary muscles prove only that their
functions are not the same as those of the straight muscles. If
Professor Wheatstone is correct in the functions which he assigns
tothe oblique muscles, it is easy to see that they have an appro-
priate office under voluntary control, though their peculiar ac-
tions do not assist the straight muscles.


Light, like heat, is an agent by which all vegetables and animals are intended
to be influenced. As the terms heat and cold are only relative, and no tem-
perature is so low but that there might be a lower, and the plant, which lives
in the snow only of polar regions, would still perish if the temperature were
lower than it is; so light really exists in darkness, — no darkness might not be
darker, and no plant or animal can be totally deprived of light. Deprived of
light, a plant would lose its characteristic form, colour, taste, and odour, and
puzzle the best botanist: persons deprived of light grow pale and sickly ; but
in this case, whether the place be a mine, a narrow street, or a prison, the want
of fresh air, and in regard to prisoners the depressed condition of the mind, and
occasionally the deficiency or bad quality of food, must also be taken into con-
sideration: and, if pregnant women confined in dungeons often produce mon-=
sters, the state of mind cannot but be a powerful cause of the aberration. Dr.
Edwards has proved that, by excluding tadpoles from the light, they will grow to
double or triple the size that tadpoles usually attain, but are not metamorphosed
into frogs. He thinks that the proteus anguinus, which, like tadpoles, has lungs
and gills, is but the first stage of an animal which is prevented from becoming
perfect by inhabiting the subterraneous waters of Carniola. He concludes there-
fore that light has a great influence upon the human body; and ascribes the
obseryation of Humboldt, that, among millions of Caribs, Mexicans, Peru-
vians, &c., not one instance of deformity appeared, to the exposure of their body
to light, and much of the sickliness of imprisoned persons and scrofulous children
living in close streets to the want of light. (De lInfluence, &c. P. iv. ¢, 15.)
** Vegetables, though they have no nerves, guided by light, open and close their
flowers and their leaves.” “In plants with compound leaflets,’ says Professor
Lindley, “ the leaflets fold together while the petiole is recurved at the approach
of night; and the leaflets again expand and raise themselyes at the return of
day. In others the leaves converge over the flowers, as if to shelter those more
delicate organs from the chill air of night. The flowers of the crocus and similar
plants expand beneath the bright beams of the sun, but close as soon as these are


withdrawn. The cenotheras unfold their blossoms to the dews of evening, and
Re


592 SIGHT.


wither away at the approach of day. Some silenes roll up their petals in the
day, and expand them at night. The florets of numerous Composite, and the
petals of the genus Mesembryanthemum are erect in the absence of the sun, byt
become reflexed when acted upon by the sun’s beams.” ‘ Plants of corn, 1n
which there is little indication of sleep when grown singly, exhibit that pheno-
menon yery distinctly when observed in masses: their leaves become flaccid and
their ears droop at night.” “ A flower removed from the shade will often expand
beneath a lamp, just as it will beneath the sun itself.’” De Candolle found he
could induce plants to acknowledge an artificial day and night by exposure to
the light of candles. Still, Prof. Lindley remarks, there must be some other cause
than light, because many fiowers close in the afternoon while the sun shines on
them, and the petals of others fold up under a bright illumination. (Introduction
to Botany, book ii. chap. xii.)

Just, however, as different plants require different temperatures, and the
protococcus nivalis flourishes and secretes in snow, so different plants require
different degrees of light. Humboldt, near the Canary islands, saw a marine
plant of a grass green brought up from a depth of about 190 feet, where the
light could not have been stronger than that of a candle at the distance of a foot.
He found several green plants growing in the dark mines of Freiberg ; but there
the atmosphere was peculiar, — charged with hydrogen or alarge quantity of
nitrogen ; and Senebier remarked that plants do not completely lose their green
colour in darkness, if they are supplied with a certain quantity of hydrogen, —an
observation not verified in the experiments of Decandolle. (Physiologie Végétale,
par M. Aug. Pyr. Decandolle. Paris, 1832. t. ii. p. 899. sq.)

Zoophytes prove themselves sensible to light; some by expanding or con-
tracting according to its intensity, or by placing themselves on the side of a vessel
where the light is strongest. One, the veretillum cynomorium, seeks the darkest
places, and contracts as soon as light is admitted to it.

Most entozoa, living in the dark recesses of other animals and imbedded in |
what they feed upon, require no eyes, and are not known to have them, Nor
the acephalous or bivalve mollusca, as the oyster, or the cirrhopodous, as the
barnacle, the hind part only of which protrudes from the shell. Many minute
polygastric animalcules seek and enjoy the light ; and, on the front of their bodies,
small red spots are generally diseovered. Even monads, regarded as the lowest of
animals, have them. In other infusoria these spots are united into one. These
receive the impression of light only, and, as the polygastric animalcules move
rapidly and prey on others, perhaps not merely light, but forms are distinguished.
No nervous filament has hitherto been detected in such creatures: but, as they
have impressions from an external organ, desire and will, they must have some-
thing equivalent to a nervous system. This is the first form of the eye in the
larvee of insects when the organ begins to develope, and in the young of higher
animals ; and, when an optic nerve is added, this is placed behind the pigment of
the red spot, showing the spot to be the organ of vision. In the nais proboscidea,
and many of the lower tribes of annelida, an optic nerve is added to the pig-
ment: but nothing more is discoverable. Many of those entozoa or rather
epizoa which live on the external parts of others, on the skin, eyes, gills, &c. as
the ergasilus gibbus, which is attached in myriads to the gills of freshwater fishes,


SIGHT. 593


have eyes, numerous or single, single originally, or several united into one, but lying
flat on the surface, — sessile. So with most free annelida : in the planaria viganensis
there is a single row of about forty eyes. In addition to the pigment and nerve
there isa lens. In different species of gasteropoda, as the slug, snail, limpet, eyes
are situated at the base, middle, or extremity of their tentacula. The eye of the
helix pomatia has within its pigment a transparent semifluid substance, and even
another transparent body shaped like a lens. The murex tritonis and voluta
cymbrium have also an iris forming a pupil. Among the articulated animals
we find the lucid spots already mentioned, called also simple eyes and stemmata ,
conglomerate eyes, or clusters of these; and compound eyes, or a large assem-
blage of small tubes each with its own humours, retina, and cornea; together
with eyes supplied each with separate lenses and retina, but having one common
cornea. Among myriapods we have examples of the conglomerate eye ; in the
scolopendra there are twenty contiguous circular lenses arranged in five lines,
with one larger eye behind the rest, like a sentinel; in the millipede, there are
twenty-eight, arranged in a triangle of seven rows, each having one eye fewer
than the row above. In the larva state insects have only stemmata if they are
destined for a complete metamorphosis ; but, if to an incomplete, they have both
compound and simple eyes. Some zoophytes, being free in one state have eyes,
which they lose on being metamorphosed and no longer free, when eyes would
be useless. Except some parasitic insects and five species of ants, all insects
have compound eyes, generally one on each side of the head, forming a
globular mass of from fifty to some thousands, eyen twenty or thirty thousand
minute eyes closely pressed together, and placed on a central bulb which is a
part of the optic nerve. They are cylinders or cones, while their external part
or cornea is the base, usually hexagonal, like the cells of a honeycomb, because
this form allows uniformity of arrangement with the greatest economy of space.
The united bases or cornez are an hemispherical convexity; under each cornea
is an almost conical lens. Each cornea is covered by smooth epidermis, just as
our cornea is covered by conjunctiva, with its apex backwards towards the nerve,
and a portion of chorioid pigment lies between the cornga and lens, with an
aperture in the centre, constituting a rudimentary iris, which in the grey dragon
fly has been seen to contract and dilate ; and between it and the cornea are a
little space and a drop of aqueous humour. The pigment runs backwards
around the lens, separating each cylindrical compartment. The apex of the lens
is met by the end of a filament of the optic nerve, running through a vitreous
humour; and Dr. Wollaston found the focal distance to correspond accurately
with the length of the tube, so that an image falls exactly upon the retina. These
multiplicities of cornez in all directions compensate for the want of sensibility in
the eyes ofinsects. There are often simple detached sessile eyes also, equally mo-
tionless: and the purpose of the presence of both kinds is unknown. ‘There is
no apparatus of defence, —no eyelids, eyelashes, or tears, except that hair some-
times grows from between the cornex ; and these are compensated for by the
great hardness and insensibility of the cornea, which allows it to be brushed
with the hairs of legs or other moveable parts. Branches of a trachea have
been traced into each kind of eye. In the arachnida the optic nerve expands
_ into a cup-like form behind a hyoloid membrane and vitreous humour.
RR 2


594 SIGHT.


The eyes of crustacea are compound and immoveable except in the higher
orders, in which they are placed on peduncles and moved by muscles ; and one
crab has the peduncle jointed at one spot, so that the eye can be moved in
various directions, like the arms of a telegraph. In those crustacea which are
called monoculi, the eye is of the fourth class,— many lenses behind one cornea,
and placed in a socket, in which muscles exist for its motion. Allusion has
been already made to the eyes of mollusca, When they can be useful they exist,
but are always simple and solitary; they have always a lens, and approach very
closely to the eyes of fishes and higher vertebrated classes. The sepiz, indeed,
besides a large and very convex lens, exceedingly hard at its centre, have a
hemispherical vitreous humour, a chorioid, an iris with a kidney-shaped pupil, but
no cornea, the integuments of the head being continued over the iris, reflected upon
the edges of its pupil, and covering the external surface of the lens.—Fishes
have eyes similar to the sepiz, but possess a cornea, which, as in all aquatic
animals, on account of the small difference there can be between its refractive
power and the water they inhabit, however great its convexity, is nearly flat.
They require no aqueous humour, except a little to preserve the iris free. The
vitreous is not a body of sufficient density to be very important. The globe is
hemispherical, the lens nearly spherical and very dense, and more and more so
towards its centre. It consists of concentric layers of fibres, the fibres of each
layer being serrated and locked into another side by side. The pupil is
large, and the iris nearly motionless. The outer shining layer of the chorioid
passes over the front of the iris and gives it a pearly lustre; the dark inner
layer lines its posterior surface. Their situation renders all eyelids and lachry-
mal apparatus superfluous; and they have only a covering of the common
integuments over the cornea. The sclerotic is of extraordinary thickness and
hardness, and contains fat between itself and the retina. As fish live in a dark
medium their eyes are large, particularly if they live 300 or 400 fathoms below

.the surface. The eyes of fish which burrow in mud are small; sometimes
rudimental or imperceptible. The optic nerves sometimes decussate, sometimes
simply lie across each other, sometimes one passes through a hole in the other.
Amphibious reptiles, being destined to live on land and in water, have eyes

intermediate between those of fish and of land animals. Their eyes are large,
possessed of little aqueous humour, and therefore the cornea is comparatively
flat, especially in those which are the most in water; the lens is thick in the
direction of the axis of the eye; as they are sometimes out of the water they
have eyelids, the lower larger and more moveable than the upper, together with
a third eyelid or membrana nictitans. In land reptiles, the structure recedes
from that of the eye of fishes and approaches to what is observed in birds ; the
cornea is more convex, the aqueous and vitreous humours more abundant, and
the Jens less spherical; two moveable eyelids, a membrana nictitans, straight
and oblique muscles, and a lachrymal apparatus exist. In some ophidian rep-
tiles, as serpents, the skin of the eyelids passes over the eyes and their appen-
dages, and this portion of it is therefore shed with the rest: one small tribe of
them, comprehending eels, have a membrana nictitans like saurian reptiles,
In some chelonian reptiles, as the tortoise and turtle, and some of the saurians,
as the crocodile, a circle of imbricated plates of bone is seen at the fore part of


SIGHT. 595


the sclerotic, and supports the iris: within the sclerotic of some there is fat. In
the gigantic ichthyosaurus, which formerly inhabited the ocean, but is now ex-
tinct, the same is found. The chamelion has very projecting eyes, to which
the light is admitted through a minute vertical slit in the skin, which forms but
one lid, the upper and lower being united; and each eye can be turned in a
variety of directions independently of the other: there is also a membrana nic-
titans nearly as large as in birds.

The wonderful adaptation which is observed throughout nature, in the most
minute point, to the purpose for which every thing was intended, presents us in
birds with eyes the most remote in form and structure from those of fishes, and
exactly fitted for the rare medium which they inhabit; the difference between
which and the aqueous humour of the eye is so great, that this is sufficient to
refract the rays of light powerfully. The aqueous humour is, therefore, so
copious that the cornea, which is thin, is very convex ; and, to prevent the
sclerotic from being unduly expanded, and the prominence of the cornea lost, a
circular series of fifteen or twenty quadrangular, moveable, imbricated bony
plates are placed around its edge, between the two plates of the sclerotic : from
being imbricated, they are much less liable to fracture than a bony ring. The
tough posterior part of the sclerotic forms a large hemisphere almost occupied
by the abundant vitreous humour ; while the lens, not being so requisite for re-
fraction, is flattened, smaller, and less dense. The iris and lens are necessarily
at a great distance from the cornea, by which arrangement the refracting powers
are susceptible of great variation, and the animal sees well at the most different
distances. Not only were these powers necessary, but a large field of vision ;
and therefore the cornea is very prominent, and the eyes of great size compared
with the head, and placed laterally upon it. Yet they are less moveable than in
quadrupeds ; but the reason of this is the length of their neck and extreme mo-
bility of their head. The chorioid coat, lined with a black pigment of globules
with a transparent centre, sends a prolongation called marsupium or pecten,
puckered and folded, from the entrance of the optic nerve through the vitreous
humour, and to the capsule of the lens, for some purpose unknown, unless it
be to supply copious vessels for secretion, to darken the eye in the blaze of the
sun, or, if muscular, to affect the shape and position of the lens, and thus
adapt it for vision in great variations of distance. The iris has various bright
colours, and is wonderfully mobile, and thought to be voluntary, in parrots. The
membrana nictitans, or moveable semitransparent fold of the conjunctiva at the
inner corner of the eye, is of great size and moved by two strong muscles in
order to keep the tears constantly diffused over the eye in the rapid course of
birds through the air, and to protect it fully against sudden light. It returns
to its place by mere elasticity. We have a rudiment of it in our own inner
canthus. The eyes of mammalia agree generally with our own; but, as some
of this class fly, some inhabit the water, some are amphibious, and some burrow
in the dark, they are necessarily of great variety. They are generally small in
those bulky animals whose food requires not to be discovered at a distance, as the
elephant, rhinoceros, and hippopotamus: the eye of the elephant is not above two
inches in diameter ; of the whale, not above the 200th part of the length of its body.
They are small in moles and shrews; so small in the mole, that Dr. Magendie


RR 3


596 SIGHT.


denied the existence of an optic nerve in this animal.* In the zemni, or blind
rat, the integuments, overspread with hair and of uniform thickness, cover the
whole side of the head, and under it a black spot only is found, a mere rudiment
and useless. In these cases, the sense of hearing is extremely acute ; and both it
and other senses in the bat, which has very small eyes, though a nocturnal animal.
For those which prey by night, as well as those which have to see at a distance in
order to pursue or avoid pursuit, as the carnivora, rodentia, and ruminantia, have
largeeyes. The pupil is transverse in many ruminants whose head inclines down-
wards, so that they can see extensively to the side and backwards when feeding :
while in those which spring from a height, or climb, it is frequently perpen-
dicular, so that their vision is extensive upwards and downwards. In almost
all the inferior tribes, just as is generally the case in fishes, reptiles, and birds, they
are placed Jaterally in the head, with two independent fields of vision, the optic
axes forming a very obtuse angle together, so as to give a very large view. As
we ascend towards the quadrumana, the optic axes form a smaller angle,— the
two fields of vision approach, so that both eyes can be directed simultaneously
to the same object; and the same is noticed in nocturnal quadrupeds, and in
owls; and in us the axes are more nearly parallel than in any other mam-
malia, the fields of vision coincide in almost all their extent, and precision of
visual impressions is thus augmented. In carnivorous quadrupeds, the back


RE Se ee ee ey


* Not only did Dr. Magendie deny this, but M. Serres, doing the same thing,
declared that the mole and several others saw by means of other nerves than the
optic, and thus argued that one part of the nervous system could perform the
functions of another. ‘ The sense of smell,’’ says he, “can be transported from one
nerve to another, according to the ingenious remark of Professor Duméril. From
the observations of Scarpa, Cuvier, Jacobson, and Treveranus, hearing may be
partly performed by the fifth pair. From my researches on the mole, chryso-
chlore, shrew mouse, zemni, proteus, &c., these animals see by some other nerve
than the optic. Is it not such facts as these that gave M. Cuvier the idea of the
general law which he has stated, of the difference of the functions of nerves
depending rather upon the different organisation of the parts to which they are
distributed, than upon their own nature.” Gall observes that M. Serres
must have forgotten the remark in his treatise on the difference of nerves (MON
traité sur la différence des nerfs, in his 4to work, t. i. p. 127.), that Cuvier dis-
avowed this idea in his Comparative Anatomy, p. 492., where he says, ‘‘ analogous
parts constantly receive their nerves from the same pair in all animals, whatever
be the situation of the parts, however circuitous the course which the nerve has
to take. Analogous nerves have always a similar distribution : always go to
the same parts. Even those small pairs whose distribution is the most limited,
and which might easily be supplied by others, as the fourth and sixth, preserve
their existence and office.” Gall then states that he has examined the mole and
found an optic nerve, though extremely small; and adds that M. Baily has
confirmed his observations, and demonstrated the nerve to St. Hilaire and Cuvier.
Naturalists now agree with Gall. (Gall, l.c, 8vo, t. vi. p. 307. sqq.)


SIGHT. 597


part of the chorioid has not the black pigment of other parts, but a pigmentum
lucidum ora tapetum, shining with a blue or green metallic lustre. In mammalia,
to compensate for the smaller extent of motion in the head, the eye has more
means of motion than in birds. In aquatic mammalia, the eye has many affinities
with the structure of the organ in fishes. In cetaceous animals, for example,
the cornea is flat, the aqueous humour inconsiderable; the lens large, dense,
and spherical. Intermediate forms of the organ are observed in the semi-
aquatic, —the walrus, seal, beaver, otter. «‘ Thus,” says my able colleague,
“we observe these complicated optical instruments, the most universal and
the noblest organs of sense, gradually advancing to perfection from the monad
to the man, where all their internal essential parts, and all their external
accessory apparatus, are the most exquisitely finished and adjusted ; and it is
chiefly through these means that he is enabled to provide for his wants, to acquire
the materials of thought, and to enjoy the sublime spectacle of nature.’? — Dr.
Grant, ll. ce. See also Dr. Roget, 1. c.


RR 4


CHEAP, RVI


SLEEP.


* Tne faculties both of feeling and motion, possessed by the”
brain, ‘ are so fatigued by their exertions in the day, that rest is
necessary during the night to recruit them by means of sleep *—
the image of death,” as it has been termed ; for in it we cease to
be cognisant of the world around and of our own existence, and
lie motionless. Mechanical contact, temperature, savours, odours,
light, and sound are no longer felt unless strong; nor the in-
ternal feelings of hunger, thirst, &c.; thought ceases, and, from
the general suspension of volition, gravity, no longer opposed by
contracted muscles, produces its full effect, the head falls for-
wards or to one side, the upper eyelid, the lower jaw, the ex-
tremities drop, and the body sinks, as far as circumstances allow
it, into the horizontal posture. This state may come on in a mo-
ment, or in a more or less gradual manner, and it may come on
gradually for a time and at length suddenly. If gradually, we
feel tired ; find attention and muscular volition more and more diffi-
cult, so that we imperfectly understand what we are hearing, read-
ing, or thinking of, or what is passing around us: we speak slowly,
imperfectly, and unconnectedly, till we cease to speak at all;
we desire to think, perceive, and make the least exertion, no
longer, — are drowsy. If at the same time we have a reason for
keeping awake, we make great and repeated efforts to open our
eyes, to elevate the lower jaw, and to raise and balance our head
and trunk, perhaps to the great amusement of others: we take


* « Consult, besides authors hereafter to be reeommended, Dr. Darwin, Zoo-
nomia, t. i. Sect. xviii.

And Wienholt, ZHeilkraft des thierischen Magnetismus, vol. ii. p. 437. sqq-

Fr. Aug. Ammon, Commentatio pramio regio ornata de somni vigiliarumque
statu morboso. Gott. 1820. 4to.

C. Fr. Heusinger, De variis somni vigiliarumque conditionibus morbosis. Isenac.
1820. 8vo.”


But particularly Dr. Robert Macnish, The Philosophy of Sleep. Ed. 2. Glas-
gow, 1834.


SLEEP. . 599


the easiest position in our power, — that which approaches the
nearest to the horizontal, so that we may have to make no mus-
cular effort; we gape, and yawn; a degree of delirium? is ex-
perienced, from the impaired condition, short of suppression, of
our feeling and attention. This delirium or wandering when we
are between sleeping and waking is a much surer sign that we
are about to get to sleep than the consciousness of the greatest
drowsiness. A heaviness of the upper eyelid; smarting of the
eyes, such as to give rise to the common remark to a sleepy
person, that the dustman has thrown dust into them; peevish-
ness, especially in children; chilliness; also precede sleep that
does not come on suddenly. The breathing grows slower in
two respects, — as to the intervals of the respirations and as to in-
spiration, and on this very account it becomes deeper, and takes
place with increased sound: and in adults snoring is a common
occurrence during sleep, and takes place if the inspirations are
forcible, and if circumstances favour an open state of the
mouth, so that the velum palati, being relaxed, is thrown into
vibrations by the passing air, or if more or less of the tongue
lies up against the palate, so that the nose is made to vi-
brate; and if the mouth is closed, palatal snoring will still occur
should a portion of the tongue touch the palate, and snoring will
be more and more nasal the greater this portion of the tongue.
Like the respiration, the pulse grows slower and fuller. To ex-
clude the light as much as possible, the pupil becomes contracted,
and the eyes sometimes turn up or down. The temperature falls
somewhat. ‘The transpiration is found to increase; and, when
persons are weak, this is shown by its occurring frequently to the
amount of sweating as soon as ever they fall asleep. From
this circumstance, and the cessation of drinking, less urine is se-
creted; and, from the motionless state of the lower jaws and tongue,
and the absence of food from the mouth, there is less saliva and
oral mucus; from the absence of light and the quiet state of
the eyes and eyelids, less lachrymal secretion. But, except from
such absence of stimuli which act in the waking state, I doubt
whether secretion is lessened in sleep: that it is not necessarily
lessened, is shown by the increase of perspiration. Dr. Macnish


b « De Pauw has some singular; bservations upon it in his Recherches sur les
Egyptiens et les Chinois, t. lie pe Lidiy


600 SLEEP.


contends that all other secretions are lessened, — the nasal,
bronchial, and intestinal. The nose is certainly not blown during
sleep; but only because we do not perceive its charge of mucus:
on awaking, however, we find a handkerchief useful. In pulmonary
affections there may be no expectoration during the night, but
then a large quantity is discharged on waking. Diarrhoea may
not disturb a patient while asleep, but a copious evacuation is
common in this disease early in the morning. With the chaste
of either sex, genital emission is common during sleep. Jn the
morning the mouth is foul and the eyes gummy. But these
circumstances probably arise from the lessened amount of the
respective secretions from the lessened excitement, so that eva-
poration concentrates them.

The circumstance of our resisting sleep as long as we can
keep our eyelids open, and falling asleep, when very sleepy, the
moment we allow the eyelids to drop, is very striking, but ex-
plicable on the continuance of voluntary effort in the former
case, and cessation of it in the latter.

There is less resistance to the cooling power and morbid
effects of cold and injurious agents during sleep. Therefore persons
cover their heads before going to sleep; and, when habit has not
overcome the necessity for this, cold is continually caught from
its neglect. A draught of air is far more dangerous in the
sleeping state; and the back of the body appears less vigorous
than the front, as a draught at the back is much more dangerous
than in front. Agues are caught more readily if persons fall


asleep.
In the healthy state, we awake refreshed with sleep, —


“< Tired nature’s sweet restorer, balmy sleep.” °


The transition from the sleeping to the waking state may, like
the opposite, be sudden: but generally it is slow.¢ When sudden,


© Young’s Night Thoughts.
4 Milton exquisitely represents the slow approach of Adam’s first sleep as
causing him to imagine his existence was departing : —


‘¢ Pensive I sat me down: then gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seized
My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state


Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve.”
Parad. Lost, b. viii.


SLEEP. 601


a few moments are required for us to recover from our surprise
and find we are awake. When slow, we for a little while are
sleepy, gape and yawn, but half open our eyes, scarcely perceive
what is around us or understand what is said; and have imperfect
power over the muscles, so that we stagger and perform all
movements awkwardly: and, if still slower, the same delirium is
experienced as while going slowly to sleep, and for a little longer
we are still sleepy.

Sleep appears much more profound at the beginning than
towards the end, and, I presume, because the fatigue is then
greatest and gradually lessens as sleep continues. In the same
manner, transpiration, we have seen, is at first greatest, and
gradually lessens as the body loses its excess of fluid ; and ab-
sorption gradually lessens as the body becomes charged with
fluid.

In some diseases of the nervous system persons may pass
many days, and even entire weeks, with little or no sleep. I
have known this sleeplessness to be the only disease, and recur
on several occasions in the same individual: usually after ex-
cessive corporeal or cerebral excitement. Great wretchedness,
debility, and restlessness of body and brain took place.

The duration of sleep is various. Youth and young adults
will habitually sleep soundly and uninterruptedly for eight or
nine hours. Infants and old people sleep for shorter periods. Some
persons are constitutionally sound and long sleepers: others
light and short sleepers. Infants sleep far more in the twenty-
four hours than adults: when very young, having but recently
come into the waking state from the womb, they are awake but
for short periods ; and for very many months require to go to sleep
several times, and for the first two or three years more than
once, in the twenty-four hours. Old people sleep lightly and
frequently ; and altogether but little, unless lethargic disease
comes upon them, which is very common.

I heard Baxter the coachmaker declare he never took more than
three hours sleep during the most active period of his life. ‘* The
celebrated General Elliot”—“ never slept more than four hours out
of the twenty-four ; and his food consisted wholly of bread, water,
and vegetables.” Sir John Sinclair mentions a James Mackay,
‘a remarkably robust and healthy man,” “ who died in Strathnaver
in 1797, aged ninety-one, and only slept, on an average, four


602 SLEEP.


hours in the twenty-four.” —“ Frederic the Great,” as he is called,
and the truly great John Hunter, “ slept only five hours in the
same period.” Dr. Macnish, to whom I am indebted for these
instances, says, “ I know a lady who never sleeps above half an
hour at a time, and the whole period of whose sleep does not
exceed three or four hours in the twenty-four, and yet she is in
the enjoyment of excellent health.”¢ Sir Gilbert Blane states
that General Pichegru informed him that, “in the course of
his active campaigns, he had for a whole year not more than one
hour of sleep, on an average, in twenty-four hours.”f Sleep
varies so much in intensity that a dead sleep of an hour may be
an equal repose to an ordinary sleep of many hours. The cele-
brated De Moivre slept twenty hours out of the twenty-four;
and Thomas Parr latterly slept away by far the greater part
of his existence. §

We read that some persons have been able to sleep long
whenever they wished. “ Such,” says Dr. Macnish, “was the
case with Quin, the celebrated player, who could slumber for
twenty-four hours successively.” And “ Dr. Reid could take
as much food and immediately afterwards as much sleep as
were sufficient for two days.”

Independently of apoplexy, we have cases of extraordinarily
long sleep. A woman in Henault slept seventeen or eighteen
hours a day for fifteen years.» Another is recorded to have slept
once for forty days.i A man named Samuel Chilton, twenty-five
years of age, at Tinsbury, near Bath, once slept for a month: in
two years he slept again for seventeen days, at the beginning
of which period he took food, and had evacuations, but at length
his jaws fixed: when he fell asleep the barley was sowing, and
when he awoke he would hardly believe he saw it reaping: at
the end of a year he fell into such another sleep: his farther


© l. c. p. 33. sq. He refers to Gooch for the story, which he very properly
disbelieves, of a man, who “ enjoyed good health and reached his seventy-third
year,” and yet “ slept only for fifteen minutes out of the twenty-four hours ;
and even this was a kind of dozing and not a perfect sleep.”

£ Medical Logic, p. 83. 2d edit.

8 Dr. Macnish, 1]. c. p. 35.

» Medical Observations and Inquiries, vol. i.

i Plott’s Natural History of Staffordshire.


SLEEP. 603


history is not given.k Mary Lyall fell asleep in the morning of
the 2lst of June, and did not awake till the evening of the 30th,
and slept again the next day till the 8th of August, remaining
motionless and without food from the first till seven days had
elapsed, when she moved her left hand and pointed to her mouth,
in consequence of which food was given her, which she took during
the rest of her sleep: she heard nothing; and, though she instantly
drew back her left hand when touched with the point of a pin,
the right might be scratched till it bled without pain: she was
bled, blistered, and plunged into cold water without sensation :
her pulse for the first two weeks was generally 50; during the
$d and 4th about 60; and the day before she awoke 70 or 72:
her breathing was almost imperceptible, but in the night oc-
casionally strong as ina person asleep: she gave signs of hearing
about four days before she awoke; and afterwards recollected
nothing that had occurred in her attack,— neither the blistering,
bathing, nor eating; and had the idea only of having passed a
long night in sleep. !

A lady at Nismes would sleep from sunrise, slaiesten the
season of the year, till near noon; and again immediately after
noon, not waking till between seven and eight at night; but she
now remained awake till sunrise. If the attack lasted six months,
she was free for six months; if for twelve, she was free for twelve.
The affection gradually declined, so that she lived free from it
many years, and died at eighty-one.

Dr. Macnish mentions one “ Elizabeth Orvin, ‘who spent three
fourths of her life in sleep.”

In hysteria, I saw a young lady who slept for six weeks and re-
covered: and her twin sister had slept for a month ; but, whether
from not being well supplied with nourishment and warmth I
cannot say, she died before I saw her, and on inspection nothing
but inanition and bloodlessness was found.”

Elizabeth Perkins, in 1788, fell into a deep sleep from which
nothing would rouse her: at the end of eleven days she spon-
taneously awoke, and went about as usual ; but fell asleep again in
a week, remained so for some days, and, with occasional intervals


k Phil, Trans. 1694.
1 Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1818.
m See my clinical lecture in the Lancet, March 12. 1831.


604 SLEEP.


of waking, dozed for several months and died. A poor paralytic
man at Kirkheaton, twenty years of age, was seldom awake more
than three hours in the twenty-four for a year: once he slept
for three weeks, breathing calmly, but incapable of being roused
and of eating or drinking.

A lethargy of several days before apoplexy is sometimes ob-
served. Someare constitutionally or temporarily very susceptible
of the influence of soporifics. I have seen a person destroyed
by a single dose ofa third of a grain of muriate of morphia ; and
two or three from a grain, although they had recently taken doses
of half a grain, and even a grain, with little effect. Again, in
morbid irritability, as in delirium without strength, large quanti-
ties are borne. I have seen a grain of muriate of morphia, after
its exhibition in more distant doses, taken every hour for forty-
eight hours, with not the least effect. Sometimes, without dying,
persons remain a long time asleep after soporifics. Dr. Macnish
refers to a child, near Lymington, that was thus sent to sleep for
three weeks.

I believe that most adults require from six to eight hours sleep.
Some require nine or ten. In proportion to the exhaustion is
sleep required. Therefore in debility, as after a severe disease,
convalescents, though making no cerebral or muscular exertion,
sleep a great deal, and find the utmost invigoration from it. The
longer the waking state is protracted the greater, both absolutely
and proportionally, is the exhaustion, whence one advantage of
early hours, which is expressed by the adage,—one hour’s sleep
before twelve is worth two after. Ifa person rises proportionally
late, he certainly cannot suffer from this course ; and if he suffers,
it must be ascribed, provided there is no debauch in the case, to
his loss of the influence of so much solar light and morning air.
One of our judges, Lord Mansfield, is said to have questioned every
very old person who went into court respecting his habits: and
found that some had lived in towns, some in the country, some were
hard livers, some temperate, and all agreed in only one point,—
that of having been early risers through life. I, however, have
known several very old persons who had always sat up late,
though not in vicious indulgence, and risen late.

The Rev. Mr. Wasse, rector of Aynho in Northumberland, as-
certained, in a variety of instances, that we are nearly an inch
taller on rising in the morning than on going to bed; and the


SLEEP. 605


fact is explained by the intervertebral substances recovering
their elasticity during the removal of pressure in the night. »
Too much sleep produces headach, heaviness, and dulness:
too little, feebleness, intellectual and muscular; thinness ;
indifference of the feelings, so that elephants are tamed by being
prevented from sleeping; headach, and various unpleasant feel-
ings in the head, chilliness and feverishness, and at length an
inflammatory state of the brain. Studious young men too fre-
quently disregard the law of nature,— that a certain quantity
of sleep is requisite for cerebral and general vigour. They
fancy that far less sleep than people usually take is sufficient;
and instead of eight hours, which most require, especially in
youth, take but six, or even fewer. The result of this is sooner
or later felt severely ; study becomes more and more difficult,
and, at last impossible ; constant uneasiness, tension, pain, heat,
throbbing in the brain are experienced; perhaps sleep becomes
very difficult; general weakness is felt, and too often inflam-
mation of the brain, or typhus, occur, or some other disease,
the causes of which would have been inoperative but for the
exhausted and excited condition of the system to which they
were applied. So many of the best of our young men fall
into these circumstances every winter, and thus, if they hap-
pily do not die, lose eventually more time than they had stolen
from sleep, to say nothing of the minor efficiency of their exer-
tions while they can study than if they thoroughly refreshed
themselves by a natural allowance of repose, that I find it a
duty earnestly to point out this at the beginning of every
session in University College; to urge that all excess, how-
ever free from vice, and even if it proceed from virtuous feel-
ings, is followed by bad consequences; and I can with truth
add that such is the industry and thirst for knowledge and
intellectual distinction, such the correctness and good feeling of
the very large majority, that I never spend more than a moment
in guarding the freshmen against idleness, vice, and bad practices.
There can be no question that study after repose is more
efficient than before it. The brain must be more vigorous when
refreshed than after the excitement of the day. Many prefer
night study, and in the winter it is more convenient; but, in the


" Dr. Macnish, p. 38.


606 SLEEP.


summer, early study is equally convenient; and those who have
acquired the habit of night study have only to persevere in
retiring early, and rising at a fixed early hour, and they will
after a time find the morning sun tell better than the midnight
oil. Some commit the error of rising very early, without going to
bed proportionally soon: and the result is of course the same as
if they sat up late and rose at ordinary hours; they go about
weak, feverish, and stupid the whole day, and are absolutely
knocked up in the evening.

The effect of too little sleep upon the face is very striking :
sailors, who have their rest broken at short intervals, acquire an
old look.

The power of habit over sleep is very great. Within certain
limits it will lessen or augment the amount of sleep necessary ;
but these limits differ constitutionally in different individuals, and
must be influenced by the habitual amount of exertion. Any
one may acquire the habit of dividing his sleep, so as to take less
at night, and a portion previously in the day or evening. Some
become accustomed to have their rest broken at short intervals,
and able to sleep directly they wish: they acquire the habit
also of waking on the least noise; that is, of sleeping very lightly.
“ Seamen and soldiers on duty sleep when they will and wake
when they will. The Emperor Napoleon was a striking instance
of this. Captain Barclay, when performing his extraordinary
feat of walking a mile an hour for a thousand successive hours,
obtained at last such a mastery over himself, that he fell asleep
the moment he lay down.”° By habit we wake invariably at a
certain hour, however late we may retire; until, by repeatedly
retiring late, the system greatly feels the want of rest: on the
other hand, a person accustomed to go to sleep at a certain hour,
may oversleep himself in the morning, but becomes drowsy at his
usual time in the evening. Habit enables us to sleep in un-
favourable circumstances. “ An old artilleryman often enjoys
tranquil repose while the cannon are thundering around him:
an engineer has been known to fall asleep within a boiler, while
his fellows were beating it on the outside with their ponderous
hammers; and the repose of a miller is no wise incommoded by
the noise of his mill.’”—* It is common for carriers to sleep on


° Dr. Macnish.


SLEEP: 607


horseback, and coachmen on their coaches.”? ‘ Nay, silence
itself may become a stimulus, while sound ceases to be so. Thus
a miller being very ill, his mill was stopped that he might not be
disturbed by its noise; but this, so far from inducing sleep, pre-
vented it altogether; and it did not take place till the mill was
Set a-going again. For the same reason, the manager of some
vast iron-works, who slept close to them, amid the incessant din
of hammers, forges, and blast furnaces, would awake if there was
any cessation of the noise during the night.”—* A person who
falls asleep near a church, the bell of which is ringing, may hear
the sound during the whole of his slumber, and be nevertheless
aroused by its sudden cessation4:” and a person, sent to sleep
in a church by a stupid sermon, generally awakes as soon as the
preacher’s humdrum is at an end.

The ordinary cause of sleep is fatigue. The activity of the
day exhausts the powers of the brain—feeling, understanding, and
will, and the brain sleeps. The greater, in point of duration or
intensity, the activity, the greater the disposition to sleep, unless
the exhaustion has produced aching or irritation, — morbid con-
ditions, which, destroying the course of health, may prevent sleep.
It matters not whether the activity has been volition, passion,
sensation, or reflection, Exhaustion of one part of the encephalo-
spinal system exhausts the rest: nay, so bound up together are
all parts of the body,—the brain and the rest, that fatigue of the
brain exhausts all other parts, and fatigue of any part will impair
the powers of the brain, and great muscular exertion therefore

-of any voluntary part exhausts the vigour of the mind. No one
thinks well who is fatigued by exercise, and nothing causes sleep
at night more than good exercise in the day. All studious men,
who are real thinkers, require a large allowance of sleep; and find
a great difference in the soundness and urgency of sleep after a
day of intellectual labour, and a day accidentally spent in the
shallow prattling and reading common to the greater part of the
more expensively, but not better, educated persons who fancy
themselves to possess cultivated understandings ; or in the per-
formance of what is the daily routine of the majority of popular,
and probably fashionable, practitioners, who are destitute of sound
knowledge and strangers to reflection and study, and yet impu-


P Dr. Macnish, 9 Dr. Macnish,


608 SLEEP.


dently assume the highest importance, and disparage t'nose who
read, observe, and reflect, and are anxious to advance the general
good rather than their own little interests. The exhaustion being
greater before sleep has remedied it, the beginning of sleep is ne-
cessarily the soundest part, and persons are less easily roused at
the early part of the night; and, after sleep, light at first finds
the eyes so sensible that it is disagreeable. Emotion, con-
tinued and at length wrought up to the highest pitch, will induce
sleep : whence persons condemned almost always pass the night
in sound sleep before the morning of their execution, and gene-
rals sleep on the eve of their great battles. Severe pain, or a too
vivid sensation, leaves drowsiness. Exhaustion of the brain by
defective support of its nutritive functions equally produces sleep
as over exertion of its functions. Loss of blood, purging, starv-
ation, cold, diseases that impair nutrition or cause exhaustion by
general excitement, produce sleep, perhaps coma; young infants
and old people frequently require stimulants and nutriment to
rouse them from coma. Cold will induce a fatal sleep ; yet, if the
cold is not powerful enough to produce torpor, it will keep a
person awake by the disagreeable sensation. Every one must
have been unable to sleep from not having sufficient bed-clothes
on acold night; and cold feet frequently prevent repose.

Defective moral and intellectual excitement incline to sleep:
stupid and passionless people are generally great sleepers, and a
good method of getting to sleep is to think of nothing, — to turn
aside from every thought that presents itself on the pillow. The
withdrawal of all causes of sensation powerfully contributes to
sleep: and all animals, when inclined to sleep, place themselves
in a position which shall require no exertion of volition, and
retire from and exclude as much as possible all external excite-
ment.

The excitement of the brain may be reduced and thus sleep
brought on by impressions on the senses just sufficient to with-
draw attention from every feeling ana thought, and yet insuf-
ficient to maintain much activity. A discourse stupid or
delivered monotonously, a dull book or one not understood, is
pronounced sleepy from its effects; the murmur of a rivulet and
the hum of bees; the sight of any thing waving, as of a field of
standing corn or of the hand drawn up and down before the
face by a mesmeriser, attracting attention much more than an


SLEEP. 609


object at rest and yet exciting but little; induce sleep, the
former acting by the ear, the latter by the eye; and gentle
friction is equally effectual by means of touch. I know a. lady
who often remains awake in spite of every thing till her husband
very gently rubs her foot: and, by asserting to a patient my con-
viction that the secret of an advertising hypnologist whom I allowed
to try his art upon the sleepless individual, and which he did for a
time successfully, was to make him gently rub some part of his
body till he slept, he confessed this to be the fact. Boerhaave
acted on the same principle in regard to another sense, when
he directed water to be placed near a sleepless patient, so cir-
cumstanced that it might drop into a brass pan. Gentle motion
acts by an impression on the same sense; and a combination is
of course still more effective, whence experience has taught
nurses to rock, and otherwise gently agitate infants, while they
hum them to sleep.

Most of the substances termed narcotic have a property of
inducing sleep and stupor; they have the property of inducing
also giddiness, confusion, headach, delirium, and heat and throb-
bing: but some narcotics produce few or more of the other effects
rather than sleep. Narcotics lessen sensibility throughout and
indeed affectibility, possessing a general hostility to all vital pro-
perties. Yet many, if not all, stimulate in moderate quantities.
Opium augments the pulse and the heat, even in the head ; excites
the intellect and feelings; gives headach; and renders noise in-
tolerable: strychnine causes tetanic spasms: tobacco excites
sneezing : very many narcotics occasion smarting and burning.

Impure air appears narcotic and disposes to sleep. Heat has
the same power, probably by relaxing; for a certain proximity of
particles, and as it were tension of structure, is indispensable to
vigour and activity. Heat may also act by overcharging the
head with blood, partly through relaxation of vessels, partly, as
some think, by expanding the blood itself. Whatever overcharges
the head, as the reversed erect posture, has the effect of causing
heaviness and stupor; and thus by lying flat ona revolving mill-
stone, with the head towards the circumference, the centrifugal
force accumulates blood in the head sufficient to produce sleep and
at last apoplexy. Whatever else than blood compresses the brain
has the same effect; for instance an accumulation of serum, depres-
sion of bone, and, when the bone has been deficient in an individual

ss 2


610 | SLEEP.


through accident, pressure upon the brain with the hand at once
sends the person to sleep. A full meal causes drowsiness as long
as the food is in the stomach, perhaps from the great activity of
the organ, so that, from the general sympathy, the brain among
the rest is drained of its power: some ascribe a little to the
more difficult expansion of the chest, and consequent accumula-
tion of blood in the head. Fat and plethoric people are drowsy,
and in them there is excessive fulness of the blood-vessels of the
head from plethora and from the obstruction produced by dif-
ficult respiration.

The causes of waking are the opposite of those of sleeping.
The accumulation of vigour gradually proceeds while sleep lasts,
till the brain is spontaneously active again. But, before this, we
may awake from an external excitant, to whatever sense it
may be applied; from any internal causes of feeling, mental, or
in the body at large; or from excitement having been so strong
before sleeping that the brain will not remain torpid; from ex-
citement of the nutritive functions of the brain, its circulation,
evolution of heat, &c.; from the agency of certain substances
which possess the property of keeping the mind active, as tea,
coffee, which may prevent sleep altogether or cause it to be
- short.

The proximate cause of sleep or the condition of the brain in
it has been variously viewed. Some have fancied the brain
compressed, and compression will disqualify the brain for its
functions and cause sleep, even coma, apoplexy, and death: but
there is no proof or even probability of this in ordinary sleep.
Blumenbach says, he thinks that sleep “ probably consists in a
diminished or impeded flow of oxygenated (arterial) blood to
the brain; for that fluid is of the highest importance, during the
waking state, to the re-action of the sensorium upon the functions
of the senses and upon the voluntary motions. *


® « Those who wish to know and compare other opinions upon the causes of
sleep, may consult,

M. de Grimaud, Mémoire sur la Nutrition. Petersb. 1789. 4to. p. 194.

H. Nudow, Versuch einer Theorie des Schlafs. Koningsberg. 1791. 8vo.

Steph. Gallini at the end of his Saggio d’ Osservaxioni sui nuovi progresst della
Fisica del Corpo Umano. Padua. 1792. 8vo,

Mauduit, in Fourcroy, in the Médecine Eclairée, &c. t. iv. p. 273.

T. Chr. Reil, Functiones Organo Anime Peculiares. Tal. 1749. 8vo.
p- 108.


SLEEP. 611


* The influx of blood,” he continues, “is diminished by its
derivation from the brain and congestion in other parts; it is
impeded by the pressure of foreign matter upon the brain,
whether from serous or purulent collecting, from depression of
fractured bones, &c.”

“‘ Besides other phenomena which accord with this explan- »

ation, especially those of hybernating mammalia’, is a very re-

markable one which I witnessed in a living person whose case
was formerly mentioned, —that of the brain sinking whenever
he was asleep, and swelling again with blood the moment he
awoke.

“ This opinion is likewise strengthened by the production
of continued watchfulness from congestion of blood in the
head.”

Now it is certain that the supply of arterial blood to every
part, and especially to the nervous system, is requisite to its
functions and its life, and that in proportion to the activity of a
part is the activity of its supply of arterial blood. Analogy,
therefore, renders it extremely probable that, during the in-
activity of sleep, the brain, having less occasion for arterial
blood, has a less vigorous circulation than during the waking
state; and we know that whatever diminishes the ordinary de-
termination of blood to the brain, or impairs the movement of
the blood through itt, disposes to sleep. But, although this be


L. H. Chr. Niemeyer, Materialien zur Erregungstheorie. Gotting. 1800.
Svo. p. 71.

Troxler, Versuche in der Organischen Physik. p, 435.

Brandis, Pathologie, p. 534.”

Cullen, Physiology, p. 124. sqq.

Adelon, Physiol. t. ii. p. 292. sqq.

Dict. des Sc. Méd. t. xix. p. 348. sqq.

Bourdon, Principes de Physiol. 1. 6. p. 785. sqq-

* «y, c, Of the alpine marmot, of which Mangili treats in Reil’s Archiv.
vol. viii. p. 466. sqq.

t As arterial blood when at rest acquires the venous character, and the slower
its motion the greater is its tendency to assume this character, it is evident that
in congestion of blood, by which is meant simply an unusual quantity of blood
in the vessels of a part, not flowing with its usual freedom, the part atfected has
not its proper supply of perfectly arterial blood. Hence congestion in the head
must, even from this cause alone, produce drowsiness, to say nothing of the
effect of pressure on the cerebral substance,

ss 3


612 SLEEP,


granted, it must be viewed, not as the cause, but as a circum-
stance, or, in fact, a consequence, of ordinary sleep. Increase
the activity of an organ, you increase its circulation; diminish
its activity, you diminish its circulation. The alteration of cir-
culation is usually not the cause but the consequence; necessary,
indeed, to the continuance of the altered degree of activity in
the organ, but not the cause. The degree of activity of any
part, and the degree of its circulation, are exactly and unalter-
ably correspondent. If the circulation through a part be me-
chanically increased or diminished, the sensibility and activity of
the part will, doubtless, be proportionally increased or diminished.
This example occurs in hemorrhage. Frequently both are af-
fected simultaneously, — when diarrhcea renders the surface pale
and cold, both the blood is sent more sparingly to it, and the
energy of its vessels is diminished by the increase of energy in
those of the intestines. But, in ordinary sleep, the diminished
circulation appears only the consequence, for activity is always
followed by inactivity. Stimulate a muscle separated from the
body, it contracts, but it soon refuses to do so; after a little
rest, it again contracts upon the renewal of the stimulus. The
case of the brain is analogous ; and when, after its daily activity,
it falls asleep, the diminution of its circulation consequently
ensues. ‘The influence of sleep upon the cerebral circulation is
shown by the headach and other marks of congestion which
follow too much sleep. Boerhaave mentions a student who took
a fancy that sleep was the natural state of man, and so slept
eighteen out of the twenty-four hours, till he died of apoplexy.
The horizontal posture will not explain these ill effects, because
persons with spinal disease will lie a year upon the back without
them.

Sleep is an inactive state of the brain, resulting ordinarily
from mere fatigue of the organ through its activity: though
pressure, want of proper blood, narcotics, &c. or want of exciting
causes, may prevent activity, and thus induce sleep.t The case


“ The most silly discussions may be found in old authors and modern twad-
dlers (see, for instance, Jsis revelata, a book soon to be quoted) about the state of
the soulin sleep, ‘ There have been great disputes,” says Gall, « upon the ques-
tion, whether the soul can ever exist, as in sleep, without feelings or ideas? If
we lay aside all vain metaphysical subtlety, the answer is very easy. In this life
the soul receives its feelings and ideas by means of cerebral organs ; when these


DREAMING. ,613


of the brain is the same as that of voluntary muscles. If these
are laid bare and freely stimulated, they at length cease to con-
tract; after a little repose, they obey a stimulus again. The
brain may be kept awake by strong exciting causes long after it
would have sunk into inactivity ; but at length no stimulus will
rouse it and sleep is inevitable. Exhausted soldiers sometimes
sleep as they march, or sink on the ground in deep slumber
amidst the roar of cannon. Still more readily will the young.
During the battle of the Nile some boys fell asleep on deck
in the heat of that dreadful engagement.”


In sleep the function of the brain is suspended, and, if it is
perfect, there is no sensation, consciousness, thought, emotion, or
volition: but the degree of suspension is extremely various. In
ordinary sleep the mind is susceptible of sensations, and able,
if these are unpleasant, to make an effort to remove their causes ;
— whether to remove the uneasiness of impeded circulation in
the lungs by breathing, or to draw away the hand when tickled,
or change our position, as some continually do in sleep. One
or more faculties is often active, and one idea associates with
it another, intellectual or moral, so that we dream; but the ac-
tivity of the mind is partial, and, though we are able occasionally
even to reason correctly in our dreams, we are not sufficiently


organs are completely inactive, the soul can have neither feelings nor ideas.
Deep and complete sleep is a temporary cessation of personality (moz).” (Il. ce.
4to. vol. ii, p. 454, Svo. t. ii. p. 506. sq.) By soul Gall meant cerebral
power: but he wrote cautiously, as in Austria, Italy, and France, catholics
are not contented to base our hopes of a future life upon Scripture, but insist
on the existence of a soul to make Scripture probable.

Y Dr. Macnish.—Blumenbach and Cabanis call sleep a function, The former
says, ‘¢ Sleep is a completely periodical function, by which the intercourse of the
mind and body is suspended, and whose phenomena correspond, if any do, with
the supposition of a neryous fluid.”” To say intercourse of mind and body, and
not activity of brain and its dependences,—the rest of the encephalo-spinal
system, and to say nervous fluid, is antiquated nonsense. Cabanis’s words are,
«¢ Sleep is not simply a passive state, but a peculiar function of the brain.’’ The
answer to both these writers is, that ‘‘ the cessation of a function cannot be a
function.” How different is the language of Gall: “Sleep is merely in the
activity, the perfect repose of the brain in health. During this suspension of the
cerebral fuactions, the brain acquires new force, and, on waking, its faRenets
take place readily.” 1. c. 8vo. t. i. p. 210.

58 4


614 DREAMING.


ourselves to discover the incompatibility of many circumstances
which we fancy. In a higher degree of activity, we answer
questions put to us, although often ridiculously, as our deficiency
of mental power prevents us from keeping our associations in a
proper train; and we sometimes even perform a regular series
of movements. Somnambulism is but imperfect and partial sleep.
In it persons walk and even perform a variety of other actions,
without hearing or seeing, or consciousness of their situation, so
that they fall over things placed in their way, or down a descent.
They will sometimes write excellent letters, compose good verses,
and perform accurate calculations, in this state, and on being
roused into consciousness know nothing of what has happened.
This state generally occurs in sleep, but it occasionally seizes
persons awake, and is then termed ecstasis.” This is by no
means uncommon at the commencement or termination of epi-
leptic or hysteric paroxysms. In an opposite morbid affection,
the patient is conscious and sensible of every thing around, but
unable to move, or give the least sign of life.t

Dreaming and mental activity of all degrees in sleep, from
merely turning in bed, to talking, walking, and composing, are
partial activity of the brain. “ Almost all physiologists agree,”
‘says Gall, “that in dreaming animal life is partially active.
They are right, and yet they deny the plurality of organs! But
dreams cannot be conceived without the hypothesis of this
plurality.”

‘* When, in sleep, particular organs of animal life become
active, the sentiments and ideas which depend upon them must
necessarily be awakened ; but, in this case, the activity is inde-
pendent of the will.

“When one organ only is active, the dream is simple: the
object of our love is embraced, harmonious music is heard, we
fight our enemies, accordingly as one organ or another is per-
forming its functions.

“« The more organs are in activity at once, the more the action
of the dream will be complicated or confused, and the more in-
congruous will these be.


“ A remarkable example is given in the Psychological Magazine of a young
lady thus taken for dead, and after the funeral hymns were sung, &c. discovered
to be alive by a sweat breaking forth at the moment she found the lid of the
coffin was about to be nailed down.


DREAMING, 615


** When the organs are fatigued by the waking state and
exertion, we usually do not dream during the first hours of sleep,
at least unless the brain is very irritable. But, in proportion as
the organs become refreshed, they are more disposed to enter
into activity, whence towards the approach of rising, we dream
more and with greater vivacity.”

“ How is it that in a dream certain faculties occasionally dis-
play more energy than in the waking state? What precautions
do we not take to meditate profoundly on a subject. We prevent
all external impressions, we put our hand before our eyes, we
shut ourselves up, to concentrate all our attention on a single
point. The same thing takes place in certain dreams. All the
vital energy is concentrated on one organ, or upon a small num-
ber of organs, while others are in repose; so that the energy of
the former becomes necessarily more energetic. The sentiments
and ideas excited in a dream are, in some cases, completely dis-
engaged from all external mixture. We therefore cannot be
astonished if some, like Augustus La Fontaine, make admirable
verses in their sleep, or like Alexander draw out the plan of a
battle; if others, like Condillac, solve difficult problems; if on
waking in the morning some, like Franklin, find a work com-
pleted which had been projected on going to bed; if in sleep the
true relations of things are discovered, which in the tumult of
sentiments and ideas had defied our sagacity.”*

In ordinary dreaming, our conceptions of objects of sense


* Il. cc. 4to. vol ii. p. 454, sq. 8vo. t. ii, p. 506, sqq. Cabanis relates that
Franklin had on several occasions been informed in his dreams of the
issue of affairs in which he was engaged. His vigorous mind, otherwise
free from prejudice, says Cabanis, could not quite secure him from a super-
stitious notion with respect to these premonitions. He did not take into
consideration that his profound prudence and rare sagacity still characterised the
operations of his brain during sleep. It is also related of Condillac that,
while writing his Cowrs d’ Etudes, he was frequently obliged to leave a chapter
incomplete and go to bed, and that, on awaking, he found it, on more than one
occasion, finished in his head. Voltaire assures us that, like La Fontaine, he
many times in his sleep made verses which he remembered on waking. Tartini
composed his Devil’s Sonata in a dream, in which Satan appeared and challenged
him to a competition on his own fiddle. Coleridge prefaces his poetical frag-
ment called Kubla Khan with the following account of himself; — «In the
summer of the year 1797, the author, then in ill health, had retired to a lonely
farmhouse between Porlock and Linton, on the Exmoor confines of Somerset
and Devonshire. In consequence of a slight indisposition, an anodyne had been
prescribed, from the effects of which he fell asleep in his chair, at the moment


616 DREAMING.


are always far stronger than when we are awake: we always
conceive with an intensity equal to sensation, — an impossibility
in the waking state, unless under extraordinary excitement. —
In sleep-waking, the conceptions have been so strong that an
archbishop of Bordeaux declares of a young man, whose case will
soon be related, that, dreaming he had just emerged from a stream,
he shivered, his teeth chattered, he begged for brandy, and, on
receiving water instead, again asked for brandy, took a glass of
strong liquor, felt refreshed, and without waking fell into a perfect
sleep. In sleep, things are sometimes remembered and spoken
of, which had been forgotten: and we sometimes dream of our
previous dreams, forgotten perhaps in our waking state: if
we have remembered them when awake as dreams, we may
dream of them as dreams, and sometimes, without having
awakened after a dream, we dream on, dreaming again that
the first was really a dream.y— Another instance of increased


ne


that he was reading the following sentence, or words of the same substance, in
Purchas’s Pilgrimage : ‘ Here the Khan Kubla commanded a palace to be built,
and a stately garden thereunto; and thus ten miles of fertile ground were
enclosed with a wall.’ The author continued for about three hours in a pro-
found sleep, at least of the external senses, during which time he has the most
vivid confidence that he could not have composed less than from two to three
hundred lines; if that indeed can be called composition in which all the images
rose up before him as things, with a parallel production of the correspondent
expressions, without any sensation or consciousness of effort. On awaking he
appeared to himself to have a distinct recollection of the whole, and taking his
pen, ink, and paper, instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines that are here
preserved. At this moment, he was unfortunately called out by a person on
business from Porlock, and detained by him above an hour, and on his return to
his room, found, to his no small surprise and mortification, that, though he still
retained some vague and dim recollection of the general purport of the vision,
yet, with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the
rest had passed away like the images on the surface of a stream into which a
stone had been cast, but, alas! without the after restoration of the latter.”

« Henricus ab Heer mentions the case of a student at a German University,
who haying been very intent on the composition of some verses, which he could
not complete to his satisfaction, rose in his sleep, and, opening his desk, sat
down with great earnestness to renew his attempt. At length, having succeeded,
he returned, went to bed, after reciting his composition aloud and setting his
papers in order as before.”’ (Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 310.) ‘ See what Holl-
man has related of himself in this particular. Pneumotolog. Psycholog. et Theol.
Natur. Gotting. 1770. 8vo. p. 196.”

Y Dr. Macnish, 1. c. p. 87.


DREAMING. 617


excitement in dreaming is the extreme rapidity of conception,
so that a succession of events may be crowded into a dream
which we are certain cannot have lasted more than a few
moments —a rapidity which takes place in the waking state only
under the strongest excitement, as in the fear of instant death
‘* Persons recovered from drowning have mentioned,” says Dr.
Macnish, “ that in the course of a single minute, almost every
event of their life has been brought to their recollection.”
Some dreams have been singularly prophetic, from the extreme
intelligence of the dreaming brain: in other instances, as when
the prevision has related to the individual’s death, the strong
impression on the mind may have worked the fulfilment of the
prediction: in others there may have been mere coincidence,
but the coincidence has been most extraordinary. The greater
part, however, of dreaming prophecies are never fulfilled.

The impression from dreams sometimes continues for life, espe-
cially from the dreams of childhood, and sometimes its events are
afterwards confounded with reality. We always wake from a
dream in the mood of our dream: and, on waking from a terrific
dream, emotion and unconsciousness that all was a dream have
continued for a short time so powerful, notwithstanding the per-
ception of all objects of sense around, as to cause the individual
to jump out of window or to commit murder; sometimes insanity
has resulted, and sometimes, as from strong emotion in the
waking state, the cure of some disease.»

It is an error to suppose that our dreams are a mere repetition
of sentiments and ideas previously experienced. Man may invent
in his sleep just as when awake: for the internal sources of our
sentiments and ideas are the same, whether we are asleep or
awake. ©

Dreams are no doubt forgotten as well as remembered: and,
what is curious, we not only sometimes forget our dreams till we
dream again, when the same things are recognised, with or
- without our knowing that they had been dreamt. We may
dream of things as having been dreamt before, when, on waking,
we cannot remember the circumstance.

To suppose, with some, that sleep is always accompanied by


* Tox pe 62: * Dr. Macnish, 1. c. pp. 46. 102.
5 Phil. Trans. vol. ix., for such a cure of dumbness.
° Gall, Il. cc. 4to. vol. ii. p. 454.5; 8vo.t. ii. p. 506. sqq.


618 DREAMING.


dreams, though not remembered by us4, is a mere assumption
and indeed very improbable ; and it is the offspring of another
assumption, — that we have souls, it being settled that souls are
sleepless things.® Perfect sleep must be free from them;
though slight dreaming stands on the same footing with cough-
ing, and cannot be considered sufficient to constitute disease.
Some always dream; some never.

In Locke we find the following passage :—“ I once knew a
man that was bred a scholar, and had no bad memory, who told me,
he had never dreamed in his life till he had that fever he was
then newly recovered of, which was about the five or six and
twentieth year of his age. I suppose the world affords more
such instances.”f For many years before his death, Dr. Reid
had no consciousness of ever having dreamed.” The rey. Mr.
Jesse, of Margaretta, in Essex, informs me that he knew a car-
penter who never dreamt till after a fever in his fortieth year ;
and, as he before never could be made to understand what
dreaming meant, so when he first dreamt he was as much sur-
prised as perhaps Adam was when he first felt himself going to
sleep. He was aman of a remarkably good, quiet, and plod-
ding disposition.

We occasionally know a dream to be a dream and even act
against it: as when Dr. Reid, finding himself subject to frightful
dreams, determined to acquire the habit ofremembering their


a « Consult Kant, Critik der Urtheilskroft, p. 298.; and Anthropolog., p. 80.”

© Locke reasons powerfully on this point: “ ‘The soul, during sound sleep,
thinks,’ say these men.” — “ Methinks, every drowsy nod shakes this doctrine.”
— ‘ Nature never makes excellent things for mean or no uses; and it is hardly
to be conceived that our infinitely wise Creator should make so admirable a
faculty as the power of thinking, that faculty which comes nearest the excel-
lency of his own incomprehensible being, to be so idle and uselessly employed,
at least a fourth part ofits time here, as to think constantly, without remembering
any of those thoughts, without doing any good to itself or others, or being any
way useful to any other part of the creation. If we well examine it, we shall
not find, I suppose, the motion of dull and senseless matter, any where in the
universe, made so little use of, and so wholly thrown away.” — “ They, who
make the soul a thinking being, at this rate, will not make it a much more noble
being, than those do, whom they condemn, for allowing it to be nothing but the
subtilest parts of matter.” Essay concerning Human Understanding, ». ii.
Che diss. TOS. Ls:

Fol. c. bs. diy: Gh 1, ape § Dr. Macnish, |. ce. p. 45.


DREAMING. 619


dangers were imaginary, and always threw himself down a pre-
cipice near which he dreamt he was standing, and thus destroyed
the illusion; or, as Dr. Beattie, when, dreaming himself in dan-
ger upon the parapet of a bridge, and reflecting he was not
in the habit of such pranks and might therefore be dreaming,
determined to awaken himself by pitching over, and did so with
success. h

Dreams differ much in their absolute vividness, as well as in
the impression they make and the degree in which they are re-
membered,

We sometimes wake in our dream, and soon fall asleep and
experience a continuation of it.

I conceive that all the phenomena of dreaming resolve them-
selves into partial activity of brain, partial not in Gall’s view only,
who considers that there is activity of one or of a limited number
of cerebral organs, but also partial in regard to individual organs,
— one portion of an organ being active and another not; and I con-
ceive that the activity of the organ or portion of organ or organs
may be of various degrees of intensity. All the phenomena of
dreaming may be thus explained: though some, strangely enough,
cannot understand how to view dreaming as a disturbed state
of brain is at all more explanatory than to view them inde-
pendently of the brain; and call it “ making insignificant speech
supply the place of analysis,” or, ‘‘ merely a translation of one
language to another,” i to take into consideration the organ, the
disturbance of whose functions actually constitutes dreams.

An idea, being excited, excites another associated with it by the
order of previous occurrence, by similarity, or some other of the
endless modes of association, exactly as happens in the waking
state. But, as our brain is imperfectly and partially active, so
that we are not, as in the waking state, intelligent enough to
perceive the grossest incongruities and impossibilities, nor pos-
sessed of power of volition sufficient to detain an idea and prevent
its floating off and being replaced by another associated with it
perhaps in the most trifling manner, and this by another and
another in endless successive images, thoughts riot on in con-
fusion, not in the order of previous succession, as some assert, but


h Dr. Macnish, 1. c. p. 108. sq.
i London Review, No. II. p. 430. Isis revelata, vol. ii. p. 120,


620 DREAMING.


more like the cross reading of a newspaper, according to a remark
of Dr. Macnish.*
« Fancy,—
Wild work produces oft, but most in dreams,
Ill matching words, and deeds long past or late.


>)


A dream sometimes continues rational and consistent till near its
end, when it suddenly becomes absurd. ™

Some have supposed that the diversity and incongruous character
of dreams “ arises solely from our having no external sensations.” "
This appears to me a very confined view of the state of the mind
during dreaming. The want of external sensations is not the only
point, nor the chief point; but the want of intelligence and volition,
and the intensity of our conceptions. We may have sensations and
yet be asleep and dream. We may feel heat applied to our feet
and fancy we are in eternal torments: yet should we wake, with-
out any further use of our external senses, without smelling,
tasting, hearing, seeing, and without moving, we discover the
unreality of our fancy, and, though we should be lying uncovered
on the ground in the dark, with no means of knowing by external
sense where we are, or how we got where we are, we know
for certain that we not in hell, but are satisfied of being still upon
earth. In truth we think the most acutely when we have no
external sensation. When we wish to meditate, we seek silence,
generally shut our eyes, and may become motionless so as to have
no touch, and as to tasting and smelling we do not think of such
things. We often meditate in bed in the darkness and stillness
of night, and forget where we are. While excluding and not
aware of any external sensations, we may be most successful in
poetical conceptions, and yet do not mistake them for realities.
The evident reason of which is the same as of our poetry dif-
fering from the wild nonsense of dreams:—we are awake and
fully intelligent. Of course, when we are awake, our external
senses are in play, give us information, and may correct our
thoughts: but, if their impressions may have no relation to our
thoughts, and thus afford no correction, and yet we can medi-
date most philosophically without dreaming, their activity gene-
rally cannot be the cause of our-not being asleep and dream-

k lec. p. 49. 1 Parad. Lost, B. v.


™ Hood’s Whims and Oddities, quoted by Dr. Macnish, l. ¢. p. 42.
" Darwin, Zoonomia, vol.i. p. 293.


DREAMING. 621


ing. The very want of external sense is the effect of the sleep of a
portion of the brain: and the want of intelligence is another
effect ; not the effect of the want of external sense.

It is the same with the portion of the brain devoted to emotions,
notwithstanding the ideas calculated to excite them are perhaps
present. Few or more may be inactive. “ Objects, scenes, and cir-
cumstances present themselves to the mind, unassociated with
those feelings with which they are usually or invariably accom-
panied in our waking hours. Thus in our dreams we may walk
on the brink of a precipice, or see ourselves doomed to imme-
diate destruction by the weapon of a foe’or the fury of a tem-
pestuous sea, and yet feel not the slightest emotion of fear, though,
during the perfect activity of the brain, we may be naturally dis-
posed to the strong manifestation of this feeling ; again, we may
see the most extraordinary object or event without surprise, per-
form the most ruthless crime without compunction, and see what
in our waking hours would cause us unmitigated grief, without
the smallest feeling of sorrow. Dreams of this kind are more in-
coherent, and are subject to more rapid transitions than those in
which one or more organs of the feelings are also in a state of ac-
tivity.”° We might as well ascribe want of emotion to the want of
external sense. ‘

Again, we sometimes have great emotion during sleep :
sexual desire, terror, rage, &c.P; and we sometimes have great
intelligence, of which instances have been already given. But the


° Some Remarks on Dreaming, Somnambulism, and other States of partial Activity
of the Cerebral Faculties. Read to the London Phrenological Society, by Professor
Wheatstone, and published in the Lancet, March 31. 1832, through misprint, as
by Mr. Weisten ; and Dr. Macnish quotes it as mine, with a compliment to the
acuteness of the last sentence. (1. c. p. 76. sq.) But I am happy to say that there
is at King’s College, as well as at University College, a professor who has for
many years been a decided phrenologist and avows his conviction. Excepting
this original remark, the paper is professedly nothing more than a translation and
illustration of Gall. I amindebted to it for my references to Coleridge, Tartini,
and M. Giron de Buzareingues, not to Dr. Macnish, who appears to have taken
them from it without acknowledgment, and after all is incorrect, as he puts
Cabanis for Franklin, and Condorcet for Condillac.


P Porro hominum mentes magnis qux motibus edunt ?
Magna etiam spe in somnis faciuntque geruntque.
Reges expugnant, capiuntur, prelia miscent;
Tollunt clamores, quasi si jugulantur ibidem,
Multi depugnant, gemitusque doloribus edunt. Lucretius,


622 DREAMING.


intelligence, however acute, is limited : concentrated in one point,
without the general intelligence of our waking moments, so that
a collateral incongruity or impossibility is not detected.

I believe that excitement of the portions of the brain destined
for emotion is more frequently the cause of the train of ideas
than those of the intellect ; just as the hallucinations of madmen
most frequently arise from the morbid state of a feeling, — the
idea of being God or an Emperor, for instance, from inordinate
pride : and I may mention that Prof. Wheatstone remarked to me
in conversation that his observation of the greater incoherency and
rapidity of transitions in dreaming, where emotion was not excited,
might be extended to insanity. Still, I should say that, if very
many passions are excited in either dreaming or insanity, this
effect of emotion will be lost and the incoherence be very
great. The organs of the feelings may be excited alone in sleep.
We often wake under emotion, without knowing why. If i is
urged that we may have dreamt unpleasant things, but forgotten
them, which may be true, for we may recollect our dream after
some lapse of time, I add that, after going to bed under distress
of mind, we often wake in the morning feverish and wretched
without knowing why, till, after trying to consider the reason,
we in a few minutes recollect the real cause of our disquietude.
The emotion or unpleasant excitement of an organ of a feeling
must have existed during sleep, unaccompanied by images; at
least their occurrence is a mere hypothesis.

The excitement may be limited even to portions of organs,
or to particular modes of excitement. Just as in paralysis
we sometimes find one patient’s organ of language so affected
that he forgets nouns substantive only, and but some of them,
and another forgets one particular language only of two or
more that he may have learnt, so in dreaming we may hear or
talk one language only of several that we know, or we may see
every thing of one colour.

The excitement of the individual part that dreams may of
course be of all degrees: the conceptions may be almost too ob-
scure for us to discern them: they may be most vivid: we may
surpass our best efforts of the waking state, as happens sometimes
in insanity: we may remember things forgotten, and which we
have in vain attempted to remember ; nay, we probably sometimes
remember in our dreams without ever being aware that what we


DREAMING. 623


dream is the result of memory, and thus have revelations which
appear singular, but which are merely revived knowledge,
utterly forgotten.4 Dreaming being only excitement of some
portion or portions of the brain while the rest are asleep, the
causes of dreaming, no less than their mode of operation, must
be analogous to those of excitement in any other organ. These
exciting causes will produce their effect, like all other exciting
causes, not only according to their own intensity, but ac-
cording to the predisposition and present degree of excitement
of the brain; having, unless powerful, no effect if the brain has
no undue irritability or present excitement, and having, though
feeble, great effect if the brain is very irritable or already much
excited: and, where either of the latter circumstances exists,
dreaming will occur without any adventitious cause of excitement.
We may dream from an external impression upon any of our
nerves or from feelings produced in any internal part: from
light being let into the eyes, external heat or cold, titillation, an
uncomfortable bed, motion, pain, uneasiness of the digestive
organs, &c. We may dream from the brain being excited sym-
pathetically with the condition of any other organ, just as all
other organs may sympathise with each other: as the state of
the kidney or the brain may produce vomiting, the state of the
stomach produce headach, though productive of no uneasy
sensation in the stomach itself, so the administration of substances
possessed of the power of stimulating the brain in particular,
as certain narcotics in doses not sufficient to overpower the organ
and cause sleep, may induce dreams. Whatever excites the
blood-vessels of the brain will do the same: the ingurgitation
of stimulants, blows, great functional excitement, and any cause of
an inflammatory state or an approach to it. When the brain is
irritable by disease, as in fever, dreaming occurs; and, sleep
taking place with difficulty, the delirium of approaching sleep
continues so long and sleep is so often interrupted, that nurses
tell us that the patient wandered greatly at night. But, inde-
pendently of its excitement of such a state, the functional ex-
citement of the brain in the waking state may be too great for
complete sleep, by not easily subsiding, so that, if not too
great to prevent sleep, it may continue sufficiently to prevent the


1 See a curious instance of the discovery of legal papers by a dream, in Sir
Walter Scott’s notes to the Antiquary.
TT


624 DREAMING.
*


complete repose of the brain, and may cause dreaming. Like
delirium, dreaming may arise from the opposite of stimulation,—
from the want of due stimulation, as from want of food, or want of
stimuli rendered necessary by habit. In dreaming there will be
all degrees and extent of excitement, just beyond perfect re-
pose or sound sleep, and just short of the waking state.

From the great irritability of children, shown by the facility
with which they have convulsions and inflammation, they dream
much; and their dreams are more frequently frightful than those
of adults. Old people, from the lightness of their sleep, also
dream much.

From the renewed power and irritability of the brain we dream
much more as the period for waking approaches.*

The greater the development of a particular part of the brain,
and the greater its natural or acquired irritability, the more liable
will it than other parts of the brain be to dream; and for the
same reason dreams partake of the individual’s character, and, as
old people remember the events of their early life the best, they
dream most of these, while young persons dream of recent things.®
There are however exceptions to this. The natural character of
the insane generally continues in their disease, but sometimes is
quite altered: and dreams may occur in which the tone of the
feelings may differ from that of the waking state. The dreams of
drunkenness and under the influence of narcotics are the most
extravagant.t

A curious circumstance is the direction given to dreams by the
character of the exciting cause. When they arise from uneasy
sensations, they are disagreeable ; andI may remark that, if the
cause of dreams is disagreeable, all the feelings excited will be ex-
cited disagreeably, and the images will be disagreeable. Evena
strange bed, though soft and warm, may make us dream simply
because it is not that to which we have been accustomed. If
there is any discomfort, mental or physical, sleep may be inter-
rupted the moment after it has begun by a sudden, and perhaps
violent, start, or by a sensation of a blow or push, or of a loud noise:


* Lord Brougham contends that we dream only during the “ transition into
and out of sleep.” (l.c. p. 117.) This opinion is disproved by watching per-
sons in sleep and observing them toss about and mutter, evidently dreaming,
though their sleep continues.

* Dr. Macnish, l. c. p. 82. t Ibid. 1. c. p, 95.


- DREAMING. 625


and it may not be till after this has occurred more than once that
the person settles into sleep. Some always experience this on
first losing themselves, and then go to sleep for thenight.  Aris-
tides dreamt that a bull attacked him but only struck his knee; on
waking a small boil was there. Dr. James Gregory, having ap-
plied a hot bottle to his feet on going to bed, dreamt that he was
walking up Etna and finding the ground insufferably hot. One with
a blister on his head, dreamt that he was being scalped by Indians.
One in a damp bed, that he was being dragged through a stream.
A gouty man, when beginning to feel his pain in his sleep, may
dream he is on the rack before inquisitors. The sound of music
may excite delightful dreams. M. Giron de Buzareingues made
some curious experiments on this point, and directed at pleasure
the character of his dreams. In his first experiment, having allowed
the back of his head to be uncovered during sleep, he thought
he was at a religious ceremony in the open air: the custom of
the country in which he lived being to keep the head covered
excepting on some rare occurrences, among which was the per-
formance of religious ceremonies. On waking, he felt cold at
the back of the neck, as he frequently had when present at the
real ceremonies. He repeated the experiment in two days, with
the same result. In a third experiment he left his knees un-
covered, and dreamt that he was travelling at night in the dili-
gence, and all travellers know, he observes, that it is chiefly at
the knees they feel cold when travelling by that conveyance at
night.*

When sleep has not been profound, and persons have muttered,
I have amused myself with speaking to them and getting answers
from them. Dr. Beattie mentions a man “ in whom any kind of
dream could be induced, if his friends, by gently addressing him,
afforded the subject matter.” y


u Dr. Macnish, |. ¢. p. 28.

* Dr. Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, t. viii.

¥ « Dissertations Moral and Critical. London, 1783. 4to. pe 2re?

Though the nature of dreaming is evident, some writers are so little advanced
as to be ignorant of it, and have no other than the most antiquated notions. Mr.
Colquhoun, as we shall see, p. 691. infra, supposes that, in dreaming, the soul is
struggling to act without the body ! and Lord Brougham, conceiving that the mind
acts better the more ‘ the influence of the body is withdrawn,” says that dreams
throw a strong light upon the “ subject, and seem to demonstrate the possible dis-
connection of mind and matter,” and illustrate “ the mind’s independence of

ae oe


626 SLEEP-WAKING.


Tux power of volition is exerted in two ways —in dwelling
upon feelings or ideas, and in exciting muscular motion. (See
supra, p. 346. sq.) While we dwell upon a feeling or idea, asso-
ciation occurs, and the various faculties enable us to judge and
invent ; we remember, desire, &c., attending to some ideas and
feelings, and neglecting others. In dreaming, our faculties judge,
remember, invent, in general, very imperfectly ; or, if on rare
occasions, well, and even admirably, on a single matter, still many
of our faculties are in total, partial, or a certain degree of repose,
and as soon as our dream turns off to something else, absurdities


i  — SS


matter and capacity of existence without it.” (4 Discourse on Natural Theo-
logy, p. 111.) It is very strange, however, that, when the soul is thus unfettered
or half unfettered, and thinks by itself, it thinks so oddly, and works, in the vast
majority of cases, so much worse than when it has the full assistance of the brain,
that we are accustomed, if a man talks or writes nonsense, to say he is dreaming.
Even the soul’s consciousness of self often becomes false in dreams ; and we feel
ourselves “ conscious of being, or having been, parties in acting and suffering
what not only never did, but never could, take place: ” “ indeed any dream is
more or less, may I not say considerably, a check upon the mind of the waking
man,” and “ when we are taxing recollection for by-gone events, we frequently
exclaim, ‘ Did I really do so and so, or did I only dream it.’ (Observations on
the Discourse of Natural Theology, by Thomas Wallace, Esq. LL.D. p. 107.)

Locke, who argued well for us materialists, says, “ How extravagant and in-
coherent for the most part they are ; how little conformable to the perfection and
order of a rational being, those who are acquainted with dreams need not be told.
This I would willingly be satisfied in, whether the soul when it thinks thus apart,
and as it were separate from the body, acts less rationally than when conjointly
with it, or no. If its separate thoughts be less rational, then these men must
say, that the soul owes its perfection of rational thinking to the body ; if it does
not, it is wonder that our dreams should be for the most part so frivolous and
irrational ; and that the soul should retain none of its more rational soliloquies
and meditations.” (1. ¢. b. ii. ch. i. s. 16.)

Democritus and Lucretius account for dreams by fancying that the forms or
spectres of corporeal things, constantly emitted from them and floating about, as-
sault the soul in sleep: and Baxter, by fancying that spiritual beings amuse or
seriously busy themselves in making our souls active in sleep: and I think
they had as much reason on their side as Lord Brougham and Mr. Colquhoun.


SLEEP-WAKING. 627


commence: nay, coherency, after continuing a long while, often
terminates in an absurdity on the same subject. The power of
volition, whether over our feelings and ideas or muscles, in sound
sleep can be but moderately exerted; but its diminution has
endless degrees... We may have little or no command over our
thoughts, or we may have much, as when we reason, calculate,
or compose well. We have all shades of amount of power over
our muscles : we breathe, cough, move our head, limbs, and even
our trunk, more or less, in ordinary sleep ; people forcibly roused
frequently get out of bed and begin dressing before they know
where they are or what they are about; and, when overcome with
sleep in the midst of forced exertion, will continue standing or
walking or even moving their fingers at their work. Some-
times we will, in vain, as when Awake. When awake, we often
make great efforts in vain to detain particular ideas and under-
stand or produce, but find we cannot fix our attention’to the
point, or, if we do, that our cerebral organs are incapable of
work ; sometimes we will motion without effect. So in sleep, not
only is our will generally feeble, but sometimes strong yet un-
obeyed. We strive in vain to detain thoughts, or, if we succeed,
still certain faculties prove powerless. We may will much ex-
ertion strenuously, but the part of the nervous system connected
with the central extremities of the voluntary nerves is incapable
of being stimulated by that which is endowed with mental power.
In that imperfect sleep called night-mare, we will violently in
vain, but cannot move a muscle, nor utteracry. Persons believe
that, if they can but move or even cry out, they shall recover
themselves, mistaking effect for cause: they move and cry out
the moment they have recovered.

The phenomena of partial sleep are seen more remarkably in
the state called somnambulism, or sleep-walking, than in common
dreaming. The term sleep-waking, or somno-vigilium, has been
proposed, and is very appropriate, because in this state patients
may not walk, or may even be unable to walk. The individual
is capable of no impression from his external senses, or from one
or some of them only, and, if capable, either perfectly or in


z Dr. Darwin (Zoonomia, vol. i. sect. 18. p. 286.), and after him Prof. Du-
gald Stewart, contended that, in sleep, volition was suspended. Dr. T. Brown
refuted them in his Observations on the Zoonomia.

es ae


628 SLEEP-WAKING.


various degrees of imperfection ; some of his intellectual faculties
are highly active, and this in various degrees, while others are in
complete torpidity ; and the various inclinations and emotions
may be all inactive or one or more active in various degrees :
volition may be exerted over the muscles so that the person
shall talk, or walk, and execute various movements, or shall
dwell upon ideas at pleasure, and reason and compose, without
any general intelligence, so as to be in reality still asleep. Just
as occasionally in insanity and in ordinary dreams, an intellec-
tual faculty is sometimes heightened; and sometimes muscular
strength, or more properly the force of volition over the muscles.
Generally the whole is forgotten : sometimes remembered ; some-
times remembered and mistaken for reality; and sometimes re-
membered only when the same state returns. When persons
use their muscles, there must be that internal feeling which ac-
companies all muscular exertion (p. 527.),— there must be the
feeling of weight and resistance. I saw the sleep-waking con-
dition strikingly exhibited lately in a patient of mine in Uni-
versity College Hospital, — a girl, sixteen years of age, destitute
of the sense of smell as long as she could remember, subject to
pain of her vertex, and, like a sister, epileptic, though very in-
' telligent, very facetious, and of excellent behaviour. After the
Baron Dupotet, passing the ends cf his fingers up and down before
her, had sent her to sleep, on many occasions, for a few minutes
at a time, she was observed one day suddenly to talk uncon-
nectedly and move her arms and hands about, though incapable
of hearing, seeing, or feeling. She lay in bed or sat, with her
eyes open, saying a great number of things, such as she might
say when awake, told stories, and with great expression of voice,
features, and manner, mimicked the voices and conversation
of many fellow-patients accurately, and mimicked the manipula-
tions of Baron Dupotet ; yet she saw nobody, could not be roused
by hallooing in her ear, and bore the sharpest pinches with
indifference. She was cross, expressed displeasure at having
before been magnetised, said she would not be made a fool of,
complained of different things, shook her head, moving it forwards
and frowning, and saying, ‘“‘ You dirty beast.” Her hands were
very cold in such attacks, and her whole surface pale. She would
suddenly come out of this state, stare about like a person waking,
rub her eyes, become still, smile, and be completely herself without


SLEEP-WAKING- 629


the least knowledge of what she had been doing, and feel quite
ashamed and beg pardon, when informed that she had said we made
afool of her. After some hours, or days, the attack would return.
But, before she remained permanently awake, shesome times fell
back repeatedly into the sleep-waking: and nothing could be
more striking than to see her eyes suddenly fixed unconsciously,
and then all the phenomena of perfect external insensibility and
talking begin again in less than a minute: and, in a few minutes,
to observe her become suddenly still, look wild or fall fast asleep
for an instant, rub her eyes, be sentient of every thing around her,
smile, and in short in less than a minute be wide awake, without
any knowledge of the state in which she had just been. As she
could not be awakened by the strongest agency applied to her ex-
ternal senses, I resolved to try the effect of producing an internal
sensation, and heightening her volition over her voluntary muscles.
I took her off the bed, and found she could not stand. Two of us
supported her erect, and lessened the support now and then, so
that she might feel she was falling. Her knees bent, and she
would have fallen, had we not held her up. This was repeated
a few times, till at last she seemed to feel the ground a little
with her feet, and, when we lessened our support, her knees bent
less: at length she stood pretty well. Then I forced her on,
and, though her legs at first dragged, she at last feebly attempted
stepping, soon she walked, and, when she walked firmly, being
led on quickly by one of us on each side, she suddenly awoke.
This was all the work of not five minutes. I presently laid her
down on the bed, and she in a minute relapsed into her old
condition: I raised and walked her again, and she was instantly
restored ; and remained without any return for a week. I did
not afterwards succeed in this way. When the affection re-
turned it was not so marked. She had some power of perceiving
persons, and hearing and feeling, so that she gave a certain amount
of answer and expressed some uneasiness on being pinched.
After a few days such attacks ceased, but she fell into the deli-
rium only of the state, — ecstatic delirium: having the full use
of her external senses, her volition over her muscles, knowing
where she was, and active in all her intellectual faculties and
feelings, saying she felt as if her brain was coming out and was
too big for her head, and begging me to cut her head off; in short,
being wide awake, but wandering unconnectedly from one subject
A tae


630 SLEEP-WAKING.


to another, dejected, saying innocent, but absurd, rude, though
often witty and droll, things, which showed her feelings to be
disturbed, incoherent, and mimicking admirably, whistling and
singing well; and picking paper or linen to pieces: at length in
her attacks she occasionally swore, and was amorous. After re-
maining in this condition for a few days, she suddenly by mesmeric
manipulations one evening became herself completely ; still com-
plaining of pain at the top of her head, which she had suffered
from for many months and for which I had bled her repeat-
edly. She afterwards suddenly fell into this delirium again
several times, and, after continuing in it some hours or days,
would by mesmeric manipulations in two or three seconds become
completely herself and remain so for some hours or days. To ob-
serve her picking paper or linen to pieces, talking incoherently,
now whistling aloud, now singing in the ward, cross, miserable,
rude, dancing about, unable to look steadily for many seconds, her
eyes converging from parallelism, her countenance pale, and
expressive now of insanity, now of fatuity ; and then in two or three
seconds to see her completely herself, smiling, perfectly rational,
amiable, well behaved, with an expression of great intelligence,
was one of the most extraordinary changes I ever witnessed ; — to
see the functions of the brain in many points nearly suspended,
in many over excited, and in many wrong, — the organ altogether
oppressed and deranged, and then righting itself and perform.
ing all its functions properly in an instant, made an impression
upon me never to be effaced. When not in an attack, she forgot
every thing that had occurred in her attacks : but, when in them,
she recollected the occurrences of preceding attacks. In the
delirium her hands were not always cold as in the sleep-waking.
The pulse appeared hardly affected. =

I will relate a number of examples of sleep-waking to show the
various amount and extent of activity in this condition.

This first is very similar to that of my own patient, but sleep-
walking was added in one stage of the paroxysm.

‘«« At Berlin,” says Gall, ‘* a young man, sixteen years old, had
extraordinary attacks from time to time. He was agitated in
his bed without consciousness; his movements and gestures
showed a great activity of many internal organs ; whatever was
done to him, he did not perceive it; at length he jumped out of
bed, and walked hastily in the apartment: his eyes were then


SLEEP-WAKING. 631


fixed and open. I placed different obstacles in his way, which
he removed with his hand, or carefully avoided ; then he threw
himself suddenly on his bed, was agitated there some time, and
at length awoke and sat up, very much astonished at the number
of curious persons who were about him.”

Here was a certain amount of sight and touch, and sense of re-
sistance and weight ; all was forgotten ; the changes were sudden.

“« M. Joseph de Roggenbach, at Friburg in Brisgau,” continues
Gall, ‘‘ told me, in the presence of many witnesses, that he had
been a somnambulist from his infancy. In this state his tutor
had frequently made him read; made him look for places on
the map, and he found them more readily than when awake; his
eyes were always open and fixed; he did not move them, but
turned his whole head. Many times they held him, but he felt
the restraint, endeavoured to liberate himself, but did not wake.
Sometimes he said he should wake if they led him into the
garden, and this always happened.”

Here was a certain amount of szght, touch, and feeling of re-
sistance and weight; an increase of one mental power; and a certain
power of prediction ; he moved, not his eyes, but his whole head.

<< T knew also the history of a miller, who, dreaming and with
his eyes open, would go into his mill, enter upon his usual daily
occupation, return to bed by the side of his wife, without re-
membering in the morning any thing he had done in the night.”

Here was a certain degree of sight, and feeling of resistance
and weight ; and all was forgotten.

M. Martinet speaks of a saddler accustomed to rise in his
sleep and work at his trade»: and Professor Upham of an Ame-
rican farmer who rose in his sleep, went to his barn, and threshed
out five bushels of rye in the dark, separating the grain from the
straw with great exactness. °

These are examples of sleep-walking.

The following are examples of sleep-talking, or sleep-talking
and sleep-walking : —

«« Dr. Blacklock, the blind poet, on one occasion rose from his
bed, to which he had retired at an early hour, came into the
room where his family were assembled, conversed with them, and


9 jl. cc. 4to. vol. ii. p. 456. sqq. ; 8vo. t. ii. p. 510. sqq.
' Bibliotheque Médicale. © Isis revelata, vol. i, p. 313. sq.


652 SLEEP-WAKING.


afterwards entertained them with a pleasant song, without any of
them suspecting he was asleep, and without his retaining after
he awoke, the least recollection of what he had done.”

“ Dr. Haycock, Professor of Medicine at Oxford, would deliver
a good sermon in his sleep; nor could all the pinching and
pulling of his friends prevent him.” ¢

Horstius mentions a young nobleman who was observed by
his brother to rise in his sleep, put on his cloak, open the case-
ment, mount by a pulley to the roof of the citadel of Brenstein
where he was, tear a magpie’s nest to pieces, wrap the young
ones up in his cloak, return to his room, place the cloak with
the birds in it near him, and go to bed. In the morning he told
the adventure as a dream, and was astonished when shown the
magpies in his cloak, and Jed to the roof and shown the remains
of the nest.

‘An American lady, now, we believe, alive, preached during
her sleep, performing regularly every part of the Presbyterian
service, from the psalm to the blessing. This lady was the
daughter of respectable and even wealthy parents: she fell into
bad health, and under its influence, she disturbed and amazed
her family by her nocturnal eloquence. Her unhappy parents,
though at first surprised, and perhaps flattered by the exhibition
in their family of so extraordinary a gift, were at last convinced
that it was the result of disease; and, in the expectation that
their daughter might derive benefit from change of scene, as
well as from medical skill, they made a tour with her of some
length, and visited New York and some other of the great cities
of the Union. We know individuals who have heard her preach
during the night in steam boats; and it was customary, at tea
parties in New York (in the houses of medical practitioners), to
put the lady into bed ina room adjacent to the drawing-room,
in order that the dilettanti might witness so extraordinary a
phenomenon. We have been told by ear-witnesses that her
sermons, though they had the appearance of connected dis-
courses, consisted chiefly of texts of Scripture strung together.
It is strongly impressed upon our memory that some of her
sermons were published in America.” ¢

“A lady subject to spectral illusions would not only talk in


4 Dr. Macnish, |. ¢ 182. © Fraser's Magazine,


SLEEP-WAKING. 633


her sleep with great fluency, and repeat great portions of poetry,
especially when unwell, but even cap verses for half an hour
at atime, never failing to quote lines beginning with the final
letter of the preceding, till her memory was exhausted.”

I will now give instances of sleep-floating and sleep-swim-
ming.

Dr. Franklin says, “ I went out to bathe in Martin’s salt water
hot bath, in Southampton, and, floating on my back, fell asleep,
and slept nearly an hour, by my watch, without sinking or turning,
—a thing I never did before, and should hardly have thought
possible.” This showed only the completeness of his repose :
but Dr. Macnish quotes a case of actual swimming in sleep on
the coast of Ireland. ‘ About two o’clock in the morning, the
watchmen on the revenue quay were much surprised at descry-
ing a man disporting himself in the water, about 100 yards from
the shore. Information having been given to the revenue boat’s
crew, they pushed off, and succeeded in picking him up, but
strange to say, he had no idea of his perilous situation, and it
was with the utmost difficulty they could persuade him he was
not still in bed. But the most singular part of this novel ad-
venture, and which was afterwards ascertained, was that the
man had left his house at twelve o’clock that night, and walked
through a difficult and, to him, dangerous road, a distance of
nearly two miles, and had actually swum one mile and a half,
when he was fortunately discovered and picked up.” He then
adds a case of fishing. ‘‘ Not very long ago a boy was seen
fishing off Brest up to the middle in water. On coming up to
him, he was found to be fast asleep.”

The information given us with respect to these cases extends
no further, and we cannot tell the state of the eyes.

Dr. Pritchard mentions an individual who, having “ been in the
habit of frequenting a public promenade where he used to meet
his acquaintances, was seen to rise from his bed at night and
walk in his shirt along the same path, which extended a mile on
the brow of a hill, stopping very frequently and greeting dif-
ferent individuals whom he had been accustomed to see in the
same place.” &


f Edinburgh Journal of Science. See Dr. Macnish.
& 4 Treatise on Insanity and other Disorders respecting the Mind. By James
Cowles Pritchard, M.D. F.R.S. 1835. p. 407.


634: SLEEP-WAKING.


Vision might here have existed sufficiently to show him his
way, though the state of his brain suggested to him imaginary
forms; or he might have made his greetings by habit, without
fancying he saw individuals.

“ A female servant in the town of Chelmsford, surprised the
family at four o'clock one morning, by walking down a flight of
stairs inher sleep, and rapping at the bed-room door of her master,
who inquired what she wanted ; when, in her usual tone of voice,
she requested some cotton, saying that she had torn her gown,
but hoped that her mistress would forgive her : at the same time
bursting into tears. Her fellow servant, with whom she had
been conversing for some time, observed her get out of bed, and
quickly followed her, but not before she had related this pitiful
story. She then returned to her room, and, a light having been
procured, she was found groping to find her cotton box. Another
person went to her, when, perceiving a difference in the voice,
she called out, * That is a different voice — that is my mistress ;’
which was not the case, — thus clearly showing that she did not
see the object before her, although her eyes were wide open.
Upon inquiry as to what was the matter, she only said that she
wanted some cotton, but that her fellow servant had been to her
master and mistress making a fuss about it. It was now thought
prudent that she should be allowed to remain quiet for some
short time, and she was persuaded 2 down with her fellow
servant that she might then awake in her accustomed manner.
This failing in effect, her mistress went up to her room, and
rather angrily desired her to get up and go to her work, as it
was now six o'clock: this she refused, telling her mistress that
if she did not please her she might look out for another servant,
at the same time saying she would not rise at two o'clock,
pointing to the window, to injure her health for any one. For
the sake of the joke, she was told to pack up her things, and
start off immediately, but to this she made no reply. She re-
buked her fellow servant for not remaining longer in bed, and
shortly after this became quiet. She was afterwards shaken
violently, and awoke. She then rose, and seeing the cotton
box disturbed, demanded to know why it had been meddled
with, not knowing that she alone was the cause of it. In the
course of the day several questions were put to her in order to
try her recollection, but the real fact of her walking was not


SLEEP-WAKING. 635


made known to her; and she is still quite unconscious of what
has transpired.” )

Here sight was suspended, but hearing perfect, as well as
touch and the feeling of weight and resistance ; all was -forgot-
ten; she was roused by shaking, and with impunity.

A Jad named George David, sixteen years old, in the ser-
vice of Mr. Hewson, a “ butcher in Bridge Road, Lambeth, at
about twenty minutes past nine, bent forward in his chair, and
rested his forehead on his hands, and in ten minutes started up,
went for his whip, put on one spur, and went thence into the
stable ; not finding his own saddle in the proper place, he re-
turned to the house and asked for it. Being asked what he
wanted with it, he replied, to go his rounds. He returned to
the stable, got on the horse without the saddle, and was pro-
ceeding to leave the stable: it was with much difficulty and
force that Mr. Hewson, junior, assisted by the other lad, could
remove him from the horse: his strength was great, and it was
with difficulty that he was brought in doors.”—“ The lad con-
sidered himself as stopped at the turnpike gate, and took six-
pence out of his pocket to be changed; and holding out his
hand for the change, the sixpence was returned to him. He
immediately observed, ‘ None of your nonsense, that is the six-
pence again; give me my change.’ When twopence halfpenny
was given to him, he counted it over, and said, ‘ None of your
gammon, that is not right; I want a penny more,’ making the
threepence halfpenny, which was the proper change. He then
said, ‘ Give me my castor,’ (meaning his hat) which slang term
he had been in the habit of using, and then began to whip and
spur to get his horse on. His pulse was at this time at 136, full
and hard; no change of countenance could be observed, nor
any spasmodic affection of the muscles, the eyes remaining close
the whole of the time.’—*“ During the time of bleeding, Mr. Hew-
son related a circumstance of a Mr. Harris, optician in Holborn,
whose son, some years since, walked out on the parapet of the
house in his sleep. The boy joined the conversation, and ob-
served, ‘ He lived at the corner of Brownlow Street.’ After the
arm was tied up he unlaced one boot, and said he would go to
bed. In three minutes from this time, he awoke, got up, and


h Dr. Maenish, 164. sqq.


636 SLEEP-WAKING,


asked what was the matter (having been then one hour in the
trance), not having the slightest recollection of any thing that
had passed, and wondered at his arm being tied up, and at the
blood, &c.”:

Here sight, hearing, and touch, as well as the sense of weight
and resistance, were active; and all was forgotten.

According to the newspapers, a year or two ago, John Green, a
plasterer, accused Mary Spencer at the Town Hall, Southwark,
before Alderman Thorp, of stealing from him a pair of trowsers
which he was carrying home at ten o’clock at night, through
High Street, in the Borough, fast asleep.

“ He deposed that, after finishing his work, he went to see
some friends at Pimlico, and was accosted by a female; he had
at the time a bundle under his arm. He knew no more of
what transpired until between one and two o’clock on Sunday
morning.

“© Alderman Thorp. What! were you so drunk that you cannot
tell what happened ?

“ John Green (with great simplicity). I was not drunk, your
worship ; I was fast asleep. (Laughter.)

‘¢ Alderman Thorp” (with greater simplicity, though officially
one of those who are presumed competent to determine who are
the fittest persons to be physicians and surgeons and teachers in
St. Thomas’s and other hospitals, and who generally allow them-
selves to be led by one whom they have made treasurer and con-
sider fit to guide them in their judgment, having himself in most
instances already retired from business). ‘* You cannot be serious.
I never heard of such a thing, as a man walking through a
crowded thoroughfare, like the Borough High Street, without
being disturbed.

“* John Green. What I have stated, your worship, is true; I
am unfortunately too frequently afflicted with fits of somnam-
bulism; and, for greater security from robbers, I always make
what articles I carry fast to my arm, so that if any one attempt
to snatch it from me it would awaken me.

*“« Alderman Thorp. But how do you know the prisoner is the
party who accosted you in the Borough? If you were asleep,
you could not see her.


' Lancet, vol. i.


SLEEP-WAKING. 637


“ John Green. Strange as it may appear, although I have not
the power to arouse myself when in such a state of excessive
lethargy, yet I can retain the sound of persons’ voices in my
mind, and, from the voice of the prisoner, I have not the least
doubt she is the party.

“« Alderman Thorp. How do you account for the lapse of time,
from being accosted by the prisoner up to the time you dis-
covered your loss ?

“ John Green. T am in the habit of walking for hours in my
sleep, and if an attempt had been made to forcibly take the
bundle from my arm, it would have aroused me; my handker-
chief was cut, and thus the bundle was easily taken away.

“ Alderman Thorp. I never heard such a case before; was the
bundle found ?

** Acting Inspector M‘Craw, division M., answered in the
affirmative, and added, that what the complainant had stated
about walking the streets and roads was true: he had made
inquiries, and found it to be the fact: it was well known to the
police.

** Watt, Police constable 163., division M., deposed, that the
complainant came to the station-house between one and two
o’clock on Sunday morning, and made precisely the same state-
ment he had made before the Alderman. The Inspector thought
the tale savoured of the marvellous, and told witness to accom-
pany him (complainant) in search of the property; and on ar-
riving at a house in Kent Street, Borough, he said he thought
the bundle was there. He knocked at the door, which was
opened, and by the door of a room wherein the prisoner was
sleeping, the property was found. The moment she spoke, he
said the prisoner was the person who stopped him in the Borough.
Witness took the prisoner to the station-house.

‘“‘ The prosecutor here pointed out the way in which the
bundle must have been taken away, and showed the Alderman
the rent handkerchief.

‘“‘ Mr, Edwards for the prisoner contended that no jury would
convict upon the evidence of a sleep-walker, in prosecution
against a street-walker. The prisoner laid no claim to the
bundle; and as the complainant had sworn it was his property,
the police would give it up to him.

“ Alderman Thorp said it was so strange a case that he hardly


-


638 SLEEP-WAKING-


knew how to act; he should, however, under the doubtful cir-
cumstance as to identity, give the prisoner the benefit of it, and
discharge her. The bundle was given up to the complainant.

« A gentleman, who was in attendance, said he had known the
complainant many years, and it was not an uncommon thing for
him to be seized with that unhappy affliction while at work on
the scaffold, and yet he had never met with an accident, and
while in that state, would answer questions put to him as though
he was awake.” * .

Hearing was retained, as well as the sense of weight and re-
sistance, and possibly sight to a certain degree ; the attack came
on suddenly, in the waking state; so that the case, like that of
my patient, was one of partial sleep in the waking state, — ecstacy
as it is termed, and not of partial excitement during sleep.

An Italian nobleman, named Augustin Forari, was subject to
sleep-waking, and on one occasion watched by a Signor Vigneul
Marville, who gave the following account : —

“One evening towards the end of October, we played at
various games after dinner: Signor Augustin took a part in
them along with the rest of the company and afterwards retired
to repose. At eleven o’clock his servant told us that his master
would walk that night, and that we might go and watch hin.
I examined him some time after with a candle in my hand; he
was lying upon his back, and sleeping with open, staring, eyes.
We were told that this was a sure sign that he would walk in
his sleep. I felt his hands and found them extremely cold, and
his pulse beat so slowly that his blood appeared not to circulate.
We played at backgammon until the spectacle began. It was about
midnight, when Signor Augustin drew aside the bed-curtains
with violence, arose, and put on his clothes. I went up to him
and held the light under his eyes. He took no notice of it,
although his eyes were open and staring. Before he put on his
hat, he fastened on his sword-belt, which hung on the bed-post :
the sword had been removed. He then went in and out of
several rooms, approached the fire, warmed himself in an arm-
chair, and went thence into a closet where was his wardrobe.
He sought something in it, put all the things into disorder, and
having set them right again, locked the door, and put the key


k Tsis revelata.


SLEEP-WAKING. 936


into his pocket. He went to the door of the chamber, opened
it, and stepped out on the staircase. When he came below, one
of us made a noise by accident: he appeared frightened, and
hastened his steps. His servant desired us to move softly, and
not to speak, or he would become out of his mind; and some-
times he ran as if he were pursued, if the least noise was made
by those standing around him. He went into a large court and
to the stable, stroked his horse, bridled it, and looked for the
saddle to put on it. As he did not find it in the accustomed
place, he appeared confused. He then mounted his horse and
galloped to the house door. He found this shut; dismounted, and
knocked several times at the door with a stone which he had
picked up. After many unsuccessful efforts he remounted, and
led his horse to the watering place, which was at the other end
of the court, let it drink, tied it to a post, and went quietly to
the house. Upon hearing a noise which the servants made in
the kitchen, he listened attentively, went to the door, and held
his ear to the keyhole. After some time he went to the other
side, and into a parlour in which was a billiard table. He walked
round it several times, and acted the motions of a player. He
then went to a harpsichord on which he was accustomed to prac-
tise, and played a few irregular airs. After having moved about
for two hours, he went to his room, and threw himself on his
bed in his clothes, and we found him in them the next morning,
for after his attacks, he always slept eight or ten hours. The
servants declared they could put an end to the paroxysm only
either by tickling his soles, or blowing a trumpet in his ear.”

Here, hearing, touch, the sense of weight and resistance were
active, and probably sight to some degree; he was roused with
empunity.

Drs. Righellini and Pigatti describe, from their own ob-
servation, the sleep-waking of a man servant named Negretti,
twenty-four years of age, who, from his eleventh year, had ex-
perienced attacks of the disease in March, not extending beyond
April. March 16. 1740, after going to sleep on a bench in
the kitchen, he first began to talk, then walked about, went to
the dining-room and spread a table for dinner, and placed him-


1 J, A. Muratori, della forza della Fantasia Umana. Venezia. 1766. Dr,


Pritchard; Ip ic:
UU


640 SLEEP-WAKING,


self behind a chair with a plate in his hand, as if waiting on his
master, the Marquis Luigi Sale. After waiting till he thought
his master had dined, he cleared away, and put all the things
into a basket, which he locked up ina cupboard. He afterwards
warmed a bed, locked up the house, and prepared for rest.
Being then awakened, and asked if he remembered what he had
been doing, he answered, ‘ No.’ Often, however, he did re-
member. On the 18th of the same month, he went through the
same process, but, instead of going to bed, went into the kitchen
and sat down to supper. Dr. Righellini, with many others, were
very curious to see him eat. At once recollecting himself, the
man said, ‘ How can I so forget? to-day is Friday, and I must
not dine.’ He then locked up every thing and went to bed. If
water was thrown in his face or his eyes were forcibly opened,
he would awake, but remained some time faint and stupid. His
eyes were firmly closed in the paroxysm, and he took no notice
of acandle placed close to them. Sometimes he went against
the wall, and even hurt himself severely. If any body pushed
him, he got out of the way, and moved his arms rapidly on every
side: and, if in a place with which he was not well acquainted,
he felt all the objects around with his hand, and showed much
inaccuracy; but, in places familiar to him, he was not confused
and went through his business well. After Dr. Pigatti had shut
a door through which he had just passed, he struck himself
against it on returning. Sometimes he carried a candle about,
but, on a bottle being substituted, he carried it about as if it were
acandle. Dr. Pigatti was certain he could not see. Once in
his sleep he said he must go and hold a light to his master in
his coach. Dr. Righellini followed him closely, and found that
he stood at all the corners of the streets with his torch not
lighted, waiting a while in order that the coach which he fancied
was following might pass when the light was required. On one
occasion he ate several cakes and some salad for which he had just
asked the cook. He then went with a lighted candle into the
cellar and drew wine, which he drank. He would carry a tray
with wine-glasses and knives, and turn it obliquely, to avoid an
accident, on passing through a narrow doorway. Dr. Pigatti once
substituted some strongly seasoned cabbage for a salad which
he had prepared and had sit down to eat: he ate the cabbage,
and then some pudding whicli was substituted for it, without


SLEEP-WAKING. 641


perceiving the difference. At another time, having asked for
wine, he drank water which was given to him; and sniffed ground
coffee after asking for snuff. ™

The state of taste and smell was here inquired into, and found
inactive : touch and the sense of weight and resistance were active;
sight inactive ; and the actions were habitual.

Dr. Francesco Soave relates the case of Castelli, the pupil of
an Italian apothecary. The youth was found asleep one night,
translating Italian into French, and looking out the words in
a dictionary. They put out his candle, when he, finding him-
self in the dark, began to grope for it, and went to light it at
the kitchen fire, though other candles were alight in the room
At other times he had gone down to the shop and weighed out
medicines, and talked to supposed customers. ‘When any one
conversed with him on a subject on which his mind was bent,
he gave rational answers. He had been reading Macquer’s
Chemistry, and somebody altered his marks. This puzzled him;
and he said, ‘ Bel piacere di togliermi i segni. He found his
place and read aloud, but his voice growing fainter, his master
told him to raise it, which he did. Yet he perceived none of the
persons standing round him; and though he heard,” says Dr.
Soave, “any conversation which was in conformity with the
train of his ideas, he heard nothing of the discourse which
these persons held on other subjects. His eyes seemed to be
very sensible to objects relating to his thoughts, but appeared to
have no life in them; and so fixed were they, that, when he read,
he was observed not to move his eyes but (like M. Roggenbach,
p- 631. supra) his whole head from one side of the page to the
other.” 2

Here was most decided sight, though the existence of it
was so partial, and his mind could attend in so limited a way
that the presence of other candles was not noticed, and he went
to the kitchen for a light: hearing was active; of course the
sense of weight and resistance, and touch. Volition over the muscles
was rather weak, as his voice grew fainter while he read, and he
did not exert the muscles of his eyes, but moved his whole head.

Still more, however, has been done in sleep-waking.


m Muratori, |. c. ,
" Riflessioni sopra il Somnambolismo: di Francesco Soave.


vue


642 SLEEP-WAKING.


‘¢ In 1686, Lord Culpepper’s brother was indicted at the Old
Bailey for shooting one of the guards and his horse. He pleaded
somnambulism, and was acquitted, on producing ample evidence
of the extraordinary things he did in his sleep. There is a some-
what similar story of a French gentleman, who rose in his sleep,
crossed the Seine, fought a duel, and killed his antagonist, with-
out recollecting any of the circumstances when awake.” ©

The next, as well as the cases mentioned at p. 633. illustrates the
occasional great acuteness of sleep-wakers. “A young man named
Johns, who works at Cardrew, near Redruth, being asleep in the
sumpter-house of that mine, was observed by two boys to rise and
walk to the door, against which he leaned : shortly after, quitting
this position, he walked to the engine shaft, and safely descended
to the depth of twenty fathoms, where he was found by his com-
rades soon after, with his back resting on the ladder. They
called to him to apprise him of the perilous situation in which he
was, but he did not hear them, and they were obliged to shake
him roughly till he awoke, when he appeared totally at a loss te
account for his being so situated.” P

In the following cases a partial increase of mental power took
place, as is sometimes noticed in insanity and common dreams: —

“ A story is told of a boy who dreamed that he got out of bed,
and ascended to the summit of an enormous rock, where he found
an eagle’s nest, which he brought away with him and placed
under his bed. Now the whole of these events actually took
place ; and what he conceived, on awaking, to be a mere Vision,
was found to have had an actual existence, by the nest being
found in the precise spot where he imagined he had put it, and
by the evidence of spectators who beheld his perilous adventure,
The precipice which he ascended was of a nature that must have
baffled the most expert mountaineer, and such, as at other times
he could not have scaled.” 4

Gassendi tells of a man who often rose and dressed in his
sleep, went into a cellar and drew wine, appearing to see in the
dark as well as in the day; but, when he awoke either in the
cellar or street, was obliged to grope his way back to bed. He
often thought there was not light enough, and that he had risen


° Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 316. P Dr. Macnish, p. 166,
4 Dr. Macnish, 1. e. p- 170.


SLEEP-WAKING. 643


too early, and therefore struck a light. He tells of another who
passed on stilts “‘ over a torrent asleep one night, and on awaking
was afraid to return before daylight, and before the water had
subsided.” ©

The intellectual achievements of Coleridge and others during
ordinary dreaming are as striking as any thing of the kind to my
knowledge recorded of sleep-waking.

An increase of muscular strength has sometimes, as in insanity,
been noticed. One Sunday, Mr. Dubrie, a musician at Bath,
attempted in vain to open a window that happened to be nailed
down in his bed-room. At night he rose in his sleep, and made
the attempt successfully, but threw himself out and broke his
leg.s

The increase of mental power, in respect of determinate
muscular movement, is shown in that unusual variety of chorea
called leaping ague, in fits of which persons wide awake invo-
luntarily dance admirably who had never learnt, performing
the most difficult steps and exhibiting exquisite grace, rapidly
execute all kinds of difficult movements, and run violently in the
most dangerous situations without mischief.t Lord Monboddo
describes a sleep-walking girl in Scotland, about sixteen years of
age, who, in her fits, which began with drowsiness ending “in sleep,
or what had the appearance of sleep, for her eyes were close
shut,” would leap upon stools and tables with surprising agility,
and “run with great violence and much faster than she could do
when well, but always with a certain destination to some one
place in the neighbourhood, and to which place she often said,
when she found the fit coming upon her, that she was to go; and
after she had gone to the place of her destination, if she did
not there awake, she came back in the same direction, though she
did not always keep the high road, but frequently went a nearer
way across the fields; and though her road, for this reason, was
often very rough, she never fell, notwithstanding the violence
with which she ran. But all the while she ran, her eyes were
quite shut, as her brother attests, who often ran with her to take
care of her, and who, though he was much stronger, older, and
cleverer than she, was hardly able to keep up with her. When


Fr, Pritchard, lc; p. 494. sq. * Dr. Macnish, 171.
* See, for instance, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. vy. and vii,
UU 3


644 SLEEP-WAKING.


she told, before the fit came on, to what place she was to rum,
she said she dreamt the night befere that she was to run to that
place ; and though they sometimes dissuaded her from going to
a particular place, as to my house, for example, where they said
the dogs would bite her, she said she would go that way and no
other. When she awoke, and came out of her delirium, she found
herself extremely weak, but soon recovered her strength, and was
nothing the worse for it, but, on the contrary, was much the
worse from being restrained fromrunning. When she awoke and
came to herself, she had not the least remembrance of what had
passed while she was asleep. Sometimes she would run upon
the top of the earthen fence which surrounded her father’s little
garden; and though the fence was of an irregular figure, and
very narrow at top, yet she never fell from it, nor from the top
of the house, upon which she would sometimes get, by the assist-
ance of this fence, though her eyes were then likewise shut.”
Once, in a fit, she had a violent desire to drink of water from a
particular well, and on their giving her other water, “she would
not let it come near her, but rejected it with great aversion; but
when they brought her water from this well, she drank it greedily,
her eyes being all the while shut. Before her last fit came upon
her, she said that she had just three leaps to make, and she would
neither leap nor run more. And accordingly, having fallen asleep
as usual, she leaped up upon the stone at the back of the chime
ney, and down again; and having done this three times, she kept
her word, and never leaped or ran more. She is now in perfect
health.” #

In a recent American case of somnambulism, to which I shall
presently refer, the patient, with her eyes closed, “ sometimes
engaged in her usual occupations, and then her motions were
remarkably quick and impetuous; she moved with astonishing
rapidity, and accomplished whatever she attempted with a cele-
rity of which she was utterly incapable in her waking state.”

In another, though the patient, in her fits of sleep, while her
eyes were open and she was talking to her acquaintance, making
ironical applications to them under feigned names, was perfectly
insensible to pricking with needles, to wrenching her fingers, to
brandy and hartshorn put into her eyes and mouth, Spanish snuff in


“ Ancient Metaphysics.


SLEEP-WAKING. 645


her nostrils, a candle held so near her eyes as to burn the lashes,
the noise of a loud voice in her ears or of a stone thrown against
the back of her bed, she would nevertheless spring out of bed, and
keep “ the middle way between the bedsteads as well as when
awake, and never come against them, turning dexterously’round
between the bedsteads and a concealed closet without even groping
the way or touching the objects; and after turning round, she
returned to her bed, covered herself with the clothes, and again
became as stiff as at the commencement. She then awoke, as if
from a profound sleep, and when she perceived, from the appear-
ance of the bystanders, that she must have had her fits again,
she wept the whole day for shame, and never knew what had
lhappened to her during the paroxysm.” *

In general patients are not easily awakened. Sometimes they
are. Dr. Pritchard knew a man, who was accustomed to attend a
weekly market, rise from his bed, saddle his horse, and proceed
as far as the turnpike, which, being shut, awakened him. I have
already given other examples. Although the persons mentioned
were awakened with impunity, immediate death has occasionally
been the consequence. Dr. Macnish mentions a young lady sub-
ject to sleep-walking, whose door one night was not, as usual,
secured, so that she walked out into the garden; and there she
was awakened by some of the family who followed her. But the
shock was such that she almost instantly expired. y

One evening, about twelve or eighteen months ago, at Dres-
den, a young lady was observed walking upon the top of a house.
The alarm was given, and a considerable concourse assembled.
Every precaution was taken to prevent her from receiving injury
in case of falling: the street was covered with beds, mattresses,
&c. Meanwhile, the young lady, apparently unconscious of
danger, came forward to the edge of the roof, smiling and
bowing to the multitude below, and occasionally arranging her
hair and her dress. After this scene had continued for some
time, and the spectators were in the utmost anxiety for her safety,
she at length proceeded towards the window of a room from
which she had come. In their alarm, some of her family had
placed a light in it, which the somnambulist perceived, and in


x M. Sauvage de la Croix. Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 33
Tus C; p. Wass


uu 4&


646 S_LEEP-WAKING.


consequence suddenly awoke, fell to the ground, and was killed
on the spot.”

The curious occasional circumstance of our not remembering
the points of a dream till dreaming of the same things again, has
been strikingly noticed in sleep-waking.

Ritter* describes a somnambulist boy, who, on waking, recol-
lected nothing that occurred in his sleep, but could talk of other
matters. On falling asleep again, he could resume his discourse
just where it had been interrupted by his waking; on waking
again, he would know nothing that had transpired in his sleep,
but recollect what had been said to him last when awake; and
thus, says the simple reporter, it appeared as if he had two souls,
one for the state of sleep, and the other for the period when he
was awake. My patient recollected the occurrences of her pa-
roxysms of extatic delirium in her paroxysms only. (Supra,
p- 630.)

Even in the mixed stupefaction and excitement of intoxication
the same phenomenon has presented itself. Dr. Abel informed
me,” says Mr. Combe, “of an Irish porter to a warehouse, who for-
got, when sober, what he had done when drunk : but, being drunk,
again recollected the transactions of his former state of intoxi-
cation. On one occasion, being drunk, he had lost a parcel of
some value, and in his sober moments could give no account of
it. Next time he was intoxicated, he recollected that he had left
the parcel at a certain house, and there being no address on it,
it had remained there safely, and was got on his calling for it.”
This man must have had two souls, one for his sober state, and one
for him when drunk.

The paroxysms of intermitting insanity are sometimes followed
by oblivion of their events in the lucid interval, and a fresh
paroxysm brings them all to the memory. Here, of course, are
a rational soul and a mad soul in the same tenement.

Shakspeare, aware of the frequency of the phenomenon in
sleep-walkers, represents Lady Macbeth as walking in her sleep
with her eyes open, though he makes the royal physician igno-
rantly infer that therefore she must be awake, and a gentlewoman
of the court know better, —


* Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 320. sq.
* Psychological Magazine, vol. i. No. 1. p. 69.
> A System of Phrenology, ed. iii. p. 521.


SLEEP-WAKING. 647


** Doctor. You see her eyes are open.
Gentlewoman. Ay, but their sense is shut.


But a remarkable circumstance is that, though a particular
sense appear torpid, it may be alive to some impressions. A
sleep-waking female, mentioned by Lorry, could not be made to
see or hear or be aware of the presence of any person but one,
and him she evidently saw, and to him she used to address her-
self upon the subject of her dream. Dr. Pritchard gives an ac-
count of a boy who, in these paroxysms, became insensible to all
external impressions, except that, when he happened to play on
the flute, he sometimes perceived if other boys began to accom-
pany him, and then evidently directed his attention to them.° The
insensibility to external impressions in sleep-waking, as in common
sleep, is not in the organs of sense or the tract of their nerves, but
in the portion of the brain most immediately connected with them:
and, if these portions are not torpid, and at the same time there
is excitement either of a particular kznd, as musical, for instance,
or in connection with a particular individual, those impressions
tell which are in relation with the excitement, while those which
find all torpid with which they might be in relation are unno-
ticed. But, for this singular partial sensibility to take place, the
portion of the brain in connection with the very extremities of the
nerve of sense cannot be torpid: for, if it were, no excitement in
relation to any object of that sense, no attention or direction of
the thoughts, would avail. Such a portion is torpid sometimes.
Negretti sat down to eat a bow] of salad : yet, though his thoughts
must have been upon it and his attention directed to it, he ate first
cabbage and then pudding, which his friends substituted for it in
succession, without perceiving the difference. When he had asked
for wine, he did not detect that they gave him water; when
snuff, that he received coffee. On the other hand, if the portion
of the brain in connection with a particular sense is not asleep, its
objects may be perceived though presented unexpectedly. Signor
Augustin heard slight sounds at a distance, and was set listening.
I therefore cannot agree with Dr. Pritchard, who attempts to
explain these differences entirely by generalising the remark made
on Castelli’s case by the reporters, and saying that, “ when atten-
tion is by a voluntary act directed to the particular operation of


© On Disorders of the Nervous System, &c. p. 409.


648 SLEEP-WAKING.


sense, the perceptive faculty of the sleeper is perfect, even remark-
ably acute. But when his mind is distracted, his reverie presenting
different objects, even loud sounds are imperceptible to him.”
If, on the other hand, a particular sense is not torpid, but the
portion of the brain in immediate connection with its nerves sen-
sible, impressions may not be perceived, on account of the excite-
ment of the thoughts— of attention, in another direction; just as,
when in study we become wrapt in thought, we cease to hear the
chimes of a clock in our apartment: and, though a sensation take
place, the mind may form a wrong judgment if imperfectly excited
towards it; as when Negretti, if a blow was given him with a stick,
or a muff was thrown at him, fancied in each instance it was a dog,
— mistakes similar to those which we make, if addressed or
touched when deep in thought. And, although a sense be nearly
torpid, a powerful partial excitement and concentration of thought,
such as happens in common dreaming when we successfully effect
what we had attempted in vain when awake, may cause very
slight impressions on that sense to be accurately perceived.
Probably, not merely is the zntedlect partially much heightened,
in some instances; but a sense rendered exquisite, so that a
_ person may see with the eyes so much closed that others consi-
der them shut, and perceive in what others call darkness. I shall
mention a case of extraordinary sensibility to light at p. 653. infra.
The sensibility sometimes either quickly varies or becomes very
peculiar in the paroxysm. For, while it was certain that my
little patient in herdelirium saw perfectly all round her, I darted
my finger rapidly towards her eyes, but the pupil did not lessen
nor the lids wink. The same extraordinary phenomenon oc-
curred in a case presently to be quoted from Dr. Abercrombie,
and in another from an American journal. I made the expe-
riment repeatedly on different days. Another singularity was
that, though she evidently saw well around, she declared, on
my holding up one finger, that there were two; on holding up
two, she declared there were four; on holding up four, she said
there was a large number. On presenting a watch to her, she
could not tell the time, though she attempted carefully: she at
length pronounced an hour, and persisted in it, but quite wrong.
Once while looking at Baron Dupotet, she said he had a great many
eyes, and then that his eyes turned right round in hishead. In the
delirium I always noticed one eye to be too near the nose. The


SLEEP-WAKING. 649


following case also exhibited either rapid changes or an extraordi-
nary state of sensibility. Dr. Darwin relates the case of a young lady
about seventeen years of age, who, every day for five or six weeks,
had fits of violent convulsions, then retchings, next equally violent
hiccups, then tetanus, and at last sleep-waking, becoming insen-
sible, yet singing, quoting whole passages of poetry, and holding
conversations with imaginary persons, and coming to herself with
great surprise and fear, but with no recollection of what had hap-
pened. Atlength she could walk about the room in the fit without
running against the furniture, and evidently had some external
sense : for she took a cup of tea and expressed a fear that there was
poison in it; and seemed to smell at a tuberose, and deliberated
about breaking the stem, because it would make her sister so
charmingly angry ; once heard a bell, was less melancholy when
the shutters were open, and impatient if a hand was held over
her eyes or her hands were held down, saying, “ She could not
tell what to do, as she could neither see nor move.”

I conceive that those portions of the brain that are connected
with the nerves of the respective organs of sense may all be
completely torpid; or only some of them; or not completely
torpid ; or some in one degree of torpidity and others in another ;
and that they may appear torpid when they are not, or more torpid
than they are, from the attention being dull or directed to another
quarter: that one or more may become exquisitely sensible, while
the others are in various degrees of torpidity, and may fluctuate
rapidly between sensibility and insensibility or be peculiarly de-
ranged: that the partial intelligence of the brain may be of va-
rious degrees, and have various directions, and may act powerfully
with very little external'sense : and that great variations in every
point may take place in the fits of the same individual, and even
in the same fit. If to these considerations we add the force
of habit, we shall explain all that is usually observed in sleep-
waking. Negretti laid the table, waited, and put the things away, by
habit; and, in places to which he had been accustomed, showed no
confusion, but went through his business cleverly ; whereas, in a
place of which he had no distinct knowledge, he felt with his hands
all around, and showed much inaccuracy. He struck himself against
a wall severely, and against a door which they had intentionally
shut. Galen says that he himself walked about in his sleep a
whole night, till he awoke by striking against a stone that hap-


650 SLEEP-WAKING.


pened to be in his way. Habit will also be far more successful
in the partial excitement of sleep-waking. The man who often
went in his sleep to draw wine in the cellar had no difficulty,
but if he accidentally awoke he had to grope his way back.
He knew the way well, but when awake had the emotion of fear
to check him; and, in addition to this, probably had not the
intensity of partial excitement which prevailed in his sleep, so
that his habit was less effective.

But, though partial torpidity and partial excitement, of various
degrees and in various points of the brain, and excitement in rela~
tion to various individual external objects, and some derangement
of the natural sensibility, may explain all the cases which I have
described, some persons explain many of the phenomena by the
operation of a new sense diffused throughout the surface, but most
intense at the epigastrium and fingers, and adduce extraordinary
cases in proof of their belief.

«‘ There are, therefore, somnambulists who see,” says Gall,
after relating the cases quoted in p. 630. sq., “and the opinion
of certain visionaries, who think that the perception of external
objects takes place in somnambulists only by the internal senses,
is refuted.

« Experience proves that somnambulists who have their eyes
shut hit themselves when obstacles unknown to them are placed
in their way, that they fall into holes, &c. When, with their
eyes shut, they find themselves in a place familiar to them, they
find their way, like blind people, by the aid of local memory.

« Just as the eye and ear may be awake in dreaming, so may
other external senses. We perceive exhalations that surround
us; we recognise a bitter or sweet. taste of the saliva after a bad
digestion ; we feel heat, cold, &c. Some persons think that
somnambulism is a completely extraordinary state, because som~-
nambulists execute, during their sleep, things which they could
not accomplish awake: they clamber on trees, roofs, &c.

« All astonishment ceases as soon as we reflect upon the cir-
cumstances in which we do the boldest things, and upon others
in which we cannot. Any one ina balcony, furnished with a
balustrade, could look down from a very high tower, and without
resting against this balustrade. We walk without tottering upon
a plank placed upon the parquet. To what will not boys ac-
custom themselves in their rash sports ? What do not moun-


SLEEP-WAKING. 651


taineers in the pursuit of the chamois, rope-dancers, tumblers,
&c. perform? But take the balustrade from the balcony: let
us but discover an abyss to the right and left of the plank, and
we are lost. Why? Is it because we are not in a condition to
walk upon the plank? No. It is because fear destroys our
confidence in our powers.

“ Now let us judge of the somnambulist. He sees distinctly
what he is about to do, but the organs which would warn him of
the danger are asleep: he is therefore without fear, and executes
whatever his bodily powers allow him successfully to attempt.
But wake him: instantly he will perceive his danger, and give
way.

** All this is sufficient to establish that the nature of dreams and
of somnambulism furnishes fresh proofs of the plurality of the
organs.”


Let us, however, now inquire what phenomena of a marvellous
kind have been recorded.

We have the authority of an archbishop of Bordeaux for the
case of a young ecclesiastic who in his sleep would rise, go to his
room, take pen, ink, and paper, and compose good sermons, When
he had finished a page, he would read it aloud, and correct it.
Once he had written ce divin enfant ; in reading over the passage
he substituted adorable for divin: but, observing that ce could
not stand before adorable, he added t. The archbishop held a
piece of pasteboard under his chin to prevent him from seeing the
paper on which he was writing ; but he wrote on, not at all incom-
moded. ‘The paper on which he was writing was then removed,
and another piece substituted; but he instantly perceived the
change. He wrote pieces of music in this state, with his eyes
closed. The words were under the music: and once were too
large, and not placed exactly under the corresponding notes. He
soon perceived the error, blotted out the part, and wrote it over
again with great exactness.

A sleep-waking boy at Vevey, thirteen years and a half old,
was declared, by a committee of the Philosophical Society of
Lausanne,—Dr. Levade, and Messrs. Regnier and Van Berchem,
not only to discoyer things well by his touch, and to write, and
detect and correct any error he might have made, but to write,
with the same distinctness as before, what his master dictated,


though a piece of paper was put before his eyes. I relate no other


652 SLEEP-WAKING,


wonders of him, because I lay no stress upon the circumstance of
sleep-wakers sometimes apparently seeing in the dark or with their
eyes shut, though it is unquestionable and occurred even in
some of the cases which I have already detailed, since the
sight may become so acute that darkness is light to them, and
since the smallest aperture of the eyelids may be sufficient to
see through, and access may not be totally impossible to the
eyes, though they appear closed or are even bandaged. A case
is related, by Professor Feder, of a Gottingen student, who, in his
sleep, with his eyes shut, would select music, place it on his harp-
sichord, and play it expressively; write letters ; tell that it snowed,
and that a man was at the window of the opposite house, &c. A
ropemaker at Breslau, would be seized with sleep in the midst
of his occupation, and, when his surface, ears, and nose were
perfectly insensible, and his eyes firmly closed, continue his busi-
ness just if he had been awake, pursue his journey without miss-
ing the road, and, finding some timber in a narrow lane, pass over
it as well as if awake, and once on horseback, in passing the
river Ilme on his way to Weimar, let his horse drink, and drew
up his legs to prevent them from getting wet; yet “ he could
not see when his eyes were forced open.” 4 Dr. Schultz of Ham-
burgh speaks of a girl of thirteen, who, in her paroxysms, recog-
nised all colours, and the number and stripes of painted cards, not
only with her eyes closed, but bandaged.

In America, Dr. Belden, in 1834°, very minutely detailed
an extraordinary case, in which the sleepwaker, a girl of six-
teen, did, in her paroxysms, every thing with the greatest
accuracy that she was accustomed to do when awake, threaded
needles, read, wrote, and corrected any omissions, although
in darkness and with her eyes closed and most carefully
bandaged. Sometimes she evidently saw and was directed
by her eyes; for, when once the stair-door, which was usually
left open, was fastened by the blade of a knife placed over the
latch, she rushed from her room impatiently, and, extending
her hand before reaching the door, seized the knife and threw
it indignantly on the floor, exclaiming, “ Why do you wish
to fasten me in? Her eyes were sometimes wide open, and the


d These cases are quoted in Jsis revelata from the French Encyclopedia,
vol. xxxviii. 3; Encyclopedia Britannica, SLEEPWALKER ; Psychological Magazine ;
Acta Vratislav. class iv. art. 7.

© Journal of the Medical Sciences, No. 28.


SLEEP-WAKING. 653


pupil dilated and apparently insensible. Generally they were
closed, and that they then were extremely sensible would appear,
because she almost invariably supposed it was day, and when
advised to retire usually replied, “ What, go to bed in the
day-time?” Once, in the darkness of night, while preparing
dinner, she observed a lamp alight and put it out, saying she did
not know why people wished to keep a lamp burning in the
daytime ; and once, when the light of a lamp was reflected on
the closed eyelid by a concave mirror, so diffused that the
illuminated space could scarcely be distinguished, it caused a shock
of such severity that she exclaimed, “* Why do you wish to shoot
me in the eyes.” Some uneasiness was produced even when she
was awake, although the experiment produced no pain in the
eyes of the reporter. It is particularly worthy of notice, that
once when she was writing out a song, with a black silk handker-
chief stuffed with cotton bound over her eyes, and a person
interposed a piece of brown paper between her eyes and the
paper on which she was writing, she seemed disturbed and cried
out, “ Don’t, don’t.” An apple being held before her, but
higher than her eyes, which were well bandaged, she raised her
head, as any one would if desirous of looking at something above
him, and when asked its colour, answered correctly. She learnt
backgammon in her sleep, and so well and quickly that she soon
beat Dr. Butler, an experienced player: sometimes, like many
somnambulists, she displayed an astonishing power of mimickry,
though she never exhibited the smallest trace when awake. Her
personality was double, for she recollected from paroxysm to
paroxysm and forgot all in her waking state: playing back-.
gammon, for instance, better in the second paroxysm in which she
attempted it, and, when the paroxysm was over, declaring she never
saw it played, and not knowing even how to set the men. The
paroxysms were attended by pain, at an invariable spot in the left
side of the head, often so excruciating, that she used to cry out,
“It ought to be cut open, it ought to be cut open.” As her
sleep-waking became less perfect, her face less flushed, and her
head less painful, she required more light : for once she declared,
in her paroxysm, that she could not read with her eyes shut;
and, when the doctor placed his fingers before her eyes, she
could not read a word and said it was total darkness.

Lest, however, such cases as the four last should be doubted


-


654 SLEEP-WAKING.


in this country, let us remember that Dr. Abercrombie re
lates the history of a poor girl, who, when seven years of
age, looked after cattle at a farmer’s, and slept next a room
often occupied by an itinerant fiddler of great skill and ad-
dicted to playing refined pieces at night; but his perform-
ance was taken notice of by her as only a disagreeable
noise. She fell ill, and was removed to the house of a bene-
volent lady, whose servant she became. Some years after this
change, she had fits of sleep-waking, in which, after being two
hours in bed, she became restless and began to mutter; and,
after uttering sounds precisely like the tuning of a violin, would
make a prelude, and then dash off into elaborate pieces of music,
most clearly and accurately, and with the most delicate modu-
lations. She sometimes stopped, made the sound of retuning
her instrument, and began exactly where she had left off. After
a year or two she imitated an old piano also, which she was
accustomed to hear in her present residence: and, in another
year, began to talk, descanting fluently, most acutely, and wit-
tily, and with astonishing mimickry and copious illustrations and
imagery, on political, religious, and other subjects. For several
years she was ignorant of all around her in the paroxysms ; but,
at about the age of sixteen, she began to observe those who
were in her apartment, and could tell their number accurately,
though the utmost care was taken to have the room darkened ; and,
when her eyelids were raised, and a candle was brought near
the eye, the pupil seemed insensible to light. She soon became
capable of answering questions, and of noticing remarks made
in her presence, and in both respects showed astonishing acute-
ness. ‘“ Her observations, indeed,” says Dr. Abercrombie, “‘ were
often of such a nature, and corresponded so exactly with cha-
racters and events, that by the country people she was believed
to be endowed with supernatural power.

« During the whole period of this remarkable affection, which
seems to have gone on for ten or eleven years, she was, when
awake, a dull awkward. girl, very slow in receiving instruction,
though much care was bestowed upon her; and, in point of
intellect, she was much inferior to the other servants of the
family. In particular, she shewed no kind of turn for music.” f


f On the Intellectual Powers, 4th edit. p. 294.


SLEEP-WAKING. 655


How much duller so ever than the rest of the servants this poor
girl was considered, it is evident that she had observed greatly and
acquired a store of knowledge. She was probably very reserved
and contemplative, and could learn in her own way only. The
really cleverest children are often considered stupid; while the
quick and prattling, who turn out but ordinary adults, are
thought prodigies.

Now at last comes the special wonder: greater than that
of the young priest or the Swiss boy. Dr. Petetin, perpetual
President of the Medical Society of Lyons about fifty years ago &,
had a cataleptic patient who seemed perfectly insensible. While
addressing her loudly with the view of rousing her, he acci-
dentally moved his face from her head towards the epigastrium
in finishing the sentence; when to his surprise she heard him
distinctly. He made many trials, and found the same thing in-
variably take place: and then, making experiment after experi-
ment, he discovered that she could taste, smell, and read, and
read even through an opake body, by the epigastrium: and at last
he found that speaking at one end of a conductor, the other end of
which rested on the epigastrium, was quite sufficient to make her
perceive. Wan Helmont, a century and a half before, had de-
clared that, after tasting some aconite, his head felt strange, and
all his intellect seemed to have left his head and taken up its
residence for two hours at his epigastrium. He was giddy for
two hours, and then in his ordinary condition. The simple ex-
planation is, that Van Helmont was delirious.through the narcotic ;
and at page 40. supra, [mentioned that on one occasion of mental
transport he actually saw his little soul in his stomach. Dr. Pe-
tetin tried other sleep-waking patients, and found the same phe-
nomena; and in some that the ends of the fingers and toes had
the same power as the epigastrium. Dr. Petetin secretly placed
pieces of cake, tarts, &c. upon the epigastrium, and immediately
the peculiar taste was perceived in the mouth: if they were
wrapped in silk, there was no taste till they were uncovered.
One patient distinguished a letter folded four times, and inclosed


& Mémoire sur la Décowverte des Phenomenes que présentent la Catalepsie et
le Somnambulisme. Par M., Petetin. 1787.
h Demens idea, § 11. sq.
' Electricité Animale prouvée par la Découverte des Phenoméenes Physiques et
Moraue de la Catalepsie Hystérique, et de ses Variétés. 1800.
x xX


656 SLEEP-WAKING.


in a semi-transparent box held by Dr. Petetin upon her stomach.
Another patient, when a letter was placed upon her finger,
said, “If I were not discreet, I could tell you the contents:
but to prove that I have read it, there are just two lines and a
half.’ She correctly enumerated the chief articles in the pockets
of the company: and a Madame de St. Paul, if interrogated
mentally only by means of a metallic chain, one end of which
was placed on her epigastrium and the other on the interro-
gator’s lips, or of a chain made by several persons, the first
of whom placed his hand on her epigastrium and the last
whispered in the hollow of his hand, heard perfectly, though
insensible to the loudest voice if the chain were interrupted by a
piece of sealing-wax.

These things seem calculated only to excite asmile; but, from
that time to this, similar cases have been recorded in different
countries. Baron de Strombeck published one, in which the
phenomena were observed, noted down, and attested by three
physicians as well as himself.‘

Dr. Joseph Frank!, in 1817, gave an account of a violent
case of hysteria and catalepsy, in a married woman twenty-
two years old, who, in her fits, was insensible to light, prick-
ing, and the loudest sound, but heard the moment the doctor
approximated his mouth to her epigastrium and spoke in a
low tone, not audible to the bystanders. Still he spoke: and
be it also known that the woman was so credulous as to
have given herself up to certain empirics and old women; “ so
ardent in putting her trust in God that she prayed fervently
day and night ; and laboured under hysteria, which often gives
a strong disposition to deceive and excite the interest and
wonder of others. While comatose, she both tasted sugar and
water applied to her epigastrium, though after the coma she could
say only that something moist was there but could not tell
what, and could hear nothing except the doctor’s hand was
on her stomach. When asked the name of a gentleman pre-
sent, she was silent: but, as soon as Dr. Joseph Frank, whose
hand was always on her stomach, took him by the hand, she


Histoire de la Guerison dune jeune Personne par le Magnétisme Animal pro-
duit par la Natur elle méme. Par un Temoin oculaire.
1 sry Medic. , Ips] ii 1
Praxeos Medice Universe Precepta. Leipsix, 1817. P. ii. vol. i, p. 495.
sqq-


SLEEP-wWAKING. 657


at once told his name; and, indeed, answered questions put
to her by any person, and told all their names, provided they
formed a chain by their hands among themselves and with Dr.
Joseph Frank, and he had his hand on her stomach. The woman
was always so obliging when the doctor had his hand on her
stomach, that it must have been fortunate his name was Joseph.
Dr. Bertrand gives several others, which had occurred up to
the appearance of his work in 1826™, and contends that the
phenomena repeatedly appeared in the hysterical excitement of
the Quakers, of the Cevennes, the Nuns of Loudun, and the
Convulsionaires of St. Medard.

A case more recently occured in the Jervis Street Hospital,
Dublin, and is recorded in a clinical lecture by Mr. Ellis." A
cataleptic female, Mrs. Finn, gave no signs of hearing an AZolian
harp played close to her ears; and, after the fit, declared she had
not heard it, nor recollected that cold water was dashed upon her,
though it had made her scream violently. She had been spoken to
on the epigastrium, palms, and soles, but it was not till long after-
wards, in thinking on what had happened to her during the last
two months, that she remembered having heard a voice one day on
the pit of her stomach. “ On the occurrence of the first cataleptic
attack after this conversation, she was spoken to in the epigastrium
as previously ; and on the subsidence of the fit, she could report
with accuracy every word addressed to her through this region.
This experiment was often repeated, and always attended with
similar results. She could hear the lowest whisper, or the
ticking of a watch.”

One occurred in a man in the Hospital della Vita at Bologna,
in 1832°, and it was probably the fame of this that caused
the same city to be happy enough soon afterwards to produce
another in a female who in her coma talked Latin, which she
had never learnt, gave an accurate anatomical description in
technical terms of the solar plexus, pancreas, heart, and first
vertebra, detailed the pathological state of a lady whom she did
not know, and the situation of places in Paris where she had
never been; extracted roots of numbers, for instance of 4965,


™ Du Magnétisme Animal en France. Par A. Bertrand. Paris, 1826.
" Lancet, May 2. 1835.
° Bulletin des Sciences Médicales. Bologna, 1832. or Gazette Médicale. Paris,
Noy, 24. 1832.
Sg


658 SLEEP-WAKING.


though she had never learnt more than the first four rules of
arithmetic, and unconsciously detailed various philosophical sys-
tems, and discussed others which were mentioned to her.?

Oh the waste of labour, time, and money spent in education,
and books, and philosophical apparatus, when mesmerism is such
aready help! One hysterical young lady at Grenoble, whose
case was read to the Philomathic Society of Paris, was able to
get through a great deal of business, for in copying letters she
read with her left elbow while she wrote with her right hand. 4

I do not doubt the truth of the narration of all the cases of
sleep-waking, excepting those in which there was extraordinary
knowledge, patients saw through opaque bodies, or the epigas-
trium, fingers, and toes, were the seat of extraordinary per-
ceptions: and these I shall defer considering till I speak of
sleep-waking induced by art. The cases are too numerous,
have occurred in too many places, at too many times, and
under too many circumstances, are too naturally and respect-
ably told, are all too similar and yet too diversified, and yet
not marvellous enough, for a reasonable mind to doubt them.
They are all evidently examples of partial torpidity and partial
excitement, and some also of partial extraordinarily rapid change
or peculiar derangement of various portions of the brain, and
perhaps of some other parts of the nervous system. The phe-
nomena ascend from the faintest common dreaming, or even from
disturbed sleep, through plain sleep-walking, and somewhat sin-
gular performances, to the most astonishing. Every degree is
morbid; and, to view the cases as any thing else than instances
of bodily derangement, would be absurd. The attacks are some-
times periodicalt; take place in bad health, and are worse in
proportion as the health is worse; are frequently united with
other diseases of the nervous system, — catalepsy, hysteria, epi-
lepsy, delirium, &c., or are changes from these or change to
these; occur, unless when chronic, most frequently when the


P See Lancet, Feb. 16. 1833.

‘ Bertrand, l.c. p. 458. sqq.

™ Martinet mentions a watchmaker’s apprentice who had an attack once a
fortnight, and did his work well, astonished on awaking at the progress he had
made. The fit began with heat at the epigastrium rising to the head and
followed by confusion and complete insensibility, his eyes being fixed and
staring. Negretti’s attack was alwaysin March. See supra, p. 639.


SLEEP-WAKING,. 659


sexual feelings and functions are establishing themselves and the
former not yet gratified s, and the whole young mind is under-
going the changes of the adult period; are often attended by
pain in the head, and all the common symptoms of deranged dis-
tribution of blood and of morbid sensibility in that part; they
have all the same exciting causes as other nervous diseases ;
the pre-disposition to them is sometimes hereditary‘; and they
require the treatment common to all other nervous diseases.
To consider them as examples of the soul acting independently
of the body in the disease, is discreditable to an author of the
present day. Old authors regarded common dreams in this
point of view; and I formerly quoted the remark,— that the soul
must work very strangely, when so disencumbered of the activity
of the brain, for us to dream “ such perilous stuff as dreams are
made of.” (Supra, p.626.) The cases of double consciousness
in those affected with the disease (supra, p. 646.) ought to
prove two souls to exist; and one of them to be able to get
drunk alone in the case of the Irish porter, whose second con-
sciousness showed itself only in his intoxication. Sleep-waking
is neither more nor less than diseased sleep. The torpor far
exceeds that of common sleep, and is a coma like that of apo-
plexy, hysteria, or epilepsy; though in the first of these the
brain generally is prevented by pressure only from performing
its functions. In epilepsy we have equal coma: in a moment
the patient becomes insensible to mechanical violence, the loud-
est noise, and the strongest light: even when the disease is
partial, as in two little boys whom I attended, in whose fits
the eyelids only were convulsed and the head drawn back, the
insensibility came in a minute, and as suddenly ceased, and was


* Of 50 cases which I have counted, 21 were apparently permanent, and 18
such occurred in males; 16 patients were females, and 13 of these from 13 to
25 years of age, and unmarried; of the $4 males, 16 were from 10 to perhaps
a little above 20 years of age, and apparently all unmarried: 7 of the young
patients were 16 years old. The chronic cases probably are more rare, but
appear so large in proportion from attracting greater attention and therefore be-
ing oftener recorded.

* « Negretti’s son was subject to it from boyhood.”” Dr. Willis knew a family
in which the father and all the sons were sleep-wakers, and “ the sons in their
nightly discursions ran against and awakened each other,”? Dr. Pritchard, T'rea-
tise on Insanity, p. 459.

“xr


660 MESMERISM.


such that, during the minute of the fit, a pistol fired off in the ear
of one was unnoticed. In common epilepsy and sometimes in hys-
teria we have coma, — perfect insensibility, and at the same time
such high excitement of the parts of the nervous system which
move the muscles that violent convulsions occur. In sleep-waking,
it is an intellectual, and sometimes also moral, part of the
nervous system that is excited in the midst of the torpidity,
sometimes one part, sometimes another; and, in some instances,
probably a heightened partial sensibility of parts concerned
in external sensation. In neuralgia we have fits of violent
excitement of nervous parts concerned in sense; in palsy of
sensation, the reverse. In tonic and clonic spasms we have
excitement of nervous parts concerned in motion; in palsy of
motion, the reverse. We have these two portions sometimes in
opposite conditions. The same holds good precisely of all
parts of the brain: and these conditions, in all these cases, and
in all other diseases of the nervous system, as fits of morbidly
excessive sleep, may be purely functional, and occur in pa-
roxysms: nay, most rapid changes of external sense may pro-
bably take place in the paroxysms, or even alterations different
from changes of mere degree. Some may have ecstatic de-
lirium, in which there is no loss of external sense, nor coma,
but a sudden change in the internal feelings, so that the patient
talks and acts like a fool, and in a moment the whole may cease
and be forgotten, and the patient be as before: and this may be
interchanged with fits of sleep-waking.


By certain processes, such as passing the points of the fingers
at a short distance from a person in a direction from the face
down the arms, trunks, and legs, with a degree of energy, the
state of sleep, or sleep-waking, may actually, we are told, be in-
duced. It is then termed magnetic, and the whole phenomena,
animal magnetism. The patient becomes insensible to all around, but
may have the inward senses augmented as in common ecstasis, —
may sing well for the first time in his life, and talk so unguardedly
as to disclose secrets. The external senses may become so impene-


_


MESMERISM. 661


trable, that a pistol fired in the ear is not heard, nor melted wax
dropped on the body felt, nor ammonia applied to the mouth or
nostrils perceived, although the gentlest word of the operator
(magnetiser) is heard and answered, water similarly treated (mag-
netised) by him tasted and found ferruginous, and the gentlest
touch of him recognised. A delightful feeling of ease and light-
ness is experienced, the body grows warmer, and perspires freely,
though sometimes anxiety, palpitation, slight convulsions, and
wandering pains take place. On the first attempt these occur
generally without sleep-waking, and it is only after many trials
(and sometimes they continue fruitless) that such a state is in-
duced. On coming out of the sleep-waking, the person is un-
conscious of all that has occurred; but, when thrown into it
again, recollects the whole and converses on it. The magnetiser
can put an end to this state at pleasure: and, when he is a good
magnetiser and the patient very susceptible, a single movement
of the hand may instantly magnetise, and even knock down and
kill; a look may magnetise : and we are told that all these effects
may sometimes be produced at great distances by the mere voli-
tion of the magnetiser.

But this is not all. We are assured that matters often go
much farther ; that a person can often be so highly magnetised,
not only as to taste magnetised water and recognise the mag-
netiser by hearing and touch, but even to perceive objects of sight,
hearing, taste, and smell, by the epigastrium, fingers, and toes, —
by the organ of touch, so as to read a letter by these parts", even
though it be folded in several envelopes ; nay more, to discover
a person in the next room, though a wall intervene; to foretell
events entirely relating to others, and describe things going on
at incalculable distances, as well as learn the thoughts of persons
present ; to relate the most minute points regarding persons who
touch them, though never seen before ; to see the interior struc-
ture of his own body, and describe the seat and appearance of a
diseased organ, predict the future events of a disease of either
himself or others, and point out the remedy. However, I am not
aware of any anatomical discoveries having ever been made, and


" This reminds one
** Of Rosicrusian virtuosis,
Who see with ears and hear with noses,” Hudibras.
x x 4


662 MESMERISM.


presume that blood would never have been seen flowing up the
cava inferior and down the aorta unless Harvey had first taught
the circulation; and I observe that the remedies always depend
upon the country and the period, —that, in Paris, leeches to the
anus and vulva, ptisans, baths of Bareges, and extract of nux
vomica if the person has heard of Dr. Fouquier’s treatment of
paralysis, gummed water and gummed lemonade, diet drinks of
borage, and M. Dupuytren’s remedy of mercurialised milk
procured by milking a goat previously rubbed with mercurial
ointment, are ordered: and suppose that calomel, sulphate of
magnesia, porter, and port wine would be called for in England ;
and that neither quinine for ague, nor iodine for bronchocele,
were ever commanded before Pelletan and Dr. Coindet had
made known their virtues.

This state is called hellsehen, clairvoyance, or lucid vision; and,
if the lucidity extends to all objects of space and time, so that
things long past relating to others, things passing at a great dis-
tance, and things to come, are revealed, it is universal lucidity, or
allgemeine klarhett.

They affirm not only that water can be magnetised so as to
taste chalybeate, but inanimate bodies made conductors no less
than a chain of persons.

It was said to have been discovered by Dr. Mesmer, a very
glutton in all that was marvellous, in the latter part of the last
century, who, knowing that the magnet was much employed as a
remedy, and hearing from Hell, a Jesuit, the professor of astro-
nomy at Vienna, that he had cured himself by magnetic plates of
a severe cardialgia, opened a house for curing every disease in
this way, and began to imagine the existence of an universal
magnetic power, distinct from that of the common magnet, de-
pending upon a fluid pervading all living and inanimate matter,
and the source of all in art and nature. To throw this fluid into
persons, — to magnetise them, he manipulated as we have men-
tioned, and employed other processes which are now omitted.
He travelled, performed many great cures, and often failed; was
praised, and deservedly abused, for he adopted the course of all
quacks, whether regular or irregular practitioners. He depre-
ciated others, affected mystery, and extolled himself. He insisted
that there was but one health, one disease, and one remedy, which


MESMERISM. 663


remedy, of course, he had discovered. He rubbed and pressed
his patients, and touched them with an iron rod, made them sit
silently in circles, in a room rather darkened and furnished with
mirrors, music playing all the time. After him, a school was es-
tablished at Lyons and Ostend by a Chevalier Barbarin, where no
manipulations were used and all was accomplished by the energy
of the operator’s volition. Faith removed their mountains, and
their motto was “ Veuillez le bien —allez et guérissez.” At a
third school, that of the Marquis de Puysegur at Strasburg, very
gentle manipulations were employed, and the operators made
them frequently at some distance from the patient.

Such results appeared as caused a commission of inquiry to
be ordered, in 1784, by the government of France. The whole
was ascribed to imagination, imitation, and touching; the matter
declined, and Mesmer retired to Switzerland. Still it was prac-
tised not only in the three first schools of Mesmer, Barbarin,
and Puysegur, but assiduously cultivated in many parts of Ger-
many, and lingered still among us, for a Miss Preston in Blooms-
bury Square, who died lately, practised it during the best part
of her life; and I recollect that, about twenty years ago, numbers
went to a magnetiser at Kennington. I some years ago saw
lectures upon it advertised in the prospectuses of the medical
courses in German universities,—at Heidelberg for instance.
Of late the subject has been revived among the physicians of
Germany and France, and at Berlin a magnetic clinical ward
has been opened; and a commission of the Royal Academy of
Medicine sat in 1826, in Paris, to inquire into it anew.

J. B. Van Helmont, born at Brussels in 1577, certainly shows
in his works that he was well acquainted with animal magnetism
and practised it. His cures by its means, were, like most miracles,
ascribed by the wicked to the assistance of the devil. His language
is so distinct, that “ we might almost conceive,” says Mr. Col-
quhoun, “ that we were reading the works of some disciple of
Mesmer:” and indeed many Continental and English writers of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries contended for an universal
magnetic power, which produced the dependence and reciprocal
action of bodies, and especially the phenomena of life; and al-
lowed extraordinary effects to be produced in another living
being, even at a great distance, by the will or imagination of


664 MESMERISM.


man. Cornelius Agrippa ab Nettesheym asserts that a man
naturally, and without any miracle, unassisted by the Holy Spirit
or any other, may convey his thoughts in the twinkling of an
eve to another at any distance : “et ego id facere novi, et saepius
feci. Novit idem etiam fecitque quondam Abbas ‘Trithenius.” *
A professor of philosophy at Padua, Petrus Pomponatius, born
in 1462, had contended, before Van Helmont, for the power of
the imagination or will of one person to send forth an influence
upon another ; and enumerated the conditions of the exercise of
this power in nearly the terms of modern magnetisers. He too
surpassed all, for he point blank declares that inanimate matter
may obey this influence. ‘“ Cum hominis anime voluntas et
maxime imaginativa fuerint vehementes, venti et reliqua mate-
rialia sunt nata obedire eis.”y Still Mesmer was the great
restorer and modern establisher of magnetism in spite of great
obstacles, so that the facts have been termed mesmerism ; and, as
the denomination animal magnetism is incorrect, and may lead to
misconception, I shall in future adopt the word mesmerism.
Even an arbitrary word in science is better than one devised
from imperfect knowledge.

Those who ascribe all to imagination, consider the agitations and
prophecies of the Delphian priestess of Apollo and the Sybils, and
all ancient prophesies, the ecstacies of Dervishes and Santons, and
of Shakers and Quakers, Irvingites, and of all ridiculous enthu-
siasts in what they strangely call religion, but which is all super-
stition and revolting irreverence to the infinite God of the uni-
verse, and the pretended miraculous cures of all ages, from the
days of Serapis of Egypt to those of the blessed Paris of Paris ”,
and of our own day, and of all countries, as only of a piece with
mesmerism, showing how strongly fear or enthusiasm will work
upon the brain and all the other organs. Others discover that mag-
netic influence has always been acknowledged, and even adduce
a passage attributed to Solon, and preserved by Stobzeus, to


x De Occulta Philosophia, 1. ii.

Y De Incantationibus. Basil, 1577. p. 237.

2 Such eestacies, &c. and miracles were worked at his tomb, that the govern-
ment closed it, and forbad any more!


«“ De par le Roi, défense 4 Dieu
De faire miracle en ce lieu.”’


MESMERISM. 665


prove the antiquity of performing manipulations like those of
magnetism to procure tranquillity :—


‘ 7
“* Tey Se xaxats voUcoror nUKwpLEVOY apyartass TE
~ 9


“Adapetyog xetpoly alba rlOno” bysh.


Sometimes the fury of the worst disease,
The hand by gentle stroking will appease.


They adduce another from Plautus to show that manipu-
lations were used in Rome to send persons to sleep. Mer-
cury, proposing to knock a man down, says ironically in allusion
to putting a child to sleep by gently rubbing it,-—“ Quid si
ego illum tractim tangam ut dormiat.” Sosia replies, —“ Ser-
vayeris, nam continuas has tres noctes pervigilavi.”2 The
Bible, of course, has not been left unquoted. When Naaman
drove to Elisha’s door in his chariot, and the prophet neither
invited him in nor went out to him, but directed him to go
and wash himself seven times in the Jordan, he was greatly
disappointed at not being touched by the holy man. “ But
Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought,
He will surely come out to me and stand and call on the name
of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and
recover the leper.” They believe there was mesmeric oper-
ation in these things: and consider them, and all the oracles,
visions, prophecies, magic, and miracles of the pagan world, and
those mesmerisers who are deists consider even the alleged
supernatural things of the Jewish and Christian world, as not
supernatural, but the result of this mighty power. Some are such
enthusiasts, that they refer to mesmerism the instinctive applica-
tion of our hand to a part in pain andrubbing it. The pressure
and agreeable sensation go for nothing. The production of
sleep by gentle friction is mesmeric. The mere circumstance of
a gentle and continued impression has not the effect, because the
sight of waving corn, the trickling of a brook, or the motion of
rocking, does not produce sleep, nor can we rock or rub ourselves
to sleep. ‘The practice of the peasants in Bavaria, of rubbing their


4 Amphitryo, act 1.

Consult Lettres Physiologiques et Morales sur le Magnétisme Animal, Par J.
Amedée Dupeau. Paris, 1826.

b Kings, ii. 5. 11.


666 MESMERISM.


little ones from head to foot before putting them to bed, and the
Oriental habit of uniting friction with the bath, is mesmeric. It is
a great oversight in them not to adduce the habit of brute mothers
to lick their little ones, as licking is friction with the tongue:
but then to be sure brutes lick themselves also. It must however
be an oversight not to adduce the habit of expecting our grooms
to rub down our horses thoroughly night and morning. The
verses of Martial referred to as implying mesmeric practice, are
fully as applicable to grooms and horses : —


« Percurrit agili corpus arte tractatrix
Manumque doctam spergit omnibus membris.” (iii. 82.)


Ignorant Mr. Mahomet and the rest of the shampooers ! ignorant
women who get your living as rudders to the diseased! you ima-
gine not that you are all aximal magnetisers. The mesmeric pro-
cess of rubbing horses, universal in civilized nations, would have
been as good an example as that of a family in Dauphiné, “ who
have been in the habit of magnetising, from father to son, for cen-
turies,” and whose “treatment consists in conducting the great toe
along the principal ramifications of the nerves ;” or as that of the
great toe of King Pyrrhus. It was irreverent to adduce a merely
royal toe, when virtue is known to go out of the toes of his holiness
the Pope, whose foot is therefore devoutly kissed by the faithful.
The ancient medical employment of friction is mesmeric: and so
must be all similar mechanical means; and among the rest the
douche, which is liquid friction and percussion. I do not see why
percussion, on the good effects of which treatises have been
written, is not as mesmeric as friction. Mere touch does wonders,
not by imagination, but mesmerically. A boy at Salamanca is
mentioned who cured numberless persons merely by touching
them with his hand. Many monks did the same. They forget to
mention at the same time that an inanimate hand has great power
in thisway. It might be thought to have lost its mesmerism, but
the mesmeric fluid is probably retained by the ligature around the
neck, for the hand of a dead man just fresh from the gallows is to
this day stroked over tumours to remove them. If any thing is
mesmeric and not mechanical, this must be; as it is quite sufficient
to draw the hand once across the swelling. Then again the
efficacy of the royal touch has been known from the time -of


MESMERISM. 667


Vespasian, who performed two miracles now ascertained to be
mesmeric, to that of the Scandinavian princes, particularly St.
Olaf in 1020, and even down to our modern kings, for whose
mesmeric virtues the royal surgeon Wiseman, not through the
mean craftiness of a courtier, but through philosophical con-
viction, stoutly vouches.e It is very remarkable that it was not
simply hereditary and constitutional, but depended upon the
individual being actually in office as king, and it is a loss, if
not disloyal and radical, to consider our kings as no longer
endowed with this virtue. George the Third gave up the pre-
tension; but a king would still have thousands of patients if he
would but praetise : —a strong argument in favour of mesmeric
influence. The practice of the imposition of hands and the
manner of benediction are unquestionably mesmeric. The Chal-
dean priests are said to have practised this mode of treatment ;
as also the Indian Brahmins, and the Parsi; and the Jesuit
missionaries inform us that the practice of curing diseases by
the imposition of hands has prevailed in China for many years.
The zmposition of hands in blessing, and in the episcopal form of
confirmation dates from the remotest antiquity, and originated
in the view of imparting some holy effluence, just as I presume
the imposition of the hands in correcting naughty boys and
thrashing a man must have originated in the view of imparting
something disagreeable. Among the eastern nations curative
virtue was found to proceed from good men, if but even the
hem of their garment could be touched. On the other hand,
pernicious influence has always been acknowledged to proceed


© « T myself have been a frequent eye-witness of many hundreds of cures
performed by his Majesty’s touch alone, without any assistance of chirurgery ;
and those, many of them, such as had tired out the endeavours of able surgeons
before they came thither.” This our chronicles have long testified, and the
personal experience of many thousands can testify for his Majesty that now
reigneth, and his uncle, father, and grandfather. His Majesty that now is
having exercised this faculty with wonderful success not only here, but beyond the
seas, in Flanders, Holland, and France itself.” (p. 243.) The king always ex-
pressed his belief that the cure was effected by the grace of God, saying, at the
time of the ceremony, ‘I touch, God heals ;” and the pious and moral Charles
II. touched 92,107 in twenty years, an average of twelveaday. Chirwrgical
Treatises, vol. i. p. 387. In 1684, Thomas Roswell was tried for high tresaon
in having spoken contemptuously of the royal’ touch.— See Wadd’s Mems.,
Maxims, and Memoirs.


668 MESMERISM.


from the eye. Every schoolboy remembers the passage in
Virgil —


«« Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.” 4


The word envy comes from invidio, and this from in and video.
The Arabs dread the evil eye above all other mischiefs, and, if a
stranger expresses admiration of any object belonging to them,
they avert the calamity by passing over the object a finger wetted
with saliva. Who is ignorant that the fierce look of man disarms
the most ferocious brutes of their courage: that Pliny recom-
mends breathing upon the forehead as a means of cure®; and that
when a child complains the nurse often tells it she will blow away
the pain. A dyspeptic friend of mine assured me that, on con-
sulting a celebrated physician at an inland watering place, the
doctor put his finger in mystic silence upon his forehead before
feeling his pulse. Had it not been a little too late in the day,
I have no doubt he would carry on such tricks like the notorious
Dr. Streper, an Irish gentleman named Valentine Greatrakes,
and a gardener named Leverett, who all, in the middle of the
seventeenth century, cured thousands by stroking with the hand.
Boyle and Cudworth both put themselves under the care of Great-
rakes; and the Lord Bishop of Derry declared that he himself
had seen “ dimness cleared and deafness cured,” pain “ drawn
out at some extreme part, ” ‘‘ grievous sores of many months date,
ina few days healed, obstructions and stoppages removed, and
cancerous knots in the breast dissolved,” by the Irishman. The
gardener used to say that so much virtue went out of him, that
he was more exhausted by touching thirty or forty people than by
digging eight roods of ground. By means of the mesmeric fluid,
some believers explain why a person cannot tickle himself; why,
proverbially, when a friend is near, we think of him (“ talk of the
devil, &c.”) ; and why, at the moment of death, distant friends
have been said to see or hear the dying who happen to be think-
ing intensely of them so as mesmerically to influence them! f


4 Kclog. 30. © Hist. Nat. xxviii. 6.

f A short and luminous account and defence of mesmerism will be found
in Dr. Georget’s Physiologie du Systéme'Nerveux, t.i. from p. 268. to 301.
1821. Drs. Hufeland, Treviranus, Sprengel, Reil, Autenrieth, Kieser, Carus,
&e. have believed in it.

For a good and entertaining history of the mesmeric phenomena as they ap-


MESMERISM. 669


Many of the phenomena of mesmerism are unquestionable,
and no more than occur in health or disease. To yawn and
fall asleep, have catchings of different parts, and various little
sensations, is nothing wonderful. To become more or less in-
sensible to all around, and more or less powerless in one or
more or all external parts, and have one or more of the intel-
lectual faculties or external senses highly exalted beyond their
usual pitch in the individual, to have not only trains of thought
and inclinations, but to speak and sing, walk, write, &c., in the
midst of extreme insensibility, and afterwards to forget what has
occurred, or even to remember it when the same state returns, and
only then, is no more than what we occasionally observe in patients.
But when we are requested to believe that persons perceive objects
of sight through dead walls; perceive objects of hearing and sight,
smell and taste, with their bellies and fingers or toes; know what
is going on at a distance, what will happen in regard to persons
and places with which they have no connection, know the his-
tory of persons whom they never heard of before, but who are
put in relation (en rapport) with them by contact, speak lan-
guages they never learned, display scientific knowledge which
they never acquired, and make anatomical and pathological ob-
servations in their own frames and those of others, the matter is too


peared in a patient at the Hotel-Dieu in 1820, see Expériences Publiques sur
le Magnétisme Animal, faites d ? Hétel-Diew de Paris. Par J. Dupotet, 3d edit.
1826. The woman had gastritis and aortic aneurysm, and is said to have de-
scribed the inner surface of her stomach as raw with red pimples, and perceived a
little pouch full of blood! The Baron is now publishing a work upon mes-
merism in London.

For a complete history, see the Diction. des Sc. Méd. article Magnétisme
Animal. The writer remarks that, in some Egyptian monuments, Anubis is
represented near the patient as a mesmeriser, with one hand raised above the head,
the other on the breast, while behind the patient another figure stands with the
right hand elevated. See also the work of Deleuze, 2 vols. ; the Marquis de
Puisegur, 3 vols. ; the Count de Puisegur, 4 vols. ; Chardel, 1 vol. ; Tardi de
Montravet, 2 vols.; the Bibliothégue du Magnétisme, 4 vols.; Archives du M.,
4 vols. ; Annalen des M., 4 vols. Dr. Bertrand’s excellent treatise Du Mag-
nétisme Animal, §c., 2 vols. Paris, 1826. He at first ascribed all to imagin-
ation; but was obliged at last to admit an unknown power, The reader of
English only should consult Isis revelata, a work just published in two volumes,
by Mr. Colquhoun of Edinburgh. It contains great information, and is highly


amusing, not the less so perhaps for containing some nonsense,


670 MESMERISM.


wonderful for belief. I must be excused for not believing, till Ihave
seen these things. ‘Those who have read the history, and seen a
little, of human nature, well know what deceptions have been prac~
tised upon the most wary; how long it has been impossible to
detect the cheat; how bold and marvellous have been the im-
positions; and yet that at last the truth has come out, the im-
postor been covered with shame and the credulous believer with
ridicule. Human testimony has been given to all kinds of ab-
surdities and impossibilities in all ages, and may always be ob-
tained from ignorance, superstition, enthusiasm, or interest, to
any amount for any prodigy. It may be sometimes difficult to say
what is contrary to the laws of nature and impossible; but the
wonders of mesmerism are so astounding, and our experience of
deception so abundant, that I find it more rational to suspend my
belief than to admit them. Indeed, the most zealous mesmeriser
must allow that deception on the part of the patient has fre-
quently been detected; that women have appeared to be in so
deep a mesmeric sopor that they have borne impressions of
melted wax without the least agitation of countenance, and yet
the whole has been proved an imposture: nay, that collusion
between both parties has been discovered. We have seen that
the same prodigies have been recounted as occurring in ordinary
ecstacy and somnambulism as from mesmerism.,

No one will allege that deception must have been impracticable,
who knows the tricks performed by Asiatic and African jug-
glers¢: and no one will allege that frequently no motive for de-
ception was possible, who remembers that, besides interest, and
even against interest and comfort, the desire to excite attention
in ill conducted minds, and to excite attention or even simply
to deceive in hysterical disease, is often intense; and no one will


& They will not only make a branch blossom before your eyes, but a seed
spring up into a tree, and the tree bear fruit; throw one end of a long chain
into the air, where it remains as if fixed, and send a dog up it, which disappears
as soon as he has reached the other end: they will take the form of a cube,
which then rises into the air, remains stationary over the heads of the spectators,
and descends again; sit in the air four feet from the ground, one hand and arm
being held up, the outer edge of the other resting on a crutch, while its fingers
deliberately count beads; and will cause unblemished boys or women, or pregnant
women, to see in ink the figure of any dead or absent individual that a third
person may name. See Mr, Hunter, l. c. p. 284. sqq. ; and Mr. Lane’s recent
work on Egypt.


MESMERISM. 671


urge the sense, attainments, and respectability of the believers,
who has seen much of human nature, for he must know that the
wisest have their weak points, and especially in regard to ex-
traordinary things, which they often gloat upon like the most
ignorant peasant, and that many who pass for highly informed
men possess but partial information, and many who are dis-
tinguished for some one kind of discovery and pass for men of
talent, possess but a moderate share of high and general intel-
lectual power. The chief British advocate of all the miracles
of mesmerism believes a thing to have been possible, which
was an evident trick, and in which interest was the palpable and
only motive. A Scotchman exhibited a boy lately in London,
whom he pretended to be gifted with second sight. I went to
the exhibition, and the boy told the colour and other qualities
of things without seeing them, the names and ages of strangers
in the room, &c. &c. But the father very fairly demanded that
we should show him the objects, and tell him our names and
ages, in short, make him acquainted with the facts, previously, in
order that we might not say the boy was wrong when he was
right. The boy, on being admitted into the room, without pre-
vious conversation with any person in it, invariably gave correct
answers. A friend who accompanied me at once pointed out
the trick. The father always addressed the boy before the little
fellow uttered a word: and he began each successive sentence
with a word, the first letter of which went to form the answer.
Forinstance, if the object was of stLK, the father might begin —
““ See now you answer correctly ; J know you will; Look well
before you speak; Know what you are about.” Or each letter
of a word of ten letters might be agreed upon, each being dif-
ferent, to signify a particular number. Thus if the letters of the
word Cumberland were settled to signify 1, 2, 3, &c. in the order
in which they stood, the father would begin, after a numerical
question, with a sentence, the first letter of the first word of
which signified the first number; then next with a sentence
beginning with the letter signifying the second number. This
was the principle, and of course there might be many variations
of its application.» Mr. Colquhoun records, that “ the father


» My friend’s explanation will be given in a new edition of Dr. Brewster’s
Letters on Natural Magic, in which numerous deceptions are explained. A more
copious work is by Euscbe Salvert. Sur la Magie.

yy Y¥


672 MESMERISM.


stated he had five children, all gifted in the same extraordinary
way :” and, though Mr. C. acknowledges there is much room for
deception, ‘ would strongly recommend” (in italics) the investi-
gation of the facts to professional men, because he has “ suf-
ficiently proved that the phenomena exhibited are of possible
occurrence.”i He would have us believe the case of Miss Mac-
aray, of Liverpool, a Roman Catholic young lady, who became
blind in June, 1816, when fifteen years of age, and accidentally
discovered in the following October that she could read with
her fingers the “ Lives of the Saints,” —the “ Life of Thomas a
Becket,” and the Bible; having previously, after having become
totally blind, presented a stole made by herself to her confessor.
Whether the priest, for the glory of God and the church, sug-
gested subsequent miracles of sight to her, or she imposed
upon his Roman Catholic credulity, is a matter of speculation.
She told an object placed under two plates of glass, by touching
the upper plate of glass with her fingers; and could read with
her fingers nine inches from the book, dy a convex lens which she
touched! Now this single circumstance proved the whole to be
an impudent imposture. If the lens could have assisted her
fingers to see, it must have been when they were placed at that
particular distance from it at which the rays formed an image
of the object ; not when they were in contact with it. At its sur-
face, alens affords no image of an object: yet to her fingers,
touching the surface of the lens, objects appeared magnified if
the glass was convex, small if it was concave! This statement
was a most unlucky mistake ; she should have pretended to see
with her fingers at the proper focal distance. *

Voltaire advises the Devil never to address himself to the
faculty of physic, but to that of theology, when he wishes to
impose upon mankind. However, in 1726, a poor woman at
Godalming in Surrey, named Mary Tofts, pretended that, after
a violent longing for rabbits, when pregnant, she brought forth
these animals ; and persuaded her apothecary, “ Mr. Howard, a


ij, c. vol. it, p. 339. sq.

k See Annals of Med. and Surgery ; London, 1818, vol. ii. p. 385. ; where
it is remarked as singular that no person thought of ascertaining whether the
point which she touched upon the glass was in a line between the object and
her eyes; and whether an intervening opake substance, placed in this line,
prevented her power of discriminating objects.


MESMERISM. 673


man of probity who had practised for thirty years,” or, in common
language, a highly respectable practitioner of great experience,
that, in the course of about a month, he had delivered her of
nearly twenty rabbits. George the First, not thinking it impossible,
sent his house surgeon, Mr. Ahlers, to inquire into the fact; and
the royal house surgeon returned to London, “ convinced that he
had obtained ocular and tangible proof of the truth,” and pro-
mised to procure the woman a pension. The wise king then
sent his sergeant-surgeon, Mr. St. André: and the sergeant-
surgeon returned to town also a firm believer. They both re-
turned with rabbits as proofs! and the rabbits had the high
honour of being dissected before the king. An elaborate Report
of their production and dissection was published by the sergeant-
surgeon; and Whiston (of the faculty of theology indeed)
showed, in a pamphlet (for a furious controversy arose between
the believers and the unbelievers), that the miracle was the
exact fulfilment of a prophecy in Esdras. An eminent physician,
Sir Richard Manningham, backed by Caroline, then Princess
of Wales, detected the cheat, and, on a threat of a dangerous
operation and imprisonment, Mary Tofts confessed the whole.
— Ann Moore of Tutbury, of extreme piety, and with a Bible
always on her bed before her, pretended in 1808, sqq. to have
taken nothing into her mouth for six years but the inside of
some black currants once; and for the last four years and a
half, nothing. There was no peculiar state of the nervous sys-
tem to account for the circumstance. She was watched for
sixteen days and nights in September, 1808: and members of
the faculty of theology and medical practitioners testified to
the truth of her statement: though Dr. Henderson showed,
from many circumstances, to all rational people, that it was an
absurd imposture. The Rev. Legh Richmond, in 1813, earnestly
solicited her to undergo another watching. She consented ; and,
having caught a bad cold and thinking herself dying, she with
great solemnity said, “ In the face of Almighty God, and on my
dying bed, I declare that I have used no deception,” &c. Yet
evidence of guilt and falsehood was at last obtained, attempts
at concealment were useless, and she publicly expressed her
contrition for her long continued imposture. |

' See an interesting work by my friend Mr. Hunter ; Sketches of Imposture,
Deception, and Credulity, — Family Library. London, 1737.

yy 28


674 MESMERISM.


Gall was at considerable pains to examine into the facts
of mcsmerism. It was then in high favour with many, and
adopted by many physiologists in their writings, so that he felt
“the subject as delicate as it formerly was to proceed against
sorcerers.”™ To avoid the charge of misrepresentation, he
quotes the words of Kessler, who maintains that the epigastrium
of the magnetised can perform the functions of all the five senses,
and more acutely too than the special organs under ordinary
circumstances ; the fingers read the smallest print; the contact of
the magnetiser’s thumb render the ears unnecessary for hearing, —
“the most common fact in the world, and the simplest experiment;”
and complete vision take place with the eyes shut, so that all ob-
stacles are avoided as dexterously in strange as in familiar places.
“ T will not bring a multitude of proofs, and the authentic testi-
mony of many credible persons,’ says Kessler, ‘‘ but will mention
only what I have seen again and again, and of the truth of which
any one may satisfy himself favourably by his own experience.” ®
Gall then, at great length, quotes Walther, the professor at Land-
shut, for a description of the stages of mesmerism, in the highest of
which (clairvoyance ) “time and space no longer present obstacles
to the penetration of the magnetised,” ‘ who sees as distinctly
into the interior of the magnetiser’s body as into his own,” the
reason of which is, that “ all the nervous system is an identity
and a totality —a pure transparence without cloud, an infinite
expansion without bounds or obstacles,—such is universal
sense ;” and, as “in the waking state the soul is more closely
and intimately united with the body,” and “ natural sleep is a
more intimate communication of our soul with the universal soul of
the world; so in magnetic sleep our soul is united in the most
intimate manner with the soul of the world and with the body,
and with the Jatter not by means of the nervous system only, but
immediately in all its parts and members, so that life is no longer
a particularity, but original life.’° “If any one,” says Gall,
‘“‘is convinced of all these marvellous fancies, and especially if
he comprehends them, he is justified in asserting that such a doc-
trine exercises the most important influence upon the whole science
of nature.” Reil, so strangely brought forward as the rival of Gall,


™ }. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 185. sqq-
" Priifung des Gallschen Systems. Jena, 1805.
° Phys, t. ii. p. 244.


MESMERISM. 675


is the third whom he quotes: — “ The estimable Reil,” thus Gall
generously terms him, “after having spoken of the abdominal
ganglia as capable of becoming the conductors of sensation, says,
‘the transition to the state of a conductor is so much more easy
in living than in inanimate nature, that a communication may be
established between the magnetiser and the magnetised, so that
if the former chew pepper, the latter tastes it;’” “the mag-
netised are enabled to know by this evidence the configuration of
their interior just as well as if they saw it with their external


>


senses ;” “a patient described the thoracic and abdominal
viscera, the spinal marrow, the sympathetic nerve, and the solar
plexus, as white threads and clear spots; some have heard
sounds too low to be heard by others; some, with their eyes
shut, have perceived objects, and especially men, in another
apartment, and foretold, without ever making a mistake, what
persons would come to the house: the magnetiser scratches
himself, the magnetised itches at the same part; the former
coughs, pricks himself, the latter also coughs and feels the
prickP: the magnetiser takes wine and pepper into his mouth,


® This equals Sir Kenelme Digby, who solemnly assures us that a gentleman,
having had his hand wounded in a duel and suffering great pain, found the
pain suddenly cease when Sir Kenelme dissolved some powder of vitriol in water,
and put into the solution the bloody garter with which the wound had been
bound up. A few hours afterwards, however, he took the garter out of the
solution and dried it before a large fire; but “it was scarce dry before the
wounded gentleman’s servant came roaring that his master felt as much burning
as ever he had done, if not more, for the heat was such as if his hand were twixt
coales of fire.” He desired the man to return home, saying, “ his master should
be free from that inflammation, it may be, before he could possibly return unto
him.”—‘* Thereupon he went, and at the instant Sir Kenelme did put again the
garter into the water: thereupon he found his master without any pain at all.
To be brief, there was no sense of pain afterwards, but within five or six dayes
the wounds were cicatrised and entirely healed.” (A Late Discourse made in a
Solemne Assembly of Nobles and Learned Men at Montpellier in France, by Sir
Kenelme Digby, Knight, &c.; rendered faithfully out of French into English,
by M. White, Gent., ed. 2. London, 1658. p. 6. sqq-) I may mention that
the knight anticipated another folly and imposition, just as it may be with dif.
ferent practitioners, — Hahnemannism, or homeopathy, by pointing out an
undoubted remedy on the principle of similia similibus. « Tis an ordinary
remedy, though a nasty one, that they who have ill breaths, hold their mouths
open at the mouth of a privy, as long as they can, and by the reiteration of this
remedy they find themselves cured at last.” p. 76.


yY vig


676 MESMERISM.


and both taste them: the magnetised distinguishes magnetised
from common water, foretells the commencement and duration of
the paroxysm of his diseases, and points out the remedies.” 4
Gall, with that beautiful and playful irony which so charac-
terised him, and with which he delighted to annihilate his adver-
saries’ absurdities, after remarking that the human mind always
turns in the same circle, —that Plato and Socrates had taught
that our souls knew every thing originally, were in intimate com-
munication with the universal soul of the world, and that their
connection with the body did but impede the free use of their
knowledge, avows that, if, in mesmeric sleep, our soul becomes
intimately united with the soul of the world, none of the in-
credible tales of mesmerism can be doubted. “It is a trifle to
hear a poor peasant, born far from Upper Saxony, speak the
dialect of that country in its purity and with all its inflexions,
and possess the gift of unknown tongues: to see another stupid
peasant, ignorant of French, read correctly and understand a
French book applied to her stomach. To read with the fingers,
to know the hour by the watch in my pocket, to see through
walls and houses, and perceive at a distance a person who will
come to the house, are all wonders explicable by the intimate
connection with the universal soul of the world. We thus see
that if ever a great truth was promulgated, it is the doctrine of
predestination and pre-established harmony. Magnetism proves,
in the most peremptory manner, that every thing in the universe
is not only concatenated, but completed. The dialect of Upper
Saxony, the French language, my watch, the visit of the stranger,
the letter of a lover which you fancy is so snugly concealed in
your bosom, are concatenations of the world as necessary as the
sun is to the universe. Say, now, what can be concealed from
us either present or future ?”— “ We will not ask how the soul
can be united intimately with the body and with the soul of this
world at the same time; how it can be confined in its narrow
prison and at the same moment detached from all its ties ; how
the soul of the magnetiser and the magnetised can be mingled,
and afterwards separated again.” ‘ Unfortunately,” he continues,
*‘ scientific discoveries still have to be made by the long and
laborious method of experience, notwithstanding the magnetised


1 Archiv. fiir Physiol. bs vii. st. 2. 8. 232


MESMERISM. 677


see all their internal structure in the clearest manner, and mag-
netism has been practised so long.”

The result of Gall’s investigation was this :—‘ Neither we, nor
any other dispassionate observers, who have been present at the
famous experiments of which such wonderful accounts have been
given, have witnessed any thing supernatural or contrary to
nature: we ought therefore to abandon the belief of the meta-
morphosis of nerves (the performance of the function of one nerve
by another) to those who are better organised for the marvellous
than ourselves.”

It being, however, impossible to deny such facts of mesmer-
ism as occur in some nervous diseases, are they to be ascribed
to mere imagination — an excitement of the feelings by the ges-
ticulations and proximity of the manipulator', or to the oper-
ation of an unknown power? Gall admits this power, and even
does not reject the hypothesis of its connection with a fluid.
“* How often in intoxication, hysterical and hypochondriacal
attacks, convulsions, fever, insanity, under violent emotions, after
long fasting, through the effect of such poisons as opium, hem-
lock, belladonna, are we not in some measure transformed into
perfectly different beings, for instance, into poets, actors, &c. ?”—
** Just as in dreaming, the thoughts frequently have more deli-
cacy, and the sensations are more acute, and we can hear and


* “ Among all the phenomena, however,” says Professor Dugald Stewart,
“to which the subject of imitation has led our attention, none are, perhaps, so
wonderful as those which have been recently brought to light, in consequence of
the philosophical inquiries occasioned by the medical pretensions of Mesmer and
his associates. ‘That these pretensions involved much of ignorance, or of ims
posture, or both, in their author, has, I think, been fully demonstrated in the
very able report of the French academicians; but does it follow from this that
the facts witnessed and authenticated by those academicians should share in the
disgrace incurred by the empirics who disguised or misrepresented them? For
my own part, it appears to me, that the general conclusions established by
Mesmer’s practice, with respect to the physical effects of the principle of ima-
gination (more particularly in cases where they co-operated together) are in-
comparably more curious than if he had actually demonstrated the existence of
his boasted science: nor can I see any good reason why a physician, who admits
the efficacy of the moral agents employed by Mesmer, should, in the exercise of
his profession, scruple to copy whatever processes are necessary for subjecting
them to his command, any more than that he should hesitate about employing a
new physical agent, such as electricity or galvanism.” Elem, of the Phil. of the
Human Mind, vol, iii. p. 221.

YY 4


678 MESMERISM.


answer: just as in ordinary somnambulism we can rise, walk, see
with our eyes open, touch with the hands, &c.; so we allow that
similar phenomena may take place in artificial somnambulism, and
even in a higher degree.” —‘* We acknowledge a fluid which has
an especial affinity with the nervous system, which can emanate
from an individual, pass into another, and accumulate, in virtue of
particular affinities, more in certain parts than in others.” —“ We
admit the existence of a fluid, the subtraction of which lessens,
and the accumulation augments, the power of the nerves ; which
places one part of the nervous system in repose, and heightens
the activity of another; which, therefore, may produce an arti-
ficial somnambulism.” s

A rigid mathematician, La Place, observes that, “ of all the
instruments which we can employ, in order to enable us to dis-
cover the imperceptible agents of nature, the nerves are the most
sensible, especially when their sensibility is exalted by particular


* It may be interesting to mention an observation which Gall made upon
himself by chance, and which, independently of the phenomena of mesmerism,
confirmed him in this opinion. Having, while in contemplation, placed his
hand upon his forehead, and walking backwards and forwards several times
with his fingers over the hairy part of the front of his head, at about the distance
of an inch, he remarked a gentle warmth, like a vapour, between his hand and
the upper part of bis cranium: he felt a heat ascend towards his shoulder and
cheeks: heat in the head and chilliness in his loins. The same thing having
recurred several times arrested his attention, and he repeated the experiment,
and always with the same results. If he continued to move for some moments,
with his hand suspended, the same phenomena increased. “ ‘The eyes become
painful, and tears run down ; the tongue can no longer articulate, twitchings of
the face occur, respiration grows laborious, and sighing and oppression follow ;
the knees tremble, and totter: and some hours of repose are required to restore
him perfectly.

* He has often, by the continued movement of the hand, produced similar
phenomena in persons not previously aware of them. He produced even deep
and prolonged fainting: he has, in regard to this peculiarity, a particular
affinity with persons of both sexes who have fine and rather curly hair. They
only act upon him in this manner, and he is able to distinguish, by this singular
impression, if it is an individual of this description or not, who, at a fixed dis-
tance, in a numerous company, moves his hand over the superior anterior part
of his cranium. On the other hand, he can act upon persons of this consti-
tution only. The rapidity with which he loses his senses, and especially the
extremely disagreeable impression produced by an inexplicable depression, have
prevented him from pushing the trial beyond this and obtaining farther
results,”


MESMERISM. 679


causes. It is by means of them that we have discovered the
slight electricity which is developed by the contact of two
heterogeneous metals. The singular phenomena which result
from the extreme sensibility of the nerves in particular indi-
viduals have given birth to various opinions relative to the
existence of a new agent, which has been denominated animal
magnetism, to the action of the common magnetism, to the
influence of the sun and moon in some nervous affections, and,
lastly, to the impressions which may be experienced from the
proximity of the metals, or of a running water. It is natural to
suppose that the action of these causes is very feeble, and that it
may be easily disturbed by accidental circumstances; but, be-
cause, in some cases, it has not been manifested at all, we are
not to conclude it has no existence. Weare so far from being
acquainted with all the agents of nature, and their different
modes of action, that it would be quite unphilosophical to deny
the existence of the phenomena, merely because they are in-
explicable in the present state of our knowledge.” t

Cuvier fully admits mesmerism : —“ We must confess that it is
very difficult, in the experiments which have for their object the
action which the nervous system of two different individuals can
exercise one upon another, to distinguish the effect of the imagin-
ation of the individual, upon whom the experiment is tried, from
the physical result produced by the person who acts for him.
The effects, however, on persons ignorant of the agency, and
upon individuals whom the operation itself has deprived of con-
sciousness, and those which animals present, do not permit us to
doubt that the proximity of two animated bodies in certain
positions, combined with certain movements, have a real effect,
independently of all participation of the fancy. It appears also
clearly that these effects arise from some nervous communication
which is established between their nervous systems.”

I have no hesitation in declaring my conviction that the
facts of mesmerism which I admit, because they are not con-
trary to established morbid phenomena, result from a specific
power. Even they are sometimes unreal and feigned, and, when
real, are sometimes the result of emotion, — of imagination, to


* Théorie Analytique du Calcul des Probabilités,


" Anatonie Comparée, t. ii,


680 MESMERISM.


use common language; but, that they may be real and inde
pendent of all imagination, I have seen quite sufficient to con-
vince me.

In May, 1829, I was introduced to Mr. Chenevix by Dr.
Hodgkin, and, as that gentleman had persuaded himself, theo-
retically and practically, at Paris, of the truth of mesmerism, I
seized this opportunity of commencing an experimental examin-
ation, by availing myself of his -offer to mesmerise any person I
might present to him. I saw him mesmerise two girls at his own
lodgings in Old Burlington Street, and took him several times to
St. Thomas’s Hospital. The two girls appeared to fall fast
asleep by the process: but, though I watched them very carefully,
I might be deceived, and, as they were well known to Mr. Che-
nevix, and had been mesmerised before, I drew no inference.
At St. Thomas’s Hospital, I selected female patients at random
from my list of their names, and neither he had seen them nor
they heard of him or mesmerism., Each was manipulated alone
in a private room. On manipulating a patient of a colleague,
who selected her himself, she had an hysterical fit, at which
I was not surprised, as hysteria was her complaint and the
least emotion at any time excited a paroxysm. He endea-
voured to put an end to it in vain. On a second occasion, a
violent fit recurred and his attempts to calm it were fruitless.
He manipulated six other young females, with no effect, except
that one, labouring under chorea, said her head was light and
heavy alternately, and menstruated two days afterwards for
the first time during three months. An epileptic woman fell
asleep, apparently, on the two occasions she was mesmerised :
yet we found that she was not asleep the second time, and she
declared she had not been asleep the first time, though on both
occasions she felt drowsy. I did not venture to conclude she
was asleep, but the redness of her eyes and cheeks, the heavi-
ness of her look, and every circumstance make me now believe
she was asleep the first time, for I have seen many mesmerised
persons fast asleep, who afterwards denied it. Pain was pro-
duced in her arm, and afterwards in her head, and presently
recurred by manipulating in another direction; from this I
inferred nothing then, but I have since then witnessed such
phenomena so frequently, that I do not doubt their reality and
their production by the manipulator. I remained unconvinced,


MESMERISM. 681


till another female was mesmerised. She was an ignorant Irish
girl, and unprepared to expect any thing. In a minute she
plaintively entreated Mr. Chenevix not to proceed. The mani-
pulations ‘“ drew weakness into her, and made her feel faint.”
She next complained of pain in the abdomen; ona few transverse
movements she said the pain was gone: the same thing occurred
several times, and once pain was complained of in the chest,
but ceased perfectly after a few transverse movements. He
darted an open hand towards one of her arms, and told her to
raise it; she could scarcely move it: after a few transverse
movements, she declared the stiffness and uneasiness were gone,
and she moved it as well as the other. He produced all the
same effects on the other arm, and then upon one leg. Her eyes
were closed as perfectly as could be, and, a piece of paper weigh--
ing, perhaps, a grain, being placed upon one foot, she instantly
was unable to raise it; the paper was removed, and she raised it
directly. All these things were repeated again and again, I tell-
ing Mr. Chenevix, in French, which part I wished to be rendered
powerless and which to be restored and she being prevented as
much as possible from seeing. “ Deception wasimpossible. Mr. C.
looked round at me, and asked, in French, if I was satisfied. I
really felt ashamed to say no; and yet I could scarcely credit
my senses enough to say yes. I remained silent. He then
asked me, still in a language unintelligible to the patient, «shall
I bring back a pain, or disable a limb for you once more.’ I
of course requested that he would do so. He complied instantly,
giving her a pain in the chest once, and disabling her several
times from moving her limbs, and removing those effects at
pleasure, according to the intentions he avowed to me; the
whole taking place exactly as it had done in my former trial with
this woman.” *
From this time I was satisfied that such a power as mes-
merism exists, and hoped some day to inquire into it. I had no
opportunity, however, before the arrival of Baron Dupotet in this


* Tallowed Mr. Chenevix to publish my memoranda of what I saw. They
will be found in the London Medical and Physiol. Journ. for Oct. 1829, which
contains the last of a series of papers by him on mesmerism. He did not print
them with perfect fairness, but omitted two or three comments, and I think
facts, unfavourable to mesmerism, in regard to those cases in which the effects
were none or doubtful.


682 MESMERISM.


country a few months back. As mesmerism is extolled in ner-
vous diseases, I selected three epileptic patients, a male and
two females, at University College Hospital, in whose disease
I despaired of doing any good: and one hysterical female,
who was said to have fits at such very distant intervals that I
really could not tell whether she had any thing the matter with
her, and who would not have been allowed to remain in the
Institution. Several students and other gentlemen and myself
submitted to the manipulations. On some gentlemen no effect
was produced, but the process was not repeated above once or
at all in them: of the greater number, some experienced a
tingling or some strange sensation in the arms, legs, or face, fre-
quently with little twitchings, an oppression and unusual heaving
of the chest in respiration: and some always felt a heaviness
or unusual sensation about the forehead, and even drowsiness,
convincing them that they were under some strange influence,
and on repetition experienced nothing more ; I was mesmerised
frequently, and always but once with the effect of tingling and
twitchings only. Those who had never heard of tingling and
twitching being the result, but conceived they were to be sent
to sleep, experienced these effects abundantly ; and many, who
sat down laughing at the whole as nonsense, honestly confessed
they were affected by some influence. Some of these had
witnessed the soporific power of the process, and believed in mes-
merism, like myself, and yet none could be sent to sleep. A visiter
one day was put to sleep, but he never returned, and I did not
see him. ‘The four patients were sent fast asleep, the man
always, and in from five to ten minutes ; occasionally in longer
time, occasionally in less. One of the epileptic females was
manipulated very often before she slept, although she was de-
lighted at the process and mortified whenever she was not sub-
jected to it with the others. At length, however, she began to
sleep under it; and once was sent to sleep in a few moments;
but the process often failed with her. The other was for a great
iength of time sent to sleep invariably ; but a curious circum-
stance at length occurred,—a few moments after she had lost her-
self in sleep she awoke, and it was impossible to give her longer
sleep than for a few moments. This always happened repeat-
edly during the process, till Baron Dupotet was too tired to
continue it: and it happened in every process for a long while.


MESMERISM. 683


At length, however, she was put to sleep again for the same
time as before. The patients, when about to sleep, either
showed a fixed stare, or they looked heavy and their eyelids
gradually dropped or winked; their breathing became heavy ;
and sometimes they changed from waking to ‘sleeping in an
instant. When they were asleep, the head nodded or fell in
one direction or another, the arms fell, they breathed loud or
even snored. In some, twitchings of the fingers, feet, arms, legs,
or face took place : in the hysterical girl the eyeballs rolled rapidly
from side to side, or the lower lip was raised and depressed.
These movements were the more striking that they alternated.
On awaking, she never could open her eyes; but, on the Baron’s
making a few transverse passes above and below them, she opened
them instantly. This invariably occurred : I and others every day
made the same passes in vain. If we raised her eyelids, they in-
stantly fell. We begged her to open them; but, till the fingers
of him who had mesmerised her made transverse movements, they
remained closed, however long we waited. In the rest, the sleep
lasted a short time only: from a few minutes to a quarter of an
hour: but in her it was very protracted; it was often so profound
that she did not feel pricking nor pinching; and it seldom ceased
till put an end to. This the Baron always did instantly at our
desire, by transverse movements; when she got up, rubbing her
eyes and looking drowsy for a minute, and then walked away as
if nothing had occurred. The man often on awaking complained
of a pain in some part or other, or some very strange sensation,
which was immediately dissipated by transverse movements. At
first he liked the process and prepared the chair with delight :
but, after a time, he took a dislike to it, and at length requested
not to be mesmerised, but to trust to medicines for his cure, and I
of course did not oppose his wishes. Yet at both periods the
effects were precisely the same upon him.

One of the students tried the process upon an epileptic girl,
a patient of the gentleman with whom he lived at the distance of
several miles from the College, and sent her presently off to
sleep for several hours. He offered to bring her to the Hos-
pital, as she was so susceptible of mesmeric influence ; and she
came three times aweek. Her eyelids were always closed pre-
sently: and she never could open them till the Baron made
transverse passes around them. I always attempted, but in


684 MESMERISM.


vain; and, if I opened them forcibly, they immediately shut
again. After the Baron had done this, she always was sent
asleep rapidly; and it was invariably remarked that at length
she made one deep inspiration, and was then in a comatose
sleep. ‘This deep inspiration, the Baron informed me, is the
uniform precursor of the coma. From this moment, we could do
what we pleased without waking her,— halloo in her ears, dash
her arms in any direction, pull her hair out, pinch her hand, put
snuff up her nose: she was perfectly insensible, breathing pla-
cidly, and slept on in spite of any attempt to awake her, till the
Baron made two or three transverse movements, when she instantly
awoke. ‘These phenomena were too striking and invariable for
any rational person to disbelieve that some peculiar power had
been in operation. Still, though awake, she generally could not
open her eyes till transverse passes had been made around them.
Her lower jaw was always firmly closed in her sleep, so that none of
us could open it: but the Baron always caused it presently to open
on moving his finger along it or holding his hand in contact with it:
it was opened more slowly by manipulations made without touch-
ing her. On one occasion he held his finger near the meatus of
the ear, and she presently heard, and from that time heard more
or less and talked, especially if he operated again upon the
ear; but after she was awakened she knew nothing that had
passed in her sleep-waking. Still she was mesmerised many
times before she answered questions: she heard a noise, and this
roused her sufficiently to make her talk of what was present in
her mind, but her words had no relation to the question. At
length she began to speak to every question ; and, on one occasion,
on being teased again and again to give an answer when she
repeatedly declared she could not, she fell into a violent rage,
rose, seized the inquirer, shook and pushed him with both hands,
and on being forced into a chair, after resting quiet a few mi-
nutes, she rose and made at the same person again very fiercely,
and, sat down at last with difficulty, pale with rage, and her
hands quite cold. Baron Dupotet thought it right to awaken her,
and did so immediately, when she smiled with her natural good
humour, and, on being addressed, proved herself to be in complete
ignorance of all that had just passed.

The power of mesmerism was shown as strikingly though dif-
ferently upon one of my two epileptic female patients. She ceased


MESMERISM. 685


to have epilepsy ; but fell into fits of ecstacy, which I described
at p-629., perfectly insensible, though with her eyes open,
chattering, mimicking, relating stories, &c. This state could be
put an end to by mesmerising her. Generally she was restored in
less than a quarter of an hour, even after this state had continued
many hours, or even for a day or a week; once or twice it resisted
long manipulations, but they continued, excepting once, till put
an end to by the process, and that once, I understood, she fell back
very soon into the state again. These attacks, I have already said,
changed to ecstatic delirium ; in the fits of which she was in pos-
session of all her external senses, and these attacks were terminated
by mesmerism, just like those of simple ecstacy or sleep-waking.
They ended with momentary sleep. While sitting before the
magnetiser, looking attentively at him, and saying all sorts of
ridiculous and witty spiteful things, pale, with the countenance of
a maniac, she suddenly seemed lost, her eyes rapidly closed for
a moment, then opened, she looked astonished, and was in her
perfect senses, smiling amiably, behaving in the most proper
manner, in short, in full possession of her intellect and feelings,
This phenomenon was, if possible, more striking than the sudden
awaking of those who were in a state of coma. It occurred again
and again and again for weeks, and the young gentleman under
whose care the patient was in my absence from the hospital,
succeeded like Baron Dupotet in bringing her to herself, and
even two or three times when the latter had not been able through
the state of exhaustion in which he was from having magnetised
very often and long in the course of the day.
~ These are the phenomena which I have witnessed. To ascribe
them to emotion and fancy, to suppose collusion and deception,
would be absurd. They must be ascribed to a peculiar power ;
to a power acting, I have no doubt, constantly in all living things,
vegetable and animal, but shown in a peculiar manner by the pro-
cesses of mesmerism. I have witnessed its power at least three
times a week for two months: and should despise myself if
I hesitated to declare my decided conviction of the truth of mes-
merism. I am willing to believe that a sleep-waker may pro-
phesy morbid changes in himself with accuracy, as the boy men-
tioned by Gall predicted the termination of his fit if his friends
would lead him into the garden, and the girl mentioned by
Lord Monboddo predicted the cessation of her disease with


686 MESMERISM.


equal accuracy. I cannot forget that a minute portion of semen
masculinum, probably far less than a drop, will transmit a
father’s structure, mental and bodily character, in the minutest
points, even idiosyncracies of affection from various articles of
food and medicine, and from morbid influences, so that the
offspring may never take a particular contagious disease or not
take it till a certain time of life, just like the father.

* This declaration will excite a smile with almost every body ;
for, since the report of the French commissioners in 1784, it has
been customary to ascribe all mesmeric phenomena to imagination
or deception. But I set no more value upon reports of French
commissioners than the reports are worth. I know their reports
on Gall’s labours (see supra, p. $29. sq.), contradicted by them-
selves in their subsequent report on M. Fleuren’s experiments ;
on Le Gallois’ experiments, so well opposed by Dr. W. Phillip ;
_their injustice to Dr. Tiedemann ; and afterwards to Dr. Vimont.

77 have never yet declared an opinion upon a new truth that I
have been obliged to retract. Phrenology has now advanced
to its firm establishment; Human Glanders is universally ad-
mitted; Auscultation is invariably practised except by the
wretchedly ignorant: Quinine, Prussic acid, Creosote, are now
in daily use. I stood abundant ridicule for advocating these, and
will now stand more ridicule with the same firmness and the
same silent pity * or contempt which I have always felt for my
opponents, till I see, as I shall, the truth of mesmerism also
admitted and the world forget that it was ever doubted. Ig-
norance and party feeling are more unblushing when many are
united officially, than when all is left to private and individual
discussion. For expressing opinions favourable to mesmerism,
two French academicians were expelled, and Mr. Chenevix I
heard censured after his death as a fellow of the Royal So-
ciety by the President from the chair. The first French con-
missioners strangely referred all the effects which they witnessed
to imagination, imitation, and touching. Now the influence of
touching must have been different from that of imagination,
as they employed two distinct words, and therefore all could not
have been imagination even in their view. Franklin was so


y « Rideat me ista dicentem, qui non intelligit ; et ego doleam ridentem me ;”’
said St. Austin. Isis revel. vol. i. p. 81.


MESMERISM. 687


generally absent and paid so little attention that he ought not to
have signed the report, and seems to have taken the absurdity of
the thing for granted. The celebrated Jussieu refused to sign it,
and made a special report of his own.? I have seen so much of
what is wrong, in bodies and in individuals, that the opinions of
the former and of the latter, whatever may be the rank, title,
office, power, riches, or scientific character of the parties,
never are regarded by me beyond their own simple worth.

‘ But I have never witnessed more than what, it is certain, takes

( place in health and disease. I have seen persons sent to sleep,
I have felt and heard others declare they had tingling, and heard
some declare they had various other sensations and pains, I have
seen twitchings, convulsions, and spastic contractions of muscles,
loss of power of muscle, and the most profound coma; and I have
seen these evidently and instantly removed by the process. I have
seen one sense restored in the coma by the process, so that
the person was insensible in taste, smell, sight, and yet heard and
answered questions well. I have seen paroxysms of sleep-waking
and ecstatic delirium, which had been originally induced by its
disturbance of a system already epileptic, put an end to evi-
dently, and in general quickly, by mesmerism. But I have not
witnessed persons seeing through walls or pasteboard, nor tasting
or smelling with the epigastrium or fingers ; nor speaking or under-
standing languages they had never learnt ; nor telling the circum-
stances past, present, and to come of persons they had never heard
of before. Yet I have persevered with patience and docility.
Often have I seen Baron Dupotet speak at the epigastrium and
finger ends of the ecstatic and comatose patients: often heard
him address them in a language with which they were unac-
quainted: often ask when they would have another fit; but nothing,
which, till I witness such things, I must consider supernatural,
has yet occurred. He has frequently said that these phenomena
would soon occur, — that the patients would probably soon be-
come clairvoyans : but no. No marvel has yet presented itself in
my experience: nor has any good been yet effected in the dis-
eases of my patients ; but the perfect coma induced in some of


* Rapport de lun des Commissaires, A. L, Jussieu, chargés par le Roi del Ev-
amen du Magnétisme Animal. Paris, 1784.
ZZ


688 MESMERISM.


them would be an inestimable blessing in the case of a surgical
operation, which I am positive might have been performed without
the slightest sensation on some of the female patients, exactly
as took place at the Hétel-Dieu, where a cancerous breast was
removed in mesmeric coma from a poor woman without her
knowledge. I have no doubt that I shall in time see all the
established phenomena of sleep-waking, — writing, reading, and
doing endless things even better than in the waking state. But,
before I see, I cannot believe more. I cannot believe that even
those strange phenomena are produced by it which some de-
clare to occur occasionally in plain sleep-waking, because I must
see such sleep-waking before I believe it. Yet I will continue a
little longer with docility to inquire and learn, for of Baron
Dupotet’s perfect good faith I entertain no doubt, however cre-
dulous he may be.

The observations of the late French commission agree with
mine; but they go farther. Sometimes there was no effect ;
sometimes but slight effects ; sometimes decided effects, as sleep,
extreme insensibility, and muscular movements on the direction
of the fingers of the mesmeriser, though sometimes none, and
sometimes with scarcely uniformity enough for any one to assert
that the movements resulted from it; sometimes insensibility of
a particular sense dissipated, so that perfect coma was exchanged
for sleep-waking, or the whole coma dissipated at the pleasure of
the mesmeriser by transverse movements.

They saw alarge variety of the more wonderful, but established
phenomena of sleep-waking, such as appeared in many of the
cases, related by me, unconnected with mesmerism: but which
the shortness of time only has prevented me from witnessing.
They, however, believed that they witnessed more than this. They
declare they witnessed the production of sleep-waking by mes-
merism practised in the next room to that in which the patient
was; that they witnessed clairvoyance, — reading and perfect re-
cognition of objects of sight, &c. amounting to the ability of
playing games of cards, &c. in coma, with the eyes completely
closed; accurate prophesying of the day of occurrence of dis-
tant epileptic attacks and of other events of the case; great
diminution of epilepsy ; rapid cure of hemiplegia; true de-
clarations of the seat and nature of the diseases of strangers


MESMERISM. 689


by mesmerised persons in the state of sleep-waking who had
never seen them before, but who were placed in relation with
the patients by putting their hands in contact with them. ‘The
details are most interesting, and, in at least all particulars to
which my own experience extends, I have no doubt most faithful.
The report is signed by MM. Bourdois de le Motte, Fouquier,
Gueneau de Mussy, Guersent, Husson, Itard, J. J. Leroux, Marc,
and Thillaye.

After translating this report, Mr. Colquhoun refers to some
cases of mesmeric sleep-waking in which it is said that the
surface of the body acquired a new power of sensation; some
related by M. Tardy de Montravel* of the recognition of ob-
jects of sight by the epigastrium even at some distance; one
by Dr. Gmelin» ; one of a Scotchman named Macgill, a servant
of a Russian ambassador, who resolved the man’s cure should
be attempted by mesmerism, and describes all the phenomena
himself; one of an epileptic boy at Jena, magnetised by Pro-
fessor Kieser‘4, with the effect of producing various nervous
symptoms, coma, convulsions, chorea, tetanus, and at length
perfect sleep-waking, in which, though the eye appeared quite
blind, objects of sight were recognised by his toes, fingers,
elbows, shoulders, abdominal and facial surface, chin, and point
of the nose. Similar cases without end are recorded in works on
mesmerism.¢


* Traitement Magnétique de la Dem. N. vol. i.

> Material fiir die Anthrop. vol. ii.

© Biblioth. du Magn. Animal, vol. iii. p. 126.

4 Archiv fur den thierischen Magnetismus, vol. iii. No. 2.

“ © The work of Mr. Colquhoun is meritorious in a literary point of view —
for the industry and ardour employed in it, and for the total disregard of the
laughter of the ignorant and prejudiced world at large, and of the contempt
of men who, eminent in one department of science, consider themselves autho-
rities in matters which they have never studied. It is valuable also for the
translation of the French Report, which had never been published and was
merely lithographed and distributed among the members of the Academy. But
I fear it is calculated to do far more harm than good from its displaying en-
thusiasm, and an inordinate love of the marvellous, whether true or false, in-
stead of knowledge and judgment. It contains an Appendix, entitled, 4 New
Theory of Physics, which any one acquainted with physics will perceive to be
replete with mistatements and illogical inferences. Phrenology he abhors,
and displays the grossest ignorance of it, making statements totally at variance

ZZ2


690 MESMERISM.


My readers will remember the extraordinary, but unquestion-
able, case of Colonel Townsend (supra, p. 485. sqq.), who some


bal


with facts.* (Vol. ii. p. 120.sq., 150.) So credulous is he, that he considers the
learned and amiable Swedenborg to have been naturally in a state of magnetic
illumination, whom any one conversant with Swedenborg’s theological writings,
and with the history of insanity, must know to haye been a monomaniac for
thirty years. The mad Joan of Arc he supposes to have been in an habitual crisis.
He believes every childish tale without a shadow of authenticity (vol. i. p. xxx.
87. sq.), every absurdity advanced by mesmerisers,—that mesmerised people speak,
not merely understand, when spoken to by others influencing them mesmerically,
languages unknown to them; he applies ridiculously extravagant terms of
praise to ordinary persons, and considers a certain production as highly satis-
factory, —just what he himself would have executed, — but which any man of
sense and good feeling will agree with me to have been too contemptible, intel-


* As a specimen of his knowledge and mind, I refer to a note in vol. ii. p. 153.
He has “ good reason to believe” that the brain is the seat of the operations of
intellect, but equally good to hold “ that the ganglionic system, the nerves of
_ the chest and abdomen, is the primary seat of the affections!” Love, hate, jea-
lousy, &c. alter the functions and even the structure of these organs, and any
effect of these passions “ upon the brain appears to be merely secondary and
sympathetic!” Shame makes the cheek blush; shame therefore has its pri-
mary seat in the cheeks. We may go farther: disorder of the stomach causes
headach ; dyspepsia therefore has its primary seat in the head, and any effect
produced upon the stomach appears merely secondary and sympathetic.

I must take this opportunity of supplying an omission on the subject of phreno-
logy. All persons give Dr. Spurzheim the credit of inventing the term phrenology
for his master’s science: and he takes this credit, for, in his Phrenolog, » vol. i.
p- 12., he says, “ In extending my views, I have found it necessary to change
the name again. I have chosen that of phrenology, which is derived from two
Greek words, ¢pxy, mind, and doves, a discourse, and I understand by it the
doctrine of the special phenomena of the mind, and of the relations between the
mental dispositions and the body, particularly the brain.” Now, Dr. Forster,
in his Recueil des Ouvrages et des Pensées dun Physicien et Metaphysicien, par
Thomas Forster, Francfort sur le Mein, 1836, p. 12., proves that he himself gave
the name: ‘TI introduced my friend (Dr. Spurzheim) to the converzationi of
Sir Joseph Banks, which were held every Sunday evening in Soho Square, and
to many other men of science; but the greatest benefit I rendered him was
to give him a suitable name for his system. In 1816 I published my Sketch of


the Phrenology of Gall and Spurzheim, London, 1816;—a name which the
science has never lost,” {


MESMERISM. 691


time before his death possessed the power of gradually reducing
the action of his heart till it became imperceptible and for half


ee


lectually and morally, for me to condescend to notice. Materialism is as great a
horror to him as phrenology ; and he fancies that mesmerism proves the existence
of a soul independent of body, and is doing wonders by weaning people “ from
the deadly error of materialism and infidelity, and giving birth to a sound and re-
ligious faith.” (Vol.ii. p.176.) He is thus ignorant that materialists may not only
believe in God, but in the divine authority of Scripture; and more honour Scripture
by looking implicitly in full faith to it alone, as God’s authority, for their belief
in a future state, than those who endeavour to make its declarations more pro-
bable by fancying a soul immortal in its own nature and independent of matter,
when the Scripture tells us we shall rise as matter, — with bodies, and go to
heaven with bodies, where Christ, God himself, sits bodily, — as matter, flesh,
blood, and bones, in the words of the Church of England. (See my arguments
at pages 39. sqq., 360. sqq- ) ,

He supposes that, when Negretti had dressed a salad and then ate first cabbage
and then tart instead, without perceiving the trick, and did not know that he
was drinking water when he had called for wine, his “ soul only was busy,
without any co-operation of the body.” (Vol. i, p. 344. sq.) Negretti’s im-
material soul was resident in his brain, however, at the time, because Ne-
gretti was eating and drinking and doing a great many things with his body set
in action by his brain, which was evidently hard at work. He conceives that
in sleep there is always dreaming,— that the soul can never sleep, but is always
at work; and that, when we are conscious of dreaming, it is only that the
soul is struggling to manifest its independent activity without the co-operation
of the bodily organs. (Vol. ii. p.121.) It is a pity that the soul does not suc-
ceed; for, when acting only half followed by the brain, it works much worse
than when completely so, our dreams being generally absurdities. (See supra,
p- 626.) I wonder why we should not recollect what our soul does in sound
dreamless sleep without the co-operation of the brain: surely it must have


memory. I wonder why, if it works so well without the brain, nature entangles


it in a brain at all.
In mesmeric sleep-waking he contends that all has proceeded without the


brain. The sleep-waker “‘ remembers nothing, because the soul acts perfectly
without the body, and every thing has taken place out of the brain, since we
have seen that the fluid goes in search of objects.” (Vol. ii. p.159.; vol. i.
p. 302.) In the subsequent fit, however, all is remembered, and yet the fluid
must be again gone out in search, It must, therefore, be at home and abroad
at the same time. So powerful does he believe the soul unencumbered by
body to be in sleep-waking, that he actually declares not only that he is not
aware of a sleep-waker perishing in the dangers which he frequently encounters,
but that © so long as he is left undisturbed in his proceedings he acts fearlessly
and is safe,”—* that he is protected from injury by other means and guarantees
of security than those by which his conduct is regulated in his ordinary waking
22S


692 MESMERISM.


an hour he appeared really dead. Bernier informs us that In-
dian Bramins and Fakirs can throw themselves into somnam-


 ——


state.” I have frequently read in the newspaper of persons opening the
window and being dashed to pieces in their sleep. But, waving this, we
saw that Negretti struck himself against a door which was shut without his
knowledge, and once burt himself severely against a wall (p. 640.) : that Galen
was awakened by striking against a stone: and that Mr. Dubree in his sleep
threw himself out of the window and broke his leg. Besides the soul must be
very stupid in sleep-waking, while it is doing the more wonderful things, —
seeing with the surface, it is not aware of half that is existing and doing
around. (See for instance supra, p. 635. 637. 640. sq.) Supposing that persons
perceive, independently of touch, by their surface, this shows no immaterial
substance independent of matter to be at work, for the material surface is con-
cerned in the operation. If the mesmerised person has intelligence of the past,
present, and future, in regard to others as soon as they are put into relation with
him by contact or intermediate communication, the unconnected, detached, imma-
teria] substance must be a strange substance, which, to do these wonders, requires
material bodies and their conjunction. At any rate, there is no detached im-
material essence at work. But I am weary of such nonsense. Any person of
common discernment, unbewildered by fancies and unfettered by the intolerance
of conceit and prejudice, must perceive that all the phenomena of sleep-waking
-are the effects of disorder of the matter called nervous system ; coexist or are
variously interchanged with all kinds of disorders of this part of the animal body ;
and are often attended by common bodily symptoms — heat, pain, throbbing,
flushing of the head, &c.; and arise from the same causes as other nervous
diseases, — mechanical injury, derangement of some distant part, &c. ; and are
sometimes hereditary. Brutes are influenced by mesmerism like human beings ;
and even vegetables, and inanimate matter. If mesmerism can act at a dis-
tance, so, let us remember, can gravitation, affinity, and other properties of
inanimate matter. The soul, in the mesmerised, has disconnected itself from
the brain! the fluid (is the fluid the soul? is not fluid still matter?) has gone
out in search of objects! Where is it? and when out, how happens it to learn
so little? to see only what is passing with respect to certain persons? to see
only one person perhaps dying ? or does the soul of the dying person go to its
friends for a moment and show itself in.those remarkable cases of the fancied
sight of dying distant friends? The soul flies out under the manipulations of
the magnetiser, and then flies away home again, knowing its way to the original
skull, like a little material dickybird. Mr, Colquhoun’s views are fit only for
old divines and nursery maids. An enlightened Christian will scorn the support
of any thing for his revelation but its plain evidences; these he will consider
all-sufficient ; and above all will he scorn the assistance of mesmerism, when
he reflects, — a fact which Mr. Colquhoun does not mention, that some of the
greatest mesmerists, — those who believe things which I will not believe till I see
them, but which he believes, —contend that all the prophecies of the Old and New


MESMERISM. 693


- bulism, and even teach the art.f Cardanus professed to be able
to place himself in ecstatic insensibility.s St. Austin tells of a
priest, named Restitutus, who could become insensible and lie like
a dead man whenever he pleased, insensible to blows, punctures,
burning, though if persons spoke loudly he heard something
like distant sounds.» We have a modern account of a similar
nature: — A man in India, “is said by long practice, to have
acquired the art of holding his breath by shutting his mouth and
stopping the interior opening of the nostrils with his tongue; he
also abstains from solid food for some days previous to his in-
terment; so that he may not be inconvenienced by the contents
of his stomach, while put up in his narrow grave ; and, moreover,
he is sewn up in a bag of cloth, and the cell is lined with ma-
sonry and floored with cloth, that the white ants and other
insects may not easily be able to molest him. The place in
which he was buried at Jaisulmer is a small buildimg about twelve
feet by eight, built of stone; and in the floor was a hole about
three feet long, two and a half feet wide, and the same depth,
or perhaps a yard deep, in which he was placed in a sitting
posture, sewed up in his shroud, with his feet turned inwards
towards the stomach, and his hands also pointed inwards towards
the chest. Two heavy slabs of stone, five or six feet long, and
broad enough to cover the mouth of the grave, so that he could


Testament, and all the miracles relating to the animal frame, were only so much
mesmerism, and that Christ was but an extraordinary mesmeriser. A celebrated
living mesmerist asserted this in a public lecture at Montpellier, and the people
soon afterwards took up stones to stone him and endeavoured to drive him out
of their city. Mr. Colquhoun himself quotes at great length a fierce tirade
against the Bible, calculated, I should think, to produce great irreverence of
the book.

Mr. Colquhoun would haye rendered real service to mesmerism, if, instead
of compiling so much rubbish, and displaying such ignorance and credulity,
with a dogmatism and coarseness (vol. i. p. 136. ; vol. ii. p. 162. sqq-) which
have prevented me from being at all delicate with respect to him, he had col-
lected unquestionable facts only and gone to work experimentally, like a phi-
losopher, and communicated his results to the public.

f Cérémonies et Coutumes réligieuses, t. vi. p. 188.

= “ Quoties volo, extra sensum quasi in ecstasin transeo.”” De rerum varietate,
1]. viii. c. 43.

h De civitate Dei ; all quoted in Isis revelata, vol. i. p, 146. sq.


694 PERIODICAL PHENOMENA.


not escape, were then placed over him, and I believe a little
earth was plastered over the whole, so as to make the surface of
the grave smooth and compact. The door of the house was
also built up, and people placed outside, so that no tricks might
be played nor deception practised. At the expiration of a full
month, that is to say this morning, the walling of the door was
broken, and the buried man dug out of the grave; Trevelyan’s
moonshee only running there in time to see the ripping open of
the bag in which the man had been enclosed. He was taken
out in a perfectly senseless state, his eyes closed, his hands
cramped and powerless, his stomach shrunk very much, and his
teeth jammed so fast together, that they were forced to open
his mouth with an iron instrument to pour a little water down
his throat. He gradually recovered his senses and the use of
his limbs ; and when we went to see him was sitting up, supported
by two men, and conversed with us in a low, gentle tone of
voice, saying that ‘we might bury him again for a twelvemonth
if we pleased.’” The narrator is Lieut. A. H. Boileau, an officer of
engineers, employed on the extensive trigonometrical survey of
India. The Indian is now alive, and he voluntarily agreed with
Esur-Lal, one of the ministers of the Muharawul of Jaisulmer, to
be buried for a month. There may be after all some trick ;
but Cornet Macnaghten once suspended him for thirteen days
‘1a close wooden box. Previously to his interments he takes
milk only, and of that no more than is sufficient to support life :
and during it his hair ceases to grow.!


Besrpes sleep, various diurnal revolutions take place in the ani-
mal system. We have seen that the pulse is generally thought to
be quicker in the. evening than in the morning: that the form-
ation of carbonic acid in the lungs was found by Dr. Prout
in experiments upon himself to increase from daybreak to noon,
to decrease from noon to sunset: that muscular power in Dr.
Edward’s experiments increased during the first half of the day
and decreased in the latter. I have noticed for twenty years a


' India Journal of Medical and Physical Science.


SLEEP. 695


diurnal revolution in my intellect and feelings: in the morning
my intellect is stronger, as is that of all persons necessarily after
repose; but in the evening all my social feelings are strikingly
more acute. I often am deeply distressed in the evening, when
reflecting on the loss or absence of those dear to me, and at the
misfortunes of others not connected with me, till the very mo-
ment I go to bed and fall asleep; and in the morning can reflect
upon the very same things with coolness, and perhaps am
indisposed to reflect upon them at all.

Again, brutes have their seasons, — periods in which certain
propensities become ungovernable, — for travelling, for singing,
building, for the joys of love.

Morbid phenomena frequently have periodical recurrences —
fever, pain, epilepsy, &c.,— and the intermission may be hours,
days, weeks, months, years.


All brutes, probably, except those whose life is of very short duration, sleep.
They sleep, however, at different periods of the twenty-four hours; so that
according to their waking period they have been divided into diurnal, crepus-
cular, and nocturnal. Though darkness is not the cause of sleep, its effect
upon diurnal birds is strikingly shown, if darkness supervenes in the day: I
have been amused to see my birds go to sleep in the morning during a solar
eclipse, and awake again when it was over. Those which prey by night, like
the cat, see better in darkness from the structure of their eyes, and pass the
greater part of their time in sleep; while those which do not, are awake the
greater portion of the twenty-four hours. The former are said to reverse their
natural habits if in captivity, and to sleep at night. Carnivorous brutes sleep more
than herbivorous. Most brutes, we are informed, sleep longer in winter than in
summer. Brutes generally have a certain character of sleep ; all hares, cats,
birds (a goose is a far better night watch than a dog), &c. being light sleepers:
bears, badgers, turtles, &c. heavy sleepers. Some, as the hare, always sleep
with their eyes open (Dr. Macnish, p. 25. sqq.): some sleep well standing,
and horses have been known to stand for thirty days. Those which eat at long
intervals, as ‘some reptiles, have been observed to sleep for days after their
enormous meal.

Plants have been said to sleep, from periodic changes in the position of an
entire leaf or of the several leaflets of which a compound leaf is formed. The
leaf stalks bend upwards or downwards, so that the flattened surface of the leaf
is elevated or depressed: the upper surface of some leaflets and the under of
others is brought together. These changes are influenced by light and heat,
but not primarily induced. For, in a darkened room, the leaflets of sensitive


696 HYBERNATION.


plants periodically fold and open: if excluded from light by day, and exposed
to strong lamp-light by night, the periods of sleep become irregular at first, but
generally, at length, the leaves close by day and open at night. The alternate
opening and closing of flowers is analogous, but take place at different periods
in different species, and not at the same period with the same changes in the
leaves. An acacia has closed its leaves and expanded its flowers at sunset, and
expanded its leaves and closed its flowers at sunrise. (Prof. Henslow’s Prin-
ciples of Descriptive and Physiological Botany, in Lardner’s Cyclopedia, p. 171. 8q-)

The functions of plants are very periodical : leafing and flowering occur at
certain periods. ‘The regular return of the seasons influences their periodicity,
but there is a natural independent tendency to it which, though assisted by the
vicissitudes of the season, causes the changes of individuals to be considerably
accelerated or retarded. (Prof. Henslow, 1. c. p. 149. sq-)


The phenomena of hybernating animals, which grow dull on the approach of
winter, and at length fall asleep, continuing so till the return of mild weather,
and generally endeavouring to be as little exposed to noise, motion, and all causes
of excitement, and to lose as little heat during the approaching cold as possible,
by coiling themselves up and getting into holes and warm situations, covering
themselves with leaves, &c. (and all the classes of animals, except birds, contain
species that have the faculty of living in this state), are precisely analogous,
though very different in degree, to those of common sleep. ‘The sensibility and
all the functions are lessened, the temperature becomes nearly as low that of the
surrounding medium, the circulation slow, respiration almost or quite impercep-
tible, and digestion suspended. Although all activity is thus reduced in the
hybernating state, vitality becomes more tenacious,—is less easily extinguished.
Mangili cut off the head and neck of a marmot in the state of hybernation in
March, and put it in spirits, yet movements were evident in it at the end of half
an hour, and galvanism produced strong contractions in pieces of voluntary
muscles three hours after they had been cut off ; and eyen four elapsed before
their excitability was much diminished: the heart beat for three hours after de-
capitation. He made the same examination in June with a marmot which had
been out of hybernation two months; the muscles showed little excitability
under galvanism at the end of éwo hours, and the heart ceased to beat in fifty
minutes after decapitation. (Annales de Museum, t, X. p- 455. sqq:) This is
what we should have expected. The augmented tenacity of life, which allows
food, air, and heat to be dispensed with in whole or in part, is likely to pervade
the muscles and indeed every part of the frame; just as the necessity for air,
food, and heat is in all other cases proportionate to the want of tenacity of
excitability in muscles and of all vital properties. ‘The sensibility is not so dimi-
nished but that “the slightest touch applied to one of the spines of the hedge-
hog immediately roused it to draw a deep and sonorous inspiration ; the merest
shake” induces a few respirations in the bat. (Dr. Marshall Hall, Phil.

Trans. 1832.*)


Panera ee ee mee ee eee ee eS


* This gentleman endeavours to show that an inverse ratio prevails between
respiration and irritability, in which word he includes both tenacity and sus-


HYBERNATION. 697


This torpidity is produced by a deficiency of external excitants, usually by cold
and want of food, and, in the language of Brown, is a state of direct debility,
while our ordinary sleep is one of indirect debility, —exhaustion. No struc-
tural peculiarity is discoverable, which enables certain animals to exist in the
torpid state.

Such animals at all times produce less heat, and vary more with the surround-
ing medium, than others, so that Dr. Edwards in an hour cooled a dormouse 36°
by surrounding it with a freezing mixture, which caused a reduction of not more
than 5° or 6° in adult birds and guinea-pigs exposed to it for even a longer time.
(I. c. p. 154. sq.) Some which do not hybernate resemble them in this inferior
power; mice, for example, which, therefore, at all ages and seasons make
themselves nests. (p. 259.) On the other hand, hybernating animals are not all
equally deficient in the power of resisting the influence of surrounding low tem-
peratures ; dormice are the most so, marmots the least ; so that animals which
preserve their own temperature in low media, and those which readily follow the
surrounding temperature, are not widely separated, but insensibly run into each
other, (I. c. p. 257. sq.) to say nothing of the inferior power of the newly-born
among many of the former, and among all if born before full time, and of the
various degrees of this power in different adults, and in all at different seasons of
the year. (See section on animal heat.) Cold produces sleep in all, and if the
sleep is indulged, death is the result in those which cannot hybernate. Those
which can, become more and more torpid, by the mere continuance of the same
degree of cold. A very intense degree of cold has been found actually to arouse
animals in a state of torpidity, but the excitement of the functions could not con-
tinue long, and death ensued. (p. 398.) It appeared necessary that respiration
should be suspended in an experiment of M. De Saissy, who, by mere cold,
could not produce torpor in a marmot till he closed the lid of the vessel in which
it was placed. (p. 154.) Hence, exposure to carbonic acid, hydrogen, &c., in
this state, was found by Spallanzini to have no ill effect upon a torpid marmot.
(Rapports del’ Air, t. ii. p. 207.) Yet respiration has often seemed not to cease
entirely. (See Dr. Reeve, Essay on the Torpidity of Animals.) ‘The blood has
been found in a certain degree coagulated in torpid bats. (Hunter, On the
Blood, p. 25.) Cold, at any time of the year, will produce the torpid state, but
want of food must greatly assist in lessening the power of maintaining temper-
ature. On the other hand, a continual good supply of food and warm temper-
ature increases their power of evolving heat, and enables them to resist the power
of cold, so that, by domestication, some cease to hybernate in the winter. (Dr,
Edwards, |. c. p. 472.) Dr. Edwards found that the temperature of hybernating
animals sinks considerably during sleep, even in summer. (p. 473.)

Fish, and other cold-blooded animals, will survive anintense torpidity. ‘The
fish froze,” says Captain Franklin, “ as fast as they were taken out of the nets,


ceptibility. I conceive that the whole is but one fact: —that animals which
retain their powers well under privations, must be those which require less
frequent and less abundant supplies of food, air, &c,; and that respiration is
less in them from the less necessity of stimuli to support the system.


r


698 HYBERNATION.


and in a short time became a solid mass of ice, and by a blow or two of the
hatchet were easily split open, when the intestines might be remoyed in one
lump. If in this completely frozen state, they were thawed before the fire, they
recovered their animation.” ‘* We have seen a carp recover so far as to leap
about with much vigour, after it had been frozen for six and thirty hours.’”’
(Journey to the Polar Sea, p. 248.) Izaak Walton (The Complete Angler, p 257.)
quotes Gesner for the fact of some large breams being put into a pond which
was frozen the next winter into one mass of ice so that not one could be found,
and all swimming about again when the pond thawed in the spring, —a thing
“< almost as incredible,” says the sentimental sinner, as Lord Byron calls him, “ as
the resurrection to an atheist.”

Insects easily bear torpidity from cold. In Newfoundland, for example,
Captain Buchan saw a frozen lake, which in the evening was all still and frozen
over, but, as soon as the sun had dissolved the surface in the morning, was in a
state of animation, owing, as appeared by close inspection, to myriads of flies
let loose, while many still remained “ infixed and frozen round.” Ellis also
mentions that a large black mass, like coal or peat, upon the hearth, dissolved,
when thrown upon the fire, into a cloud of musquitoes. (Quarterly Review,
1821, April, p. 200.) Those insects which hybernate are not thought by Kirby
and Spence (Entom. vol. ii. p. 460. sqq.) to prepare for and enter into that state
solely from cold, &c., as they do so when the season comes round, although the
weather be as warm as previously, and do not before this period, though the
temperature chance to be as low as it usually is in the season of hybernation.

Some animals become torpid on being deprived of moisture, — the most


‘simple infusoria, rotifera, vibriones for instance. A common garden snail


falls torpid if put in a dry place, and may be revived at any time by the
application of a little water. Moisture has revived some animalcules after a
torpidity of twenty-seven years. (Spallanzani, Opuscoli di Fisica animale e ve-
getabile.) The same is true of some of the most simple vegetables, as mosses.
The microscopic wheel animal, after remaining three or four years as a-shri-
velled point, capable of being broken to pieces like a crystal of salt, is still re-
coverable by a drop of water: and the eel of blighted corn (vidrio), after twenty
or thirty years. Yet electricity destroys their capability of resuscitation, _ Most
vegetables become torpid in winter. Many lichens and mosses, dried in her-
baria,-have been restored to life by moisture after a century or two. Seeds
and bulbs which have remained for centuries in the bowels of the earth have
sprung into life on being thrown into a more congenial soil; and bulbs, taken
from the hand of a mummy found in one of the pyramids, after having been
immured between two and three thousand | years, produced unknown plants
when sown in one of our botanic gardens. (Dr. Fletcher, 1. c. P. ii. by -p. 144.)
Still more lately, a writer of rank, Baron Herberstein, who was twice ambas-
sador in Russia from the Emperor Ferdinand, informs us, in his Commentaries
on Russian History, that, in the northern parts of Muscovy, near the Oby, on
the borders of Tartary, a people called Leucomori hybernate “like tortoises,
under ground,” “ quite frozen,” from the 27th of November to the 23d of
April, when “ they come to life again.” No specimens haye yet been imported
into this country,


699


CHAP. XXVIII.


OF THE GENERAL DIFFERENCES OF THE SEXES.


Tue functions which we have hitherto examined are for the
existence and well-being of the individual. But, as he is destined
to exist for a short time only, organs with other functions are
established, the object of which is the production of other beings,
like himself, to succeed him. These generative organs are not all
supplied to the same system, but are divided betwéen two; and the
two systems, possessing together the complement of such organs,
are brought into temporary contact and co-operation. The system
with one set of organs is termed male, and the other female.
The former excites the new being into development : the latter
produces the germ, retains it within her, and nourishes it till it is
launched into the world; and even then she nourishes it with a pecu-
liar secretion, furnished by a pair of distinct organs termed breasts.
To accomplish these purposes, two portions in each half of the
brain are developed, endowed with two feelings, of which one pro-
pels the sexes to the union and excitement of their respective gene-
rative organs, the other is an ardent love of the offspring, and it,
though necessary chiefly in the mother and therefore stronger in
her, exists also in the father, since the love of the mother would be
insufficient, as she, from being constantly occupied with nursing the
young, could not fully procure subsistence, clothing, and lodging,
and could not alone protect them, and advance them afterwards
in the world. Every thing in the conformation and structure of
each of the two sexes corresponds with these purposes. The
male is formed for corporeal and intellectual power; the female
for gentleness, affection, and delicacy of feeling.


- “ For contemplation he, and valour, form’d 5
For softness she, and sweet attractive grace,” 4


Nature makes every thing answer many more than its fundamental
purposes. The flowers and fruit of plants are fundamentally for the


* Paradise Lost, b.iv. 297,
ow


700 GENERAL DIFFERENCES


production of new beings. But the flowers serve to animals as
objects of beauty to the sight, of pleasure to the smell and to the
taste, and as nourishment ; the fruit serves as materials of nourish-
ment to an infinity of animals ; and infinitely more of both flowers
and fruit is produced, and serves these secondary purposes, than
ever comes to answer the fundamental purpose of the production of
a new individual. The whole arrangement of agencies through-
out the world appears to be analogous to this. In the case before
us, the sexual qualities of the two sexes are made to answer far
more than the mere production, development, and support of new
individuals: a great amount of pleasure is secured to each in the
contemplation and society of the other, and the act of generation is
the summit of their enjoyment of sensation. The love of the off-
spring is another source of endless delight. The highest degree of
friendship or permanent attachment is the ordinary joint result of
the sexual propensity and the continual association of two beings
of opposite sexes ; and thus still more pleasure is secured. To
support and protect the female and the offspring becomes a great
source of the intellectual and corporeal exertions of the male ;
and the principal excitement to activity in the female is to admi-
nister to her children and prepare comforts for her husband on
his return from his labours and the annoyances of the world.

The man’s immediate share in generation is short and occasional ;
the woman’s long and almost constant. She begins the produc-
tion of germs before impregnation; she remains pregnant a
long period; she goes through the process of parturition ; and
then suckles for a length of time; so that a far longer portion of
her destiny than that of man is for the preservation of the species.
Love has been said by Madame de Staél to form her history ; while
it is but an episode in the life of a man. We of the other sex
should delight in seeing the intellect and taste of women culti-
vated to the utmost of their capabilities; but it is clear that
woman is not intended for the rough business of the world, and
that her perfection is best displayed in quiet intellectual and
elegant occupations, and in care and activity directed to the
happiness of those individuals to whom she is attached.

«‘ For nothing lovelier can be found


In woman, than to study household good,
And good works in her husband to promote.” °


° Parad. Lost, b. ix. 232.


OF THE SEXES, 701


Women ill appreciate the true loveliness of their sex who wish to
resemble man in their mind and occupations.


** All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded : Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows,’’*


The whole mental and corporeal structure of the two sexes is
affected by and is in conformity with the respective procreative and
parental duties of each. The organs of generation and all the
parts connected with them are far larger in the female than in
the male, thus harmonising with the greater share that woman is
destined to take in the continuation of the species.

“In general, each sex has its peculiar form; more or less
striking after birth, but not very obvious in the young feetus; for
the genitals of the male and female, at this period, are not at first
sight different, on account of the clitoris being remarkably largee,
and the scrotum scarcely formed.

“ During infancy, the general figure is but little different, but it
becomes more so as age advances, when the round and plump
breasts, the general conformation, the delicacy, softness, and the


© Parad. Lost, b. viii. 551.
“«Melch. Sebiz, De differentiis corporis virilis et muliebris. Argent. 1629. 4to.
¥F. Thierry, E. preter genitalia serus inter se discrepant. Paris. 1750. 4to.
Dictionn. Encyclopéd. (Yverdon edit.) vol. xviii. art. Femme, and vol. xlii.
art. ViriL.
J. Fidel Ackermann, De discrimine sewuum preter genitalia. Mogunt. 1788,
8yo.
The same writer’s Historia et ichnographia infantis androgyni. Jen. 1805.
fol. p. 61. sq.
P. Roussel, Systeme physique et moral dela Femme. 2d edit. Paris. 1803. 8vo.
Ad. F, Nolte, Dissertat. sistens momenta quedam circa sevus differentiam.
Gotting. 1788. 8vo.
J. Louis Moreau de la Sarthe, Histoire naturelle de la Femme. Paris. 1802.
vols. 8vo.
Autenreith, Archiv. fiir die Physiol. t. vii. p. 3. sq.”
* “Langguth, Embryo 34 mensium qua faciem externam. Viteb. 1751. 4to.
James Parsons, Phil. Trans. vol, xlvii. p- 143.
Morgagni, De sedibus et causis morborum. xlviii. 10.”
* «This I lately found confirmed in twin abortions of different sexes and of


oO


about sixteen weeks’ formation, in which, although they were most beautifully
and correctly made, the difference of the genitals was not at first discoverable

In every other respect, —in the general figure, physiognomy, the dimensions of
the loins, &c., they were perfectly similar.”


SA


702 GENERAL DIFFERENCES


proportionally low stature of the female,” who is one sixth
shorter, ‘‘form a striking contrast with the sinewy and robust
body of the male.”

Her face and brain are absolutely smaller than those of man, the
face likewise proportionally so; yet such is the relative size of the
cranium, that, while in the male the head, including the teeth, is
as 1 to 8 or 10, in the female it is as 1 to 6, of the weight of the
rest of the skeleton.

Her form is more delicate: her surface has no muscular pro-
tuberances, but is beautifully rounded; her legs, therefore, have
no calves, but, like the arms and fingers, gently taper ; her feet
and hands are small; her neck longer, and without projection.
From her smaller stature and the greater length of her abdominal
and lumbar regions, it follows that the middle point, which
lies at the pubes in the male, is situated higher in the female.
Her abdomen is more prominent and rounded: the line drawn
from the centre of the sternum to the pubes is parallel with the
axis of the body in woman, but converges towards the axis in man.
“Her hips are broader, not, however, if well formed, broader
than the shoulders ; her buttocks larger”; and these and the hips
fatter.» The abdomen and pelvis receive a larger quantity of
blood then in the male, the descending aorta and iliacs being
larger and of less thickness, the former augmenting more as it
descends, and the latter dividing into more branches. The nerves
of the pelvic plexus are nearly as large again in woman as in
man; and the branches of both mesenteric plexuses to the geni-
tals also much more voluminous. Her thighs are more voluminous


® “Consult, besides our great countryman Alb. Diirer, Vier Biicher von
menschlicher Proportion. Nurenb. 1528. fol. the two celebrated male and fe-
male figures, painted by Titian, or one of his school, in Vesalius’s Epitome suor.
libror. d. c. h. anatome. Basil. 1542. fol.

Also the three delineated by that excellent artist, Jer. Laidresse, in Bidloo,
tab. i, ii, iii.

And Girardet’s figures in the Cours complet d’ Anatomie gravé par A. E.
Gautier, et expliqgué par M. Jadelot. Nantes. 1773. large fol.”

" Among the Boshmans of the Cape of Good Hope, — people at the bottom
of the human scale, the fat actually forms a large cushion, on which these
women are generally resting, and which trembles like jelly as they walk. One
of them, termed the Hottentot Venus, died at Paris, and an enormous mass of
very soft fat was found under the muscles. Some monkeys, the Papios and
and Mandrells, have masses of fat in their bare buttocks,


OF THE SEXES. 703


and distant from each other, and “in their descent gradually ap-
proach each other towards the knees,” whence she finds a diffi-
culty, and waddles if she attempts rapid walking or running;
the only movements she executes without grace, as Rousseau
remarks. The difficulty of quick progression agrees with her
destiny of being pursued and overtaken by the other sex.
The greater capacity of the female pelvis, for containing the
chief organs of generation and affording a passage to the child,
arises from the greater expansion of the ossa ilei, the larger
angle of the junction of the ossa pubis, and the greater con-
cavity and breadth of the os sacrum: the os coccygis likewise
is more slender and moveable. Her shoulders stand less forward
and distant from the trunk. Her clavicles are less bent; the thorax
more projecting, whence deeper, although narrower and shorter ;
the sternum shorter and broader ; the cartilago ensiformis shorter ;
the two superior ribs flatter, and her chest “is more moveable
above.” Camper remarks that, if the male and female forms are
traced within two ellipses of equal dimensions, the male shoulders
will stand without and the pelvis within, while the female shoulders
will remain within and the pelvis without.i Her lungs are conse-
quently smaller. The absence of the projection in front of the
neck, so remarkable in the male, arises from her larynx being
more contracted and scarcely prominent: whence, too, her voice
is less grave. The os hyoides also is much smaller.

The heart is smaller, and the coats of the arteries proportion-
ately thinner than those of the veins, in the female. Her blood is
said by Lecanu to contain more water and albumen, and less
fibrine and red particles, than the blood of man. Her whole
system is softer and more watery, and she is less prone to dis-
eases of induration. Even male dicecious plants are drier than
the female.

‘The hair of her head is commonly longer: but other parts,
which are covered with hair in men, are either quite smooth in
women, as the chest and face; or less hairy, as the perinzeum ; or

' Mémoire sur le beaw Physique.

K It cannot but be a custom most insulting to nature to shave off the beard,
which, if kept in proper trim, as birds and beasts instinctively keep their plumage


and hair in good order, completes the perfection of man’s face and the


external
distinction of the sexes, and, whatever ladies pretend to the contrary,


renders him
far more attractive to women, at any rate when custom has had time to lessen


their seeming repugnance ; for their preference to men with good whiskers is


34 S


704 GENERAL DIFFERENCES


smaller in circumference, as the pudenda; or covered with merely
a very delicate and soft down, as the arms and legs.”! In men
the hair frequently ascends in the centre from the pubes to the
navel; but very rarely, if ever, in women.

“The female skin is more delicate, and of a clearer white,”’
and the more so “ from the larger quantity of fat beneath it.”

“Her cellular membrane is more lax and yielding, so as to
dilate more easily during pregnancy.”

“The muscular system is weaker, and the muscles (with the
exception of the glutei, psow, quadrati lumborum, and a few
others) proportionally smaller.”

«The bones are, ceteris paribus, smoother and rounder, the
cylindrical more slender, and the flat thinner ; to pass over indi-
vidual differences, v. c. the very slight prominence of the frontal
sinuses, the more elliptic edges of the alveoli, &c.”™

The whole female system is more excitable, though less endur-
ing. <‘ The pulse is, ceteris paribus, more frequent,” and more
easily quickened ; the brain more liable to sudden emotion, which,
however, is shorter: ‘the growth of the body more rapid; and


nnn nnn nee TEI nEnEE nS


certain. Shaving was forbidden by Moses, and therefore, according to Jews and
Christians, by God: it was a severe punishment among the Indians, and an irre-
parable insult among the Germans. The Osmanli swears by his beard, and spends
half his day upon it. Shaving prevails in Europe because the kings of France
set the example to their courtiers, who were followed by the nation, which for-
merly gave the ton to neighbouring nations and therefore was at length followed
by all in this troublesome and unmanly fashion. (Burdach, § 18.)

1 An instance is related by M. Roux of a woman forty years of age, who had
one child, and whose breasts were well developed, having a strong and long
beard: the lobes of her ears were also covered with hair. (dnatomie descriptive,
par Xav. Bichat, t. v-)

It is remarkable that, while the human female is so divinely beautiful in every
point, hen birds are often an absolute contrast to the cock, from having far less
beautiful and copious plumage, and smaller and less beautiful combs, and
little or no beauty and power of voice. Many male fish are more beautiful
than the female. But the skin and its appendages, hair, nails, horns, claws,
&c., are greater generally in male animals than in the female: and the odorous
secretions of the skin and various parts connected with it in men and male
brutes are more abundant and powerful.

m «JT have described these differences more fully throughout the skeleton, in
my Osteological work, p. 87. sq. 2d edit.

Compare Sémmerring’s Tabula sceleti feeminei. Francof. 1796. fol. with the
male figure in B. S. Albinus’s Tabula sceleti, tab. 1.”


OF THE SEXES. 705


the periods of dentition, puberty, and full growth earlier.” Her
body is less capable of long exertion; her “appetite for food,
and her stomach are less.” 4
Greatly inferior to man in reasoning powers, extent of views,
originality and grandeur of conception, as well as in corporeal
strength, woman possesses more acuteness of external sensation,
of apprehension, and of emotion, though a smaller range of
intelligence and less permanence of impression, more tenderness,
affection, and compassion, more of all that is endearing and capable
of soothing human woes; but less consistency, impetuosity, cou-
rage, and firmness of character, except where affection subsists.
She is more disposed to believe all things, and to confide in all
persons ; to adopt the opinions and habits of others; has no
originality, but follows and imitates man; and she cannot live
happily without attachments, and these are sincere and last-
ing, even when deserved no longer; though, from her variability
of emotion, she often quarrels temporarily with those she loves
the most;— Varium et mutabile semper feemina, from the rapid
change of her emotions, is a true character; but nothing is too
irksome, too painful, or too perilous, for a mother, a wife, or a
mistress, to endure or attempt for the object of her love.
“A thousand acts in every age will prove
Women are valiant in a cause they love.
If fate the favour’d swain in danger place,
They heed not danger, — perils they embrace,
They dare the world’s contempt — they brave their name’s disgrace.
They on the ocean meet its wild alarms,
They search the dungeon with extended arms,
The utmost trial of their faith they prove,
And yield the lover to assert their love.’’®
Woman is remarkable for the delicacy of her taste, her quick-
ness of apprehension of things within her reach of intellect, her
insight into character, and tact.P


» « Hence genuine and indubitable cases of long abstinence from food have
generally occurred in females. See, among many others, Fl. James Voltelen,
Diatr. memorabilem septennis apositia historiam evhibens. Lugd. Bat. 1777.
8vo.” And beastly gluttons have generally been men.

° Crabbe, Tales of the Hall, xxi.

? Thus, though few women can take grand political views and be political
philosophers, they are probably more fitted for the business of government than
men. “ Politics,” says Burdach, “are not above the reach of women. Indeed,
there have been many able and excellent queens. It may, indeed, be a question


Sa 4


706 GENERAL DIFFERENCES


Woman, without reflection, but intuitively, not only seizes the
character of things within her power more clearly and quickly,
but the future also; so that in exalted conditions of the mind she
predicts the best, and she has greater presence of mind. All
in her is exquisite apprehension and conception, not force and
reasoning. What man accomplishes by force, she effects by
stratagem or management.’ Being timid, credulous, and defer-
ential, she is the slave of fashion and custom, and of those habits
and opinions in which she has been brought up, or which she
hears most praised by those around her.

She has more capability of endurance of bodily and mental
anguish, though her emotions, like those of children, are rapid,
and from slight causes; and like them she passes in a moment
from gaiety to grief, and in her distress sheds tears, which are
extracted from man only in the deepest sorrow. Man is proud
of his force, intellectual, corporeal, and even sensual: woman is
retiring, unambitious of power, but vain of beauty and little
acquirements. Her love of offspring is far stronger, and her
sexual desire far less: she is also far more modest in sexual
points, —a circumstance agreeing with the fact of her genitals
being internal and concealed, while man’s are external and visible.

The head of the female is as different from that of the male as
her mental character. It is altogether smaller. The forehead is
smooth, from its various parts being equally developed ; full above
the nose; narrower, but of only moderate height, and gently re-
treating : the inferior parts of the sides and occiput are small
(sexual desire, instinct to take away life, courage); but the
development immediately above is proportionally considerable
(attachment, cunning); the summit of the head is proportion
ally high (veneration).t The development of the respective parts
of the brain is in precise conformity with that of the cranium.
The contrast of the small cerebellum with the long posterior
lobes of the cerebrum is very striking.

Her organs of every external sense are smaller, and their


whether, taking equal numbers, we should not find the advantage on the side
of women.”’ (1. c. § 196.)


7 "slag
The females of dogs are more sagacious in field sports than males; and the
female fox and hamster more wary. (Burdach.)


" See a delightful paper upon the female character by Mr. W. Scott, in the
Phrenological Journal, No. vi. art. 17.


<5


OF THE SEXES. 707


sensibility, like that and the excitability of her whole frame, more
exquisite, though their range of appreciation is smaller, from the
smaller size of all, and from peculiarities in the eye and ear,


Sir Everard Home suggests’, or more probably he found that
John Hunter suggested, that the sex is not determined at the first
formation of the individual, but that the parts of generation are
originally so situated, and of such a nature, that they are capable
of becoming either male or female organs when the sex is subse-
quently fixed.t His arguments are the following : — 1. The testes
and ovaria lie originally in the same situation. 2. The clitoris is
at first of great size. 3. When the female among brute mammalia
has inguinal mamme, so likewise has the male; men also possess
breasts. 4. The scrotum occupies in the male the place occu-
pied in the female by the labia, and is of the same structure with
them. 5. The nymphe of the female exactly correspond to the
preputium of the male. 6. Twins are usually of the same sex, as
if the same cause had influenced the generative organs of each ;
when they are of different sexes, it is a common remark that one of
them often does not breed, nature probably having been disturbed
in her operations. 7. When among black cattle twins are produced
of different sexes, that which appears the cow is really an imperfect
hermaphrodite, possessing a mixture of incomplete male and fe-
male organs ; sometimes, for instance, having testicles in the place
of ovaria, sometimes four substances, looking like testes and
ovaria, is generally" incapable of breeding, and vulgarly termed
a free martin ;—a circumstance in every respect analogous to


® Phil. Trans. vol. 1xxxix.

* The opinion prevailed among the Greek and Arabian physicians (Galen,
Avicenna, Agineta, Rhases), who asserted that the male and: female organs
differed in situation only, that the structure was originally the same, but that,
when the constitution had a good degree of heat, the parts protruded, and
a male was formed ; whereas, when the temperature was low, they were not ex-
cited, and remained within, giving the female sex. Swift makes Martinus Scrib-
lerus, in his Annus Mirabilis, Dec. 29. 1722, render his prophecy of the mutual


transformation of the sexes probable. Because, 1. It was an ancient doctrine


of philosophy that Adam was an hermaphrodite, and had no female mate till he
lost his innocence by a faur pas : 2. Two transformations have occurred, one well
attested by Montaigne, and another by the late Bishop of Salisbury. 3. “ Every
smatterer in anatomy knows that a woman is but an introverted man ; ane
and flatus will turn the hollow bottom of a bottle into a convexity ; but I forbear
for the sake of my modest men readers, who are in a few days to be virgins,”

" It is said to be sometimes yery prolific. ‘


w fusion


708 GENERAL DIFFERENCES OF THE SEXES.


the preceding.y It may be added that the round ligaments of
the female descend, like the two spermatic chords of the male, to
the abdominal ring ; that marsupial bones exist, without any func-
tion whatever, in the males of some marsupial animals; that the
hen has a bursa Fabricii; and that the glans clitoridis of the
female opossum is bifid. Comparative anatomy furnishes many
similar facts. The existence in both sexes of parts which can be
useful only in one was confessed by Paley to have been a com-
plete puzzle to him”: even some species of animals have various
parts that are useful only in other species. ‘These are all equally
examples of nature’s observance of general laws. Every animal is
made more or less on the same plan. Some parts are greatly deve-
loped, some little, some not at all, so that they do not exist, and
some have probably not had the germ of existence. In their de-
velopment they are variously modified ; so that what is a hand and
arm in one, is a wing in another, and a fin in another. It is the same
with even portions of parts as with parts. The facts mentioned by
Sir E. Home, therefore, do not show that the sexual organs are
the same originally, or different originally, more than other parts
are originally the same or different in different species of animals.

Mr. Knight considers that the sex of the offspring is deter-
‘mined by the female rather than by the male. He observed that
individual cows, &c., however various the males, produce one sex
rather than the other, so that he has with tolerable certainty pre-
dicted the number of male and female young; while nothing
similar was ever observable in regard to his bulls, rams, &c.
Even the external appearance and the habits of brutes and
vegetables, he has found much more, and sometimes altogether,
influenced by the female. The quantity of pollen employed in
the fecundation of female plants, he found of no importance in
this respect.*

But M. Girou de Busareingues, from repeated and extensive
experiments, ascertained that, whatever may be the influence of
particular individuals, the age of the male, among sheep and
horses, has a very great general influence upon the sex. The
younger the males, the greater the number of females produced,
and v.v. The better also the mothers were fed, the greater the
number of females and twin births.y The stronger also the


Y J. Hunter, Observations on Certain Parts of the Animal Economy, p. 55.
w Natural Theology, c. 25. p. 472.
* Phil. Trans. vol. xcix. ¥ Journal de Physiologie, t. vii.


HERMAPHRODITISM. 709


mother, and the more in her prime, the greater the number of
females ; the weaker from any cause, or if she was below or be-
yond her prime, the more males were produced. This was noticed
also among cows. Now, as the germ is furnished by the mother
before sexual intercourse, the dependence of the sex of the new
being upon the father shows that the sexual organs are, as Sir E.
Home, or probably John Hunter, suggested, the same originally.


HERMAPHRODITISM is the existence of organs of both sexes in
the same individual. They may merely coexist without union, or
they may be more or less united. The former kind of herma-
phroditism prevails naturally in the majority of plants, and espe-
cially in the most perfect, the dicotyledons; it is seen among the
entozoa, annelida, and mollusca. In the latter kind, the orifices
of the organs may open into a common cavity, as in most pla-
naria and some mollusca; may unite into one duct, as in some
mollusca ; or the canal of one genital organ may penetrate into
the other genital organ, so that the organs are more or less
mingled or fused, as in some mollusca, — in the pleuro-branchza,
for instance, the oviduct divides into two branches, one of which
runs to the external genitals, the other to the testes and external
male organs: in the Clio borealis among Pteropoda, and in the
Doris and Tritonia among Nudibranchia, the oviduct runs alto-
gether to the testes; in the Planorbis corneus, Limax ater, and
Helix, among mollusca with lungs; and in the distoma perlatum,
of Nematodes, and in the earth-worm. Natural hermaphroditism
is not known to occur among vertebrate animals.

Distinction of sex begins to appear among plants in the class
Polygamia only ; and init the plant has even hermaphrodite as well
as male and female flowers. In the class Dieecia, the distinction
is greater, — the male and female flowers are each on separate
plants: but there are no general differences in all the particulars
of the form and function of the plants themselves: hermaphrodite
flowers also are frequently seen on them; many are monocotyle-
donous, and none marked by the highest vegetable organisation.
Sexual distinction is slightly and incompletely developed among
the lowest animals, — among entozoa and mollusca ; becomes per-
manent in insects, arachnida, crustacea, and the vertebrata ; and
is most complete in man.


710 HERMAPHRODITISM.


Monstrous hermaphroditism is not uncommon in inferior ani-
mals, for instance, moths, eels, carp, crabs, each half of the
body possessing the characteristics of a different sex ; and is
the least uncommon in osseous fish: but far more common than
in any animal, among Dicecia, male flowers being frequently seen
on the female plants of Urtica dioica, Spinacia oleracea, &c.
There probably exists no authentic account of a true her-
maphrodite’, capable of impregnating and being impregnated,


% Hermaphroditus was the son of Mercury and Venus, — Hermes and Aphro-
dite, who, while bathing in a fountain of Caria, smote the heart of its presiding
nymph, Salmacis. He rejected her entreaties, and she, endeavouriug to obtain
her wishes by force, closely embraced him, and implored the gods to make them
one body ; her prayers were heard, and the characteristics of each sex were pre-
served.


Mercurio puerum diva Cithereide natum,
Naiades Ideis enutrivere sub antris ;
Cujus erat facies, in qua materque paterque
Cognosci possent; nomen quoque traxit ab illis.
Ovid, Metam. iv. 288.


Formerly, the existence of true hermaphrodites was not doubted. In Winrich
(De ortu monst. c.20.), Riolan (De hermaphr. c.8.), and Shenkius (Obs. Med.575.),
we read of a maid servant who, in 1461, was condemned to be buried alive for
having got her master’s daughter with child. Montuus declares that he knew
an hermaphrodite, supposed to be a female, who had brought her husband several
children, and was in the habit also of intriguing with females. Sanchez, the ce-
lebrated Jesuit casuist of Cordova in the 17th century (Disput. de sancti Matri-
monii Sacramento, cvi.), determines that an hermaphrodite should adopt the
predominant sex, or, in case of equality, choose one and adhere to it, nor be al-
lowed to marry till this is done. The Jewish and Canon law treat of herma-
phrodites, and Lord Coke says (lib. 1. § 1. fol. 8. of fee simple), every heir is
male, female, or hermaphrodite, i.e. both male and female, and ‘ an herma-
phrodite, which is also called an androgynus, shall be heir as male or female,
according to the kind of sex which doth prevail, and accordingly ought to be
baptized.” The ancients thought them ill omens (Cicero, De divinatione),
and drowned them, Eusebius says that the Christian emperor, Constantine,
once ordered them for destruction, because the Nile did not overflow so much as
usual. For much learned information, see Dr. Parsons On Hermaphrodites.

When there is no combination of the organs of both sexes, a little variety has
frequently given rise to a mistake in the sex. If the septum of the scrotum is
narrow, each half may so closely surround the testis as to give an appearance
of labia. If, at the same time, the urethra terminates before it reaches the ex-
tremity of the penis, and especially if the testes are ill developed,—a circumstance
very common in this malformation, the feminine appearance is much augmented.


HERMAPHRODITISM. Tel


among mammalia. Yet, occasionally, brutes of this class have
perfect organs of one sex, combined with imperfect ones of the


——————————— re ae A ee a A eae seein


As smallness of the testes is often accompanied by want of the constitutional
male characters,—beard, prominent larynx, grave voice, and broad shoulders, and
in these circumstances the female character of broad hips, breasts, &c., more or
less appears, a superficial observer may easily mistake the sex of such persons.
A deficient development, or total absence, of the testes, may be attended by all
these general effects, without malformation of the scrotum or urethra. The
malformation of the scrotum just mentioned, together with smallness of the penis,
has sometimes occasioned a mistake of the sex till the period of puberty, when
the true sex has become evident, and the individual been imagined to have changed
his sex. Ambrose Paré mentions a Marie Germain, who had been always thought
a girl; but, while she was leaping over a ditch one day at puberty, a penis sud-
denly disclosed itself and proved her to be a lad. Montaigne also mentions him
(£ssais, 1. 20.), and another to whom the same fortune happened while playing in
bed with a female. Livy and Shenkius have recorded many such. In the
Journal de Méd. Chir. et Pharm. 1816, a young man is said to have passed for a
female all his life, and was on the point of marrying with another young man,
when his parents, being aware of something wrong in his construction, and that
he had never menstruated, determined on a previous medical examination. The
doctors pronounced him (Mary) a male; he instantly burst into tears (so much
had friendship all along taken the place of love), and exclaimed, that then she
should lose her bon ami. His dress and register were changed by order of the
authorities, and he was very nearly made a soldier.

On the other hand, with a bulky clitoris, which is common in the Mandingo
and Ibbo nations, especially if accompanied by coherent labia, or by no labia, an
opening at the same time existing under it and leading to the urethra and vagina,
a female may be carelessly mistaken for a male: but the clitoris is imperforate,
and has no preputium at the lower part, and, consequently, no frenum; and a
probe passes at once into the bladder, whereas in ambiguous males, it may have far
to go. Dr. Baillie (Morb. Anat.) considers this as distinctive of the individual
being a male: but I have seen the urethra in an ambiguous male, with a narrow
scrotal septum giving the appearance of labia, cease to be more than a groove after
running a certain way from the bladder, so that a probe introduced into it
presently reached the bladder.

We thus see the origin of the stories in Virgil and Ovid of Cceneus (neis,
VI.), and Seytha (Metam. II.), whom Ausonius Gallus, from his own case,
knew to be quite unnecessary to establish the fact :


Nolo tamen veteris documenta accersere fame ;
Ecce Eco sum factus feemina de puero.


Zacchias, Quest. Med. Leg. p. 496.
On a person so metamorphosed, Bauhin made the verse —


Mas, mulier, monachus, mundi mirabile monstrum,


Vig HERMAPHRODITISM.


other®; and both they and the human subject each set imperfect,
so as to be, though in various proportion to each other in different
cases, neutrumque et utrumque.’


« Concretus sexu non perfectus utroque
Ambiguo venere, neutro potiundus amore.”’


3 el) 3 ee


@ In the Phil. Trans. 1799, Sir Everard Home describes a bull which had
begot five calves, and possessed ordinary male organs, and had the general ap-
pearance of the male, except in the flanks and hind quarters, but which had an
udder and teats affording milk, and a small vagina, incapable of admitting the
male organ.

> See a human instance in Dr. Baillie’s Morbid Anatomy. The general aspect
was masculine, except that no beard existed. There were breasts, a clitoris, and
meatus urinarius of the natural female appearance ; but a vagina only two inches
long, and terminating blindly, and no nymphz ; labia very long, and each con-
taining a body feeling like a testicle. Menstruation had not occurred. In the
Medical Repository an adult is said to be described of general masculine aspect,
having in the left groin a small scrotum containing a testicle, and on the other
side a labium; a vagina and hymen, or at least a small opening, existed, and the
urethra resembled the female; but the clitoris was 24 inches long, when not
erect, and had a groove below as if for a male urethra: menstruation had not
occurred, nor sexual desires been experienced.

M. Petit (Mém. de? Acad. des Sciences, 1729, p. 29.) has described the ge-
nerative organs of a soldier, who died of his wounds. The penis is not men-
tioned, and therefore probably was normal, but the scrotum was destitute of
testes, and there was a blind vagina communicating with the urethra. Two
testes were discovered in the usual situation of the ovaria, possessing vasa defer-
entia, which passed as usual to vesicule seminales. There was also a prostate
gland. This person might have performed the part of a male bedfellow, but un-
fruitfully, from the termination of the urethra in the vagina, unless such means
could be successfully employed as are mentioned in John Hunter's Treatise on
the Venereal Disease.

Analogous cases of spurious hermaphrodism among brutes are the free martins
of black cattle already mentioned (p.707.). In two, John Hunter found imper-
fect testes in the situation of the ovaria, and in a third were both testes and ovaria
lying together. In an hermaphrodite ass he also discovered substances resem-
bling both testes and ovaria. Sir Everard Home has described a similar dog,
which had long been a favourite in Lord Besborough’s family, and had never
been in heat. ‘ There was not the smallest appearance of teats on the skin of
the belly; so that in this particular it differed both from the male and female ;
nor was there the least trace of any thing like the gland of the breast under the
skin. The clitoris was very large, being one third of an inch long, and one half
of an inch broad ; the orifice of the meatus urinarius was uncommonly large, as
if it was intended for a common passage to the bladder and vagina, so that the
external parts were only the clitoris, meatus urinarius, and rectum. Internally,


«
HERMAPHRODITISM, 713


Nor that in such combinations in the human subject one testis and
ovarium now and then exist, do I at all doubt, after reading the
case given by Maret¢, and seeing the creature shown here under
the name of Lefort.4 In the former, a testicle on one side and an
ovarium on the other are decidedly said to have existed, besides
vesicula seminales, a Fallopian tube, an uterus, a blind vagina, and
a blind penis: from the middle upwards the general characteris-
tics of the female were conspicuous, and from the middle down-
wards those of the male. The person died at twenty-seven years
of age. Lefort had the general characteristics of each sex. The
relative proportion of the trunk and extremities, that of the
shoulders and pelvis, and the conformation and dimensions of the
latter, were those of the male; the chin had as good a beard, and
the chest and extremities were covered with as abundant hair, as
we usually observe in fair young men of the same age. Yet there
were beautifully formed breasts, with perfect areole and nipples,
the hands and feet were small, and, like the other portions of the
extremities, most elegantly tapering. Its unforeseen departure
from London deprived me of the advantage of a second inter-
view; but I thought that the voice, face, cranium, and mental
character were a mixture of those of both sexes. I could not
have said, on seeing such a face only, whether it belonged to a
man or a woman. e


“ec


forma duplex, nec fzemina dici
Nec puer ut possit ; neutrumque et utrumque videtur ! ’’ ¢


The eyes certainly sparkled with desire. Now, had this beena


see a


in the situation of the ovaria, were two imperfectly formed small testicles, distin-
guished to be such by the convolution of the spermatic artery ; from these passed
down an impervious cord, or vas deferens, not thicker than a thread, to the pos-
terior part of the bladder, where they united into one substance, which Was
nearly two inches long, and terminated behind the meatus urinarius. The other
parts of the animal were naturally formed. When the testicles were cut into
they appeared to have no regular glandular structure.” (Phil. Trans. 1799.)

Haller describes a very similar kid: the imperfect testes were in the same situ-
ation. There was likewise a canal or vagina, which divided like the uterus into
two horns, extending to the testes. There were also vesicule seminales.

© Mém. del Acad. de Dijon, t. ii. See also a remarkable case jy
York Medical Repository, vol. xii. p. 86.

“ See also a dissection in the Dictionnaire des Sciences Médicales ; and one by
Schnell, quoted by Meckel in Reil’s Archives fiir die Physiologie, t. Xi. p. 328,

® Ovid. Metam. iv. 378.


n the New


714 HERMAPHRODITISM.


man with imperfect organs, there might indeed have been the
characteristics of the female more or less marked, but certainly
not those of the male; and vice versa. On this account I am
disposed to believe it was in possession of at least one testis and
one ovarium. The best judges in Paris pronounced it to be a
woman; the best in London, aman. With respect to the geni-
tals, being young at the time, I own myself to have been dis-
inclined to examine them at a first interview, but learn there was
a small clitoris — with an imperforate gland, and an urethra run-
ning along it inferiorly (a structure perhaps unknown in monstrous
formation of simply female organs), and opening underneath by
five small holes. A passage existed at the foot of the clitoris,
into which a catheter passed, but which afforded no urine. The
catheter introduced into it might be directed downwards behind
a membrane that united the labia below, where the opening of the
vagina is commonly found, and would probably have been divided
with advantage, as the menses came through this passage. In fact,
both they and the urine passed through it and the five holes of
the canal that was under the clitoris, and the urine is reported to
come through both, although the catheter could bring none, and
neither passed into the bladder, nor excited a desire to make
water, if introduced into the lower canal. Whence there is pro-
bability in the conjecture, that the urethra communicated with
this passage within, by similar openings to those observed exter-
nally in its lower part.

Lefort was seen to menstruate, and those who did not inspect
the pudenda when visiting it at this period, declared the counte-
nance to be pale and languid as ina menstruating woman. It
boasted of having menstruated ever since eight years of age, of
having desires for each sex, and of being able fully to enjoy both.
But a little exaggeration of this kind must be expected. ‘The at-
tendant told me that it had kept a young French girl some years.
Whether seminal discharge took place is doubtful, as the com-
munication between the testes (if there were any) and urethra
might be deficient in some point. That it could derive any plea-
sure from sleeping with a male, except in the general contact, was
impossible. On the contrary, the membrane that united the labia
must have prevented coition, and rendered every approach of
the male organ extremely painful. No wonder, therefore, that,


f Dictionnaire des Sciences Médicales, art. HERMAPHRODISME.


ORIGIN OF LIFE. 715


though its habits were feminine (it did needle-work), perhaps, in
some measure, from confinement, it had chosen a girl for its asso-
ciate. Independently, however, of these circumstances, I do not
suppose that Lefort’s beard and hairiness of breast and limbs
would easily procure a cavalier servente.

The degrees of apparent and real monstrous hermaphroditism
have been classed thus by Burdach : —

i. In the external organs only. 1. Gynandry; a penis without
urethra, or with a mere groove; or a blind cavity, formed by di-
vision of the perineum or scrotum; or the continuance of the
testes within, or the development of the mons veneris or of the
breasts. 2. Androgyny ; a clitoris with an urethra; or a vagina
opening into the urethra; extreme smallness of the vagina, or
extreme largeness of the clitoris.

il. In the median organs only. 1. Gynandry ; Testicles, but
the vesicule seminalés transformed to an uterus. 2. Androgyny ;
the ovaries united with vasa deferentia and vesiculz seminales.

iii. The internal organs. An ovary on one side, and a testis on
the other, in their natural situation or in another; or two testes
and two ovaries.


Life is supposed by some never to occur spontaneously in matter, but always
to be propagated from an organised system already and still endowed with it.
They urge that no instance has been known of a plant or animal of any species,
whose mode of multiplication may be always easily examined, springing up
spontaneously ; and that, although in many other cases the origin often cannot
be discovered, our inability to discover the mode of propagation does not
justify us in denying its existence ; but that the general analogy, the dis-
covery of the modes in which many species propagate which were adduced by
Aristotle and other ancients and the older moderns as instances of spontaneous
generation®, the generation of oviparous or viviparous animals, actually observ-
able in some species whose existence in their particular residence is inexplicable
(as of certain entoxoa, — animals bred and living in others, found in the cellular
texture "), and the occasionally manifest source of the difficulties which obstruct


ee eas ee NUIT, itr Deno
® Dr. Ehrenberg has proved the animalcules termed rotifera to be oviparous,—
discharging eggs the 12,000th of an inch in diameter ; viviparous, — containing
young ones in motion; and gemmiparous, —producing buds on their sides which
are cast off when developed enough to provide for themselves, ’
® Cuvier, Régne Animal, t. iv. p. 2. In the disease of wheat, called the purples,
Mr. Bauer discovered innumerable animalcules in the seed. Their presence ap-
SR


716 HETEROGENESIS.


our inquiries, lead necessarily to the belief, not of the unreality of the fact,
but of our deficient penetration to discover their germs. Yet many eminent
writers, and among them Lamarck, Tiedemann, Burdach, believe in equivocal
or spontaneous generation, or, to use Burdach’s expression, heterogenesis or
the production of a being different from that which, together with the co-oper-
ation of other circumstances, gives rise to it, in distinction from homogenesis or
the production of a being from one like it.

They argue (Burdach, § 7.) that our planet, like every thing in the universe,
great or small, has arrived at its present condition by degrees ; that, at a very -
remote period, it was unfit for the habitation of living beings; that these, as it
became in its progressive changes more and more favourable to their existence,
were formed gradually upon it without predecessors ; and that, as it remains
favourable to their existence, it still possesses the same power, which cannot be
transitory, but must be inherent in nature, and must always become efficient under
favourable circumstances; so that, although this productive power is at present
exerted only in the way of propagation and preservation (for the generative, nu-
tritive, and reparative processes are all fundamentally the same) in regard to
superior beings, it still gives rise to inferior forms from heterogeneous elements ;
just as, although superior organs or viscera, when destroyed, cannot be restored,
inferior structures, as cellular membrane, capillary vessels, and bones, may be
replaced.

The facts adduced (Ibid. § 8. sqq-) are, that, after water has been poured upon
certain substances, microscopic and vegetable animals appear which, or even the
germs of which, previously did not exist. These are properly called infusoria,
although the name is given to microscopic vegetables and animals in general.
The substances with which the water is mixed is most productive when coherent,
but may be a wet mass of various consistence, and it may, if organic, be, 1. De-
cayed living systems or their parts. Those which decompose most readily in
air and water usually produce infusoria the most abundantly ; and those which
do not decompose in humidity, as camphor, tannin, pure sugar, give rise to
none: dead infusoria produce them like other dead organisations. 2. The
proximate principles of organised systems ; — albumen, gelatine, &c. 3. Sub-
stances which, though changed from their original nature in organised systems,
are susceptible of further change, as sour beer, bad vinegar; and the substance
must be decomposing at the points where the infusoria are produced. 4.
Gruithuisen declares that pure water poured upon granite, anthracite, or marble,
produces them ; notwithstanding it will not if poured upon glass, iron, copper,
lead, potass, or sea salt. Treviranus produced none from water poured upon
mercury ; but detected them in water containing culinary salt or saltpetre.

Infusoria appear most abundantly if the water is fresh dew, employed to


I


peared inexplicable, yet he found them multiply by viviparous generation. But
the difficulty was solved by placing a quantity of them in the depression at the
back of a healthy seed, and sowing this; when he found the stem of the new
plant filled with them. Phil. Trans. 1823.


HETEROGENESIS. TT%


prepare infusions; next in rain or fresh spring water; in water kept in
close vessels, and whose infusoria produced from itself have all perished ;
and least abundantly in boiled and distilled water, though this will pro-
duce them as copiously as fresh water, if the solid substance is favourable
to their production. Atmospheric air is necessary; ‘and air powerfully con-
tributes to their formation; but hydrogen or azote are substitutes for it. The
character of the infusoria will vary according to either the solid substance, the
water, or the air; nay, according to the state of cohesion in which the solid is
employed. A smaller proportion of water is required for the production of
vegetable than of animal infusoria. Both are more abundant if the air has
access not only to the water, but to the solid. Too high a column of water
above the solid has occasioned motionless globules to appear instead of distinct
animalcules. Temperature, light, electricity, and season affect their formation.
Burdach, in conjunction with Hensche and Baer, boiled some fresh inodorous
earth, destitute of foreign matter, in water for a long time; evaporated the fluid
to a thick extract; and put this into recently distilled water and oxygen or
hydrogen, in bottles closed with emery and a bladder ; when Priestley’s green
vegetable substance appeared, and, if common water and atmospheric air were
employed, animalcules were produced. If marble with distilled water and
oxygen or hydrogen was used, a mucilaginous substance with white ramifying
filaments appeared; and if a piece of granite, green matter with confervoid
filaments was seen. Again, the form, &c. of infusory animals varies endlessly
according not only to the quality of the substances, but even according to the
dilution. Gruithuisen, in above a thousand experiments, never found them per-
fectly similar: and most infusoria, especially the simplest, appear in all sorts
of infusions, whatever tke solid, the water, or the gaz. The history of En-
tozoa, or animals living and produced in others, is also thought to favour the
opinion of heterogenesis. Some are declared to be found no where externally,
and to die if discharged, as some die if the animal dies in which they live ;
some are viviparous only ; some inhabit the interior of solid organs, and it is
known that blood-vessels and glandular ducts have no open mouths but allow
liquids to transude only through their walls; and, as the ova of the oviparous
are many times larger than the globules of the blood and could not enter the
smallest vessels, it is thought impossible to explain the appearance of many
entozoa by the transmission of ova. Every animal has its own entozoa,
and they are found in vegetable feeders as well as those which prey on
others. They appear in individuals whose parents never had them; and
therefore, if they were created originally, our first parents must have had them
all (and man is liable to above a dozen kinds of entozoa), and a complete
collection often pass through very many generations without development.
The paternal semen itself, — if both parents can transmit entozoa,—must contain
the germs of the entozoa of all organs, and introduce them into the maternal
ovum. They must pass. through solid substances to get into the paternal
semen or the fluid of the maternal ovum, and through solid substances again to
reach the spots which become the habitation of the developed being. The germs
of seminal animalcules must remain in the young male above twelve years un-
developed, we know not where, till semen is secreted, for these are found no


3B g


718 HETEROGENESIS.


where but in it; and, as the solids are continually changing, and the fluids not
only continually, but in the most rapid manner, how the germs (which must be
incapable of multiplication) could remain in the body is to me almost inconceiv-
able. If the offspring is female, I suppose that they are refused admittance or
are admitted and perish. Entozoa are found in the intestines of the embryo; in
eggs; and in the bodies of other entozoa, nay even in the embryo within the
bodies of other entozoa. Although seminal animalcules and those which inhabit
mollusca and fish in such numbers (and one mussel has contained ten thousand
of even one kind, besides others, and fish have them in every part of their eyes,
in the vitreous, crystalline, &c.) flourish in the best health of the containing
animal, ill health, in which the power to preserve sound composition is impaired,
unquestionably predisposes to entozoa, as seen in the case of abdominal worms
and vermin of the surface: and this fact is analogous to the circumstance of
infusory animals and vegetables being produced under the decomposition of
organic substances.

Mushrooms, although possessed of the power of propagation, often appear
where propagation is inconceivable. The same circumstances favour their ap-
pearances as that of the entozoa: for instance, vegetable or animal matterin a
state of decomposition,— decaying roots or wood, or vegetable ashes, as after stub-
ble has been burnt in wet weather. The remains of mushrooms or entophyta
(plants living in or on other systems) will give origin to others, as the remains of
entozoa may, without propagation. When Spallanzani, for instance, sprinkled
calcined mouldiness on bread, this became mouldy; but not if he sprinkled it on
substances incapable of growing mouldy. They grow presently if the trunk of the
white poplar is exposed near its root and moistened with yeast diluted with water.
One sort appears in the jelly exuding from dying branches. They have appeared on
the diseased surfaces of animals, as life declined. Mayer saw filiform mouldiness
on the surface of the diseased lungs of a crow a few hours after death, and in the
bronchi another sort; and other authors have noticed the same thing. Mouldi
ness has appeared on blistered, ulcerated, and gangrenous surfaces, some days
before death. Certain champignons appear only on the decay of certain vegeta-
bles or animals, and of certain parts of vegetables and animals, and in certain
proximate principles. The addition of an acid or an alcali is sometimes neces-
sary, and determines their character. They are scen in the interior of animals
and vegetables, as under the epidermis, in fruit, or in eggs; nay in trees within
twenty or thirty rings of annual wood. Tallow dropped from candles in mines
becomes mushrooms. Moisture produces them, if charged with organic sub-
stance. Air of some kind is requisite, but impure air favours them most;
hydrogen is sufficient: and the kind of air affects their character. There is no
doubt that confervaee may arise without propagation, and even from inorganic
substances. A dilution of chloride of barium in distilled water, in a vial closed
with emery for six months, has produced a new sort of conferva. The vegetable
vesicle of the north, called red snow, adheres to snow or stones, and cannot be
carried by the wind.

Even superior invertebrate animals appear sometimes in such a way as to make
it almost probable that they have arisen by heterogenesis, Insects appear under
the skin, as in the itch and within tumours, and occasionally in myriads, without


HETEROGENESIS. 719


any probability of external source. The insects of itch have never been seen to
come out of themselves, crawl on the skin, and attach themselves to clothes ; and
yet the disease is contagious, and when a person is infected the eruption con-
taining them spreads over the body: so that they are probably engendered by the
disease, and are not the disease. Every animal has its own vermin. Man’s
louse is seen on no other animal: the eggs of a partridge were placed under a
hen, and, when the young partridges were hatched, they had lice peculiar to
them and different from those of the fowl. Meduse disappear in winter; and
sometimes abound prodigiously, especially after whirlwinds. A stream from a
rock was arrested to make a fish-pond; in some years mussels were found in it,
although mussels had never been seen in the pond whence the fish were taken
to stock it. Worms and insects of various families have been discovered in sub-
terranean cavities excluded from the air.

Sometimes phanerogamous plants and vertebrate animals have appeared
in a very strange way. After the great fire of London, in 1666, the whole
surface was presently covered with Sisymbrium iris, so that all Europe did
not afford so many specimens. Similar facts have been observed after other
great conflagrations. Tournefort relates that, after burning the fields in
Provence and Languedoc, a large quantity of black poppies grew up, all of
which disappeared the next year. After clearing away a forest in Nassau and
burning the roots, the ground was covered with Spartium Scoparium; and
Franklin says that in North America, near Slave Lake, poplars spring up where
pines have been burnt. These phenomena, says Burdach, to whcse industry I
am indebted for all these illustrations, are quite analogous to the formation of
different infusoria under different circumstances. If a salt spring rises up far
from the sea, vegetables which grow near the sea show themselves all around.
Tournefort saw the plants of marshes come up in a country which had been dry
above a century and was afterwards covered some time with putrid water. In
Denmark, after a pond, which had existed above fifty years, had grown dry, the
aquatic plants disappeared, and the next year the soil was covered with plants
which had never been seen there, and the seeds of which had not been in the
ground, and one of which was not to be found in Denmark. Hoffman observed,
in a tract of land taken from the sea, that different plants arose according to the
nature of the soil at each part; as one was most impregnated with salt, another
was fine sand, &c. The land had been under the sea from time immemorial ;
no traces of vegetable soil were discoverable; grain could not have been
transported by the wind, for the plants sprung up rapidly ; and none of the kind
were to be found except at a considerable distance. They could not have been
conveyed by springs in the ground, since these deposit all foreign substances:
and “what a number of seeds would have been requisite, with these acci-
dental means of dispersion, to cover the tract with so large a mass of vege-
tables, each fitted for the particular portion of soil !” Another wonderful
fact is that the kind of new plant is determined by the preceding plant. The
soil of cleared forests has been soon covered with a certain kind of trefoil ; and,
when trees planted on a heath have attained a certain age, the heath disappears
and grasses and herbs come up which were not there before.


Condamine in-
forms us that, in Africa, ponds of rain water, dry during nine months of the


3. Bg


720 HOMOGENESIS.


year, are filled with fish when the rainy season returns. These are of a different
kind from those of the nearest river, which is at the distance of three hundred
fathoms, and has no connection with the marsh. If any eggs of fish had re-
mained, they must have dried; and Spallanzani found that no fish’s egg would
hatch after having been dry for three months. Such facts are common. How lakes
and streams of ice and snow water in Switzerland and the Pyrenees become
peopled with trout and other fish is unaccountable ; no less than the existence of
fish found by Macartney in a pond lying in the middle of an island, which had
sprung up from the bottom of the sea, far away from other land. The rapidity
with which all the new animals and vegetables appear adds greatly to the dif-
ficulty.

What plants and animals which increase by homogenesis are ever produced by
heterogenesis, it is difficult to say ; though the advocates of the latter suppose all
to have been so produced originally in the course of nature.

The simplest mode of inerease in Homogenesis is by the detachment and in-
dependent existence of a portion of a system,— accrementitial generation. In
this way many plants‘, polypes, some worms, and many animalcules multiply.
If the detachment is a mere division of the system, it is termed fissiparous gene-
ration. This often coexists with more complicated modes, and is sometimes the
result of peculiar circumstances only, and intended to make sure of a continuance
of the organisation. The division may be unlimited, taking place in every di-
rection, or limited, and then in a longitudinal or transverse direction only. ‘Fhe
detachment may be of a distinct part which is prepared for the purpose and
branches forth, —gemmiparous generation, common in polypes, and many vegetables,
none of which, however, propagate in this way only: or the detachment may be
of appendages containing two substances, one the new being, the other a stoek of
nourishment, — propagular generation, peculiar to vegetables. The other mode
of Homogenesis is the secretion of something which is distinet from the parent
before it is developed into a new being, — is secreted by the parent and retained
as a distinct substance, till it is nourished and developed, almost always in some
other part, sufficiently to leave the parent, — secrementitial generation. "The sub-
stance may be globular, homogeneous, and of the same nature as the common
mass of the parent, when it is termed a spore, and is found in vegetables and the
lowest animals only ; or it may be an ovwm, or vesiculiform mass containing the
rudiment of an embryo and a quantity of nourishment, and secreted by a par-


i Hic plantas tenero abscidens de corpore matrum
Deposuit sulcis ; hic stirpes obruit arvo,
Quadrifidasque sudes et acuto robore vallos ;
Silvarumque ali pressos propaginis arcus
Exspectant, et viva sua plantaria terra ;
Nil radicis egent alia: summumque putator
Haud dubitat terre referens mandare cacumen.
Quin et caudicibus sectis (mirabile dictu)
Truditur e sicco radix oleagina ligno.
Virgil. Georgica, Lib. ii.


HOMOGENESIS. 72)


ticular organ called an ovarium : and the individual passes through many changes
before it resembles its parent.

All the modes of generation but that by eggs are accomplished through one
individual only ; — Monogenesis takes place. The mode by eggs may be accom-
plished through one individual or through two ;— Monogenesis or Digenesis
may take place.

Some organic beings, both vegetable and animal, which ordinarily copulate,
will occasionally propagate by monogenesis. Thus not only have vegetables pro-
pagated by seeds for four generations, without the most indirect communication
with the male organs; but various female insects kept separated from the first
moment of their birth have laid fruitful eggs, and this has been observed through
nine generations of complete exclusion from the male, so that there has been a
race of virgin mothers, grandmothers, great grandmothers, &c.


3B 4


722


CRAP. AXTX.


OF THE GENITAL FUNCTION IN MAN.


“Tue male genital fluid is produced by the two testicles,
which hang in the scrotum, by their spermatic chords, through a
ring called abdominal, or through, more properly, a fissure in the
tendon of the external oblique muscle of the abdomen.* Be-
sides abundant lymphatics, three orders of vessels are found in
the testes : —

“The spermatic artery, which is, in proportion to the fine-
ness of its calibre, the longest artery, by far, in the system, and
usually conveys blood to the testicle immediately from the abdo-
minal aorta.

“ The ductus deferens, which carries to the vesicule seminales
the semen secreted from the arterial blood.

“ The pampiniform plexus of veins, which return to the cava or
renal vein the blood remaining after secretion.>


* Instances of more than two testes are extremely rare. Three, four, and even
five, are said to have existed, and several authors declare that they have seen three
in individuals many of whose families were equally well provided. (Dionis,
L’ Anatomie des corps humains. Demonstration quatriéme. Sect. 1. Fernelius,
Forestus, De Graaf, Borelli, &c. &c. Shenkius has collected several examples. )
Unless such cases are related by an experienced medical man from his own obsery-
ation, they deserve no credit; and even then must be regarded with suspicion, if
anatomical examination or the peculiar pain of pressure have not proved the ad-
ditional bodies to be analogous to testes no less in structure than in form and
situation. The late eccentric Dr. Mounsey, who ordered that his body should
either be dissected by one of his friends or thrown into the Thames, was found to
haye in his scrotum a small steatom, which during life might have given the
appearance, though not the sensation on pressure, of a third testis.

The writers of such wonderful cases completely disagree in their account of
the powers of these triorchides, tetrorchides, and pentorchides, some asserting
them to be prodigious, others greatly below those of ordinary men.

One testis is commonly larger than the other, and, the right spermatic chord
being for the most part shorter than the left, the right testis is generally the
higher.

* The original situation of the testes accounts for the circumstance of their


THE GENITAL FUNCTION IN MAN. 723


“The testes are not originally suspended in the scrotum. In
the very young male foetus they are placed in a very different
part, and the nature and successive changes of their situation that
were first accurately investigated by Haller¢, but have since been
variously stated, have given rise to various controversies.‘ I shall
derive my account of this subject from the natural appearances
which I have preserved in a great number of small embryos, dis-
sected by me with this view.

“On opening the lower part of the abdomen of a young feetus,
there appears in each groin, at the ring of the oblique muscles, a
very small opening in the peritoneum, leading downwards to a
narrow passage which perforates the ring and runs to a peculiar
sac that is extended beyond the abdominal cavity towards the
scrotum, is interwoven with cellular fibres, and destined for the
future reception of the testicle.

“ At the posterior margin of this abdominal opening, there is
sent off another process of peritoneum, running upwards, and
appearing, in the young fcetus, little more than a longitudinal
fold, from the base of which arises a small cylinder, or rather an
inverted cone, that terminates above in a globular sac, containing
the testis and epididymis, so that the testis at first sight resem-
bles a small berry resting on its stalk, and appears hanging, like
the liver or spleen, into the abdomen.

“ The vessels, which afterwards constitute the spermatic chord,


ee


blood-vessels arising from the loins, as John Hunter remarked ; for parts gene-
rally derive their vessels from the nearest source. The same applies to their
nerves. Hence, too, the right spermatic artery frequently springs from the right
renal as being nearer than the aorta, and the left spermatic vein frequently
pours its blood into the left renal as being nearer than the inferior vena cava,

The original situation of the testes accounts also for the circumstance of the
vas deferens arising from the lower part of the epididymis and bending upwards ;
in the foetus this is not the case, but it is the necessary consequence of the subse-
quent change in the situation of the testes. (J.Hunter, 4 description of the
situation of the testis in the foetus, with its descent into the scrotum, in his O&-
servations on certain Parts of the Animal Economy, p. 13.)

° « Haller’s Program. de herniis congenitis, reprinted in his Opusc. patholog.
p- 311. sq. vol. iii. Opera minora.”

« «C.J. M. Langenbeck, Commentatio de structura peritonei, testiculorum
tunicis, eorumque in scrotum descensu. Gotting. 1817. fol.

B. W. Seiler, Odservationes de testiculorum ev abdomine in scrotum descensir..
Lips. same year. 4to.”


724 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


ate seen running behind the very delicate and pellucid perito-
neum; the spermatic artery and vein descending along the sides
of the spine, and the vas deferens passing inwards, in the loose
cellular substance behind the peritoneum, towards the neck of
the bladder. They enter the testis in the fold of peritonzeum just
mentioned.

«« After about the middle period of pregnancy, the testis gra-
dually descends and approaches the narrow passage before spoken
of, the fold of peritonzum and its cylinder becoming at the
same time bent down, until it lies directly over the opening of the
passage.

“ The testis being now ready for descent, the opening, which
was hitherto small, becomes dilated, so as to allow the organ to
pass it, the abdominal ring, and the whole passage, and to descend
into the bulbous sac; after this occurrence, the opening soon
becomes strongly closed and even grows together, leaving
scarcely any vestige of itself in infancy.

“In proportion to the slowness with which the testis pro-
ceeded towards the opening, does its transit through the abdo-
minal passage appear rapid, and, as it were, instantaneous. It is
common to find the testis in mature foetuses either lying over the
peritoneal opening, or, having passed this, resting in the groin ;
but I have once only met with the testis, and then it happened to
be the right and in a twin foetus, at the very time when it was
adhering, and in a manner strangled, in the middle of the
passage, being just about to enter the sac; in this instance,
the left testis had passed the abdominal canal and was already in
the sac, and the abdominal opening of the same side was perfectly
closed.

«This remarkable passage of the testis from the abdomen
through the groin is limited to no period, but would seem to
occur generally about the last month of pregnancy; the testicles
are found, however, not very rarely in the abdomen or the
upper portion of the groin at birth. For they have always
another part of their course to finish, after leaving the abdomen,
viz. to descend, together with their sac, from the groin into the
scrotum,

“Repeated observation demonstrates this to be the true
course of the testicles. To assign the powers and causes of its
accomplishment is no easy matter. For I am every day more
convinced that neither of the powers to which it is usually


IN MAN. 725


ascribed, viz. the action of the cremaster or diaphragm, or the
mere contractility of the cellular membrane, interwoven with ten-
dinous fibres, that exists in the cylindrical process of peritonzeum
and is called the Hunterian gubernaculum, is sufficient to explain
so singular a movement, and least of all to explain the transit of
the testis through the passage so often mentioned; but that the
whole affords, if any thing does, a striking illustration of a vita
propria, without the peculiar influence of which, so remarkable
and unique a course, similar to no other function of the system,
cannot even be imagined.” ¢


° The descent of the testes into the scrotum must, I apprehend. be owing
to the growth of their nerves and vessels, and to the direetion afforded by
the contraction of the gubernaculum. Still the disposition of these to
grow so long and of this to contract is a peculiar fact — a vita propria, in
Blumenbach’s words. The growth of the former, and therefore the whole
process, is accounted for in the minds of some by the contraction of the latter.
(Bichat, Anatomie descriptive, t. ii. p. 234.) Mr. Hunter’s original aecount
of the gubernaculum may not be unacceptable. “ At this time of life, the
testis is connected in a very particular manner with the pariectes of the abdo-
men, at the place where, in adult bodies, the spermatic vessels pass out, and
likewise with the scrotum. This connection is by means of a substance which
runs down from the lower end of the testis to the scrotum, and which at present
{ shall call the ligament or gubernaculum testis, because it connects the testis
with the scrotum, and seems to direct its course through the rings of the abdo-
minal muscles. It is‘of a pyramidal form; its large bulbous head. is upwards»
and fixed to the lower end of the testis and epididymis, and its lower and slender
extremity is lost in the cellular membrane of the scrotum. The upper part of
this ligament is within the abdomen, before the psoas, reaching from the testis to
the groin, or to where the testicle is to pass out of the abdomen ; whence the
ligament runs down into the scrotum, precisely in the same manner as the
spermatic vessels pass down in adult bodies, and is there lost. That part of the
ligamentum testis, which is within the abdomen, is covered by the peritonzum
all round, except at its posterior part, which is contiguous to the psoas, and con-
nected with it by the reflected peritoneum and by the cellular membrane. It is
hard to say what is the structure or composition of this ligament :


it is certainly
vascular and fibrous, and the fibres run in the direction of the li


gament itself,
which is covered by the fibres of the cremaster or musculus testis, placed imme-
diately behind the peritoneum. This circumstance is not easily ascertained in
the human subject; but is very evident in others, more especially in those whose
testicles remain in the cavity of the abdomen after the animal is full grown,”
(live. mp. 6.)

It may here be mentioned that the human testes do not always descend into
the scrotum, but occasionally remain, one or both, in the groin or abdomen.
Individuals so cireumstanced were called xpulopxides, or testicondi, by the


ancients. A ridgil is a bull in which one only has descended. In these in-


726 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


“ The coats of the testes, after their descent, are conveniently
divided into common and proper.

‘‘The common is the scrotum, consisting of the skin having a
very moderate substratum of fat, and differing from the rest of
the integuments in this, —that it is continually changing its ap-
pearance, being sometimes lax and pendulous, sometimes (espe-
cially during the venereal orgasm and the application of cold)
constricted and rigid, and in the latter case singularly marked by
rugee and furrows.

‘‘ With respect to the coats proper to each testis, the dartos
lies immediately under the scrotum, and is endowed with a pe-
culiar and strong contractile power, which deceived the celebrated
Winslow, Haller, &c. into the belief of the presence of muscu-
larity.” |

We know that the skin of every part relaxes by heat and
contracts by cold, although it be not muscular: in the cold fit of
an ague, it is constricted throughout so forcibly as to have
acquired, during this state, the appellation of Culis Anserina.
The scrotum, being much more lax than any other portion of the
skin, experiences these effects to the greatest extent. What is
termed dartos is merely thick cellular membrane.

«Next to this, with the intervention, however, of much soft
cellular substance, are found three orders of tunice vaginales® ;
viz. an exterior, common to the testis and spermatic chord, and —
to which the cremaster muscle adheres by disjointed bundles of
fibres.”


stances the generative powers are not impaired ;—a testicle which has not
descended is prevented by the pressure of the neighbouring parts from fully
evolving itself, but such persons, it is certain, “ militant non sine gloria.”

f « Besides the assertion that the scrotum differs strikingly from the rest of the
integuments in being reproduced after its destruction by gangrene; although
many careful observers declare this reproduction, as it is termed, to be very im-
perfect, and even imaginary. See v. c. Stalp. v. d. Wiel. cent. 1. p. 364.
Quirot, Mém. de Acad. de Chirurg. t. iv. p. 97.”? Iknew a man whos
scrotum had been destroyed by cold, during the late Duke of York’s militar;
career in Holland some years before, and it had not been reproduced.


& « J. E. Neubauer, De tunicis vaginalibus testis et funiculi spermatici. Giess,
1767. 4to.


F. L. Eichhorn, De hydrocele. Gott. 1809, 4to,”


q


Py


IN MAN. 727


This muscle arises from the superior anterior spinous process
of the ileum, from the transversalis abdominis, the internal surface
of the Fallopian ligament and neighbouring parts, and, passing
through the ring, spreads upon the chord, vanishing upon the
beginning of the testicle. Its office is evidently to support the
testicle, and to draw it upwards against the groin during procre-
ation. In those animals whose testes, instead of hanging in the
scrotum, lie in the perinzeum, in the groin, or in the abdomen, this
muscle is, as might be expected, much less considerable. Its
source is some fibres of the transversalis and obliquus internus
muscles pushed by the testis before it in its descent.

“The two interior tunice vaginales are, one proper to the
chord, and one to the testis ; the Jatter of which usually adheres
by its fundus to the common coat, but is internally moistened,
like the pericardium, by a lubricating fluid.)

“The origin of these vaginal coats, — the subject of so much
controversy, may, I think, be readily explained, from the cir-
cumstances already mentioned attending the descent of the
testis.

*‘ The coat common to the testis and chord arises from the de-
scending bulbous sac or peritonzal process.

“The proper coat of the testis, from that production of the
peritoneum which, ascending from the cylinder, originally invests
the testis.

“The coat proper to the chord, from that fold and short cylin-
der of the peritoneum in which the fold terminates before it
surrounds the testicle.”

The old notion that each testicle, or each ovarium, is destined
for the procreation of but one sex, is too nonsensical.


n A coat, exterior to the rest, is described by M. Roux, and termed Envelope
fibreuse. It is an elongated sac, large below to contain the testis and epididymis,
and narrow above, affording a sheath to the chord. It vanishes among the
cellular membrane of the ring. (Bichat’s Anat. descrip. t. v. p. 176.) M.
Roux considers this coat as having been known to Haller, from the following
passage in Haller’s account of the testicle. Ita fit ut interiores cavee duz
sunt; superior vasculis spermaticis circumjecta; inferior testi propria.” But
Haller continues thus: “Ita sepe se habet, ut etiam aque vis aut in partem
testi propriam solam, intacta parte vasculosi funiculi, aut in istam solam, intacta
testis vagina, effundatur, neque flatus impulsus de ea vaginali ad istam commeet.””
(Llementa Physiologie, t. vii. p. 420.) He appears therefore to describe merely
the tunic vaginales of the chord and testis.


728 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


“ To the bedy of the testisi there adheres very firmly, like the
bark of a tree, a coat called albuginea, through the combination of
which with the internal part of the vaginal coat, blood-vessels pe-
netrate into the pulpy substance of the testis.« This pulpy sub-
stance is entirely composed of innumerable vessels, about a span
in length!, and convoluted into lobules, both conveying blood and
secreting semen™, the latter of which is carried, through the rete
vasculosum of Haller" and the vasa efferentia of De Graaf, to the
apices of the cones of the epididymis.®


1,1, 1. Tunica albuginea. 2, 2. Seminiferous
canals. 3. Cellular net-work of the testis. 4. Glo-
bules of mercury extravasated. 5. Excretory ducts
forming the cones. 6, 6, 6. Cones formed by the
continuation of the preceding ducts, and constituting
the head of the epididymis. 7. Epididymis injected
with mercury, and formed by one tortuous canal.
8. Tail of the epididymis, on a level with which the
vas deferens begins. 9, 9. Vas deferens.—(Haller- )


“4 « Alex. Monro, fil. De testibus et de semine in variis animalibus. Edinb.
1755. 8vo.” .

k « B. §. Albinus, Annotat. Acad. 1. ii. tab. vii. fig. 1, 2, 3.”

1 Vide Grew, Museum Regalis Societatis, p. 7.”

m «© The celebrated SOUmmerring was so successful as to inject all the vessels
composing the testis, and the entire head of the epididymis, with mercury.
Ueber die kirperl. Versch. des negers vom Europiier, p. 38.”

n « Haller, De viis seminis, in the Phil. Trans. No. 494. fig. 1. g. g.”

° « De Graaf, De Viror. organis generationi inservientibus. tab. iv. fig. 1, 2.”


IN MAN. 729


“ The epididymis, lying on the side of the testicle, and con-
sisting of one vessel about thirty feet in length, is divided into
about twenty glomerules or cones at the part called its head?, and
is continued into the vas deferens, at its lower part, which gradu-
ally becomes thicker4 and is denominated its tail.


nll

| Wp 7

i IH ti My WFZE
WIM AEE.
NW HEIL Ye a\


a,a. Bladder. b, b. Layers of posterior fibres, having a longitudinal direction.
c. Prostate. d. Membranous portion of the urethra, €) Cs Ureters. Jt Some
of the arteries of the bladder and of the vesiculx seminales. & g Left vas de-
ferens. h, h. Right vas deferens. i. Left vesicula seminalis in its natural
position. , Left ejaculator canal, traversing the prostate. J, 1. Right vesicula
seminalis, mm, m,m,m. Ccecums or appendages of the vesicula seminalis.
m, 2. Some branching appendices. — (Haller. )


“ Each vas deferens, ascending towards the neck of the urinary
bladder and converging towards the other under the prostate
gland, is then directed backwards and dilated into the vesicule
seminales, in such a manner, that the common mouth both of
the vesicles and vasa deferentia opens into the urethra, behind the
caput gallinaginis.t

‘<The vesteule seminales, which adhere to the posterior and in-
__ ferior surface of the bladder, surrounded by an abundance of fat,


P «Vide Alex. Monro, fil. Observations, Anatomical and Physigloo; :
; , :
1758.,8vo. tab. i. E.E. E.. F. G. H.” : wstological, Edinb.


1 “B.S. Albinus, Annotat. Acad. |. ii. tab. iii, fig. 1.”
" «B.S. Albinus, 1. c. 1. iv. tab. iii, fight; 2,5”


730 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


resemble two little intestines, winding in various directions, and
branching into numerous blind appendices.

« They consist of two coats, nearly similar to those of the gall-
bladder: the one strong, and of the description usually termed
nervous (tendinous®) ; the other interior, delicate, abounding in
cells, and divided into compartments by prominent ridges, like
those found in the cervix of the gall-bladder.*


a, a. Portions of the vasa deferentia, whose sides are thick, and cavity very
narrow. 0b, 6. Portions of the same canals, with less thick sides, and larger ca-
vity. c,c. Extremity of each vas deferens, which grows narrow again where
it unites with the vesicule seminales and the ejaculator canal, 4, d, d, d. Ve-
sicule seminales inflated. e, e. Their arteries. f, f,f Portion of the perito-
neum covering the posterior part of the vesicule seminales.  g, g- Ejaculator
canals. — (Graaf. )


‘In these passages is slowly and sparingly secreted and con-
tained after puberty, the semen, a very extraordinary and import-
ant fluid, of a milky yellowish colour,” which is nearly the same

‘ '

‘ The ancients gave the name of nerves to both nerves and tendons: the
expression distensio nervorum is equivalent to subsulius tendinum. The white
tendinous looking coat of the alimentary canal was therefore called by old
anatomists, in classical language, the tunica nervea.

t « See, besides, the figures by Graaf, Haller, Albinus, and Monro, i. ec,
especially the beautiful one by Fl. Caldani, in his Opusc. Anat. p- i a

 « The opinion of Herodotus respecting the black semen of Ethiopians, re-


futed in ancient times by Aristotle, has, to my surprise, been taken up in modern
times by Le Cat, De Pauw, Wagler, &c.”


IN MAN. Tou


in all animals ; “ of a peculiar odour,” like that of a bone while
being filed; of a styptic and rather acrid taste*; ‘¢of the same
viscidity as mucus; opake; and of great specific gravity, of greater
indeed than any other fluid in the body.’y It is alcalescent, turn-
ing vegetable blues green and precipitating earths and metals
from their solutions. In a few hours after removal from the body
it becomes liquid and translucent, and, though previously inso-
luble in warm or cold water, is now very soluble in it. If exposed
to the air, it dries into a horny looking substance.

“Semen has also this peculiarity, first observed by Lewis
Hamme of Dantzic, in the year 16777, — of being animated by
an infinite number of creatures, visible by the microscope, of the
kind demoninated infusoria®, and of different figures in different
genera of animals. In man», these spermatic animalcules” (or
spermatozoa, as Baer calls them,) ‘ are oval, and have very fine
tails: they are said to be found in prolific semen only,” and there-
fore not in children, old men, or invalids, “so that they are in
some degree an adventitious criterion of its prolific maturity ;
we say adventitious, because we hope, after so many weighty ar-
guments and observations’, there is no necessity at present to
remark that they have no fecundating principle and much less
are the germs of future offspring.”

Hamme, when young, had discovered the seminal animalcules ;

‘he showed them to Leeuwenhoeck: and the sagacious Dutch-
man, catching eagerly at the discovery, published an account
of them illustrated by plates. Hartzoeker, ambitious of the honour
of the discovery, wrote upon the subject the following year and as-
serted that he had seen the animalcules three years before they were


* Burdach, § 83.
~Y « F, B. Osiander asserts “ that fresh semen, emitted under certain circum-
stances, is occasionally phosphorescent.” De causa insertionis placente in uteri
orifictum. Gotting. 1792. 4to. p. 16.”

z « Vide Fr, Schrader, De microscopior. usu in nat. sc. et anatome. Gotting.
1681. 8vo. p. 34.”

* « Handbuch der Naturgesch. p. 506. 10th edit. tab. i. fig. 13.”

‘ « W. Fr. y. Gleichen, Ueber die Saamen-und Infusionsthierchen. Nurenb.
1778. 4to. tab. i. fig. 1.”

© « Consult especially Laz, Spallanzani, both in his Opuscoli di fisica animale e
vegetabile, Milan, 1776. 8vo, vol. ii., and in his Dissertaxioni, &e. Ibid, 1780.
8vo. vol. ii.”’


SIG


732 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


observed by Hamme. The subject, being the very summit of filthi-
ness, excited the earnest attention of all Europe. Physiologists,
naturalists, Popish priests, painters, opticians, and booksellers, all
eagerly joined in the pursuit of the seminal animalcules, and the
lascivious Charles the Second of England commanded them to be
presented to him, swimming and frisking in their native fluid.
Some of the curious could not find them. Others not only found
them, but ascertained their length to be +5595 of an inch, their
bulk such as to admit the existence of 216,000 in a sphere whose
diameter was the breadth ofa hair, and their rate of travelling
nine inches in an hour. They saw them too in the semen of all
animals, and, what is remarkable, of nearly the same size and
shape in the semen of the largest and of the smallest, — in the
semen of the sprat and of the whale; they could distinguish the
male from the female; in the semen of a ram they beheld them
moving forwards in a troop, with great gravity, like a flock of
sheep ; and in the human semen, Dalenpatius actually saw one
indignantly burst its wormy skin and issue forth a perfectly formed
human being. The little creatures would swim in shoals towards
a given point, turn back, separate, meet again, move on singly,
jump out, and dive again, spin round, and perform various other
feats, proving themselves, if not the most delicate, at least the
drollest, beings that ever engaged the attention of philosophers.
Their strength of constitution being an important object of in-
quiry, they gave proofs of their vigour, not only by surviving
their rough passage through the urethra, three, four, and seven
days, but by impregnating a female at the end of this time, and,
on being removed from her, by impregnating even a second.

Surely never was so much folly and bestiality before committed
under the name of philosophy.

Abr. Kauw Boerhaave, Maupertuis, Lieutaud, Ledermuller,
Monro Secundus, Nicolas, Haller, and, indeed, nearly all the phi-
losophers of Europe, were satisfied of the existence of the animal-
cules. This, however, is another of the truths which were opposed
at first. Linneus disbelieved the observations of Hamme and
Leeuwenhoeck, imagining the animalcules to be inert niolecules,
thrown into agitation by the warmth of the fluid. A thesis
was published under his presidency to prove that they were
only inert particles set in motion by some physical cause.
Buffon and his followers, prejudiced in favour of an hypo-


IN MAN. 738


thesis, although they did not deny that the semen contained
innumerable rapidly moving particles, contended that these were
not animalcules, but organic particles. Many great names
sided with Linnaeus, and Lieberkuhn was considered to have
absolutely proved that they were no animalcules.4_ Their reality,
however, might be regarded as established. But, finally, to
determine the question, and accurately to ascertain every cir-
cumstance relating to them, the celebrated Spallanzani began a
long course of observations and experiments about the middle of
the last century, unbiassed in favour of any opinion, and endea-
vouring to forget entirely all that had been written upon the
subject. The human semen, the worthy Abbé assures us, he pro-
cured from dead bodies immediately after dissolution ; but that
of brutes was obtained either after death or during life.

He found in the former innumerable animalcules with an oval
body and a tail, or appendix, tapering to a point. - This appendix,
by moving from side to side, propelled them forwards. They were
in constant motion in every direction. In about twenty-three
minutes their movements became more languid, and in two or
three hours they generally died, sinking to the bottom of the
fluid, with their appendices extended. The duration of their
life, however, depended much upon the temperature of the
weather ; at —2° (Reaumur) they died in three quarters of an
hour; while at 7° they lived two hours ; and at 123°, three hours
and three quarters. If the cold was not too intense, they reco-
vered upon the temperature being raised; when only —3° or
—4° they recovered after a lethargy of fourteen hours and up-
wards; and, according to the less intensity of the cold, they
might be made to pass from the torpid to the active state more
frequently. They were destroyed by river ice, snow, and rain
water; by sulphur, tobacco, camphor, and electricity. Even the
air was injurious to them ;—=§in close vessels their life was pro-
longed to some days, and their movements were not constant and
hurried. They were of various sizes, and perfectly distinct from
all species of animalcules found in vegetable infusions, &c. The
seminal animalcules of different kinds of animals had generally
each some peculiarity. In short, Spallanzani completely con-
firmed the principal observations of Leeuwenhoeck, and satis-


* Ament. Acad. t.i, p. 79. Spallanzani, Opusc. de Phys. t. ii. p. 13}.
oe 2


734 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


factorily explained the sources of the inaccuracies of other in-
quirers.®

Although these beings are most numerous in the semen, he
detected them occasionally in other fluids; in the mesenteric
blood of female frogs and salamanders, and in the blood of a tad-
pole and calf.f

They are supposed by some to originate by heterogenesis, and this
both on account of the semen being so decomposible a fluid, as
shown by its odour and readiness to change its nature and to liquefy:
and of its long continued contact with the walls of its canals, contact
of fluids with animal substances disposing them to deoxidise and
decompose. Czermak® found that the fluid in birds at the be-
ginning of the season contained no animalcules, and, afterwards,
when they began to appear, that they were at first motionless :
he also found animalcules disposed to move in some animals in
the vas deferens only. Needham found their number augment
when the semen became more liquid and apt to decompose ; and
Prevost and Dumas could not detect them in the thick semen of
the seminal canals of mammalia till they had diluted it with
water, — which in fact made an infusion of the animal matter.)


© Qpuscoli di Fisica animale e vegetabile, vol. ii. Prevost and Dumas have lately
confirmed the observations of Spallanzani as to the semen of various animals.
In the snail, the animalcules are fifty-four times larger than in the dog; in
the mouse, half as large again as in the horse ; and larger in some insects than
in man. They are also more numerous in some of the lower animals, especially
the mollusca. (Annales des Sciences Naturelles, t. i. and ii.) Leeuwenhoeck calcu-
lated that in the semen of a single fish there were thirty times as many animal-
cules as of human beings on the earth: —a beautiful confirmation of the fancy
of proud man, that all other animals were made for him.

f Creatures of an inch to an inch and a quarter in length, and of the same
general shape as the seminal animalcules, inhabit the mesenteric arteries of asses,
horses, &c. Mr. Hodgson found them in seven asses out of nine. (4 Treatise
on the Diseases of Arteries and Veins, &c.) Toincrease the wonder, the intestines
of the human embryo have been found containing worms. Goeze, Versuch einer
naturgeschichte der Eingeweidwiirmer. Living worms from external sources have
frequently been found in the human blood. A case, in which many live larve
of the Tipula oleracea were seen in blood twice taken from the arm of a boy
at Dumfries, may be found in the Dublin Journal of Med. and Chem, Sc. for
May, 1834; the eggs of this animal are very minute and deposited in running
water; the boy lived on the banks of a river, and had frequently drunk the
water.

® Beytrige xu der Lehre von der Spermatxoen, p. 20.

h Burdach, @ 84.


IN MAN. 735


Czermak divides them into three sections: — the Cephaloides,
rounded; the Uroides, filiform; and the Cephaluroides, or those
with one part rounded and another filiform.

In some days semen putrefies and becomes covered with the
byssus septica.

According to Vauquelin’s analysis of the semen!, 100 parts con
tain,

Of Water : - - - 90


Mucilage - - - - 6
Phosphate of lime - - 8
Soda - - ae |


« The genital fluid gradually collected in the vesicles is re-
tained for subsequent excretion, and by its stay experiences
changes nearly similar to those of the bile in the gall-bladder, —
becoming more inspissated and concentrated by the removal of
its watery portion.


i Annales de Chimie, t. x.

k « A paradoxical opinion was formerly entertained by some’’ (Wharton, Van
Horne, Swammerdam, Harder) — “ that the semen is not discharged from the
vesiculze seminales but from the vasa deferentia, and that the fluid of the vesicles
is not truly spermatic and derived from the testis, but of quite another kind,
and secreted in peculiar glands belonging to the vesicles. This has gained some
advocates among the moderns. J. Hunter, On certain Parts of the Animal
Economy, p. 27.

J. A. Chaptal, Journal de Physique, Febr. 1787, p. 101.

But it has been refuted by Sommerring, in the Bibliotheca Medica, which I
edited, vol. iii. p. 87.

Add the remarkable instances of men and other male animals possessed of
vesicule seminales, that have discharged prolific semen after complete castration.

Consult, among others, the distinguished Elliotson in his English translation
of these Institutions, p. 329. 3d edit. 1820.”

The note to which Blumenbach does me the honour to allude was the follow-
ing: —

John Hunter’s arguments are—1. “The semen, first discharged from
the living body, is of a bluish white colour, in consistence like cream, and
similar to what is found in the vasa deferentia after death; while that which
follows is somewhat like the common mucus of the nose, but less viscid. The
semen becomes more fluid upon exposure to the air, particularly that first thrown
out; which is the very reverse of what happens to secretions in general. The
smell of the semen is mawkish and unpleasant, exactly resembling that of the
farina of a Spanish chestnut; and to the taste, though at first insipid, it has so
much pungency, as, after some little time, to stimulate and excite a degree of
heat in the mouth. But the fluid contained in these vesiculx in a dead body, is


‘ 3.6 3


736 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


“‘ For, as the whole of the testis and spermatic chord abounds
in lymphatic vessels, which carry back to the blood a fluid with


of a brownish colour, and often varies in consistence in different parts of the
bag, as if not well mixed. Its smell does not resemble that of the semen,
neither does it become more fluid by being exposed to the air.”” On opening
two men immediately after death, the contents of the vesicule were of a lighter
colour than he usually found them in persons who had been some time dead,
and in one of the instances so fluid as to run out upon cutting the vesicule,
but they were similar to the semen neither in colour nor smell. An examin-
ation of the vesiculz of the horse, boar, rat, beaver, and guinea-pig, afforded the
same results. In the last animal, the contents near the fundus of the vesiculz
were viscid, and gradually firmer, till, near the opening into the urethra, they
were as solid as common cheese, and no such substance could be detected in the
vagina of the female after her union with the male. 2. During lasciviousness,
the testicles swell, and they become painful if the semen is not discharged ; in
coition, it may be added, they are drawn forcibly by the cremaster against the
pubes, as if to assist the discharge of their contents at the period of emission.
3. In the old and debilitated, the vesicule are as full as in the young and |
vigorous. 4, Nay, in four men who had each lost a testicle, the vesicula on one
side was equally full as on the other, although the men had survived the operation
a considerable length of time. The same was discovered in two cases, where, by
mal-formation, one testicle had no communication with the corresponding
vesicle. In the gelding and the stallion their contents are similar and nearly
equal in quantity. The vas deferens has no communication in some animals
with the vesiculz, and in others, as the horse, where a communication does exist,
the common duct is not of sufficient length to permit the regurgitation of the
semen into the vesicule. 5. Some animals, especially among the carnivora,
have no vesiculz seminales, yet in their copulation they differ not from those
which have. MM. Richerand indeed asserts that animals destitute of these organs
are longer in coition than others, from having no reservoir for an accumulation
of semen. (Elémens de Physiologie, c. x.) But he is mistaken. For, on inspect-
ing Cuvier’s account of animals without and with vesicule, no connection what-
ever appears between their presence or absence and the length of copulation.

In opposition to these arguments it is urged that a fluid, gently propelled
along the human vas deferens, does not pass into the urethra, but regurgitates
into the vesicula.* But, granting this true, we have no proof that the secretion of
the testes leaves the vasa deferentia except during emission, when this regur-
gitation is impossible. It may also be contended that, in many men, the act
of straining at the water-closet often instantly discharges from the urethra,
without the least sensation, a large quantity of a fluid, which is exactly similar, in
colour, consistence, and odour, to that of a nocturnal emission. The com-
pression cannot squeeze this fluid from the testes. Ifa partisan of John Hunter
should say that the extremities of the vasa deferentia afford it, we may reply to


* Winslow, Ruysch, Duverney, and others, quoted by Haller: confirmed by
Professor Wilson, Lectwres on the Urinary Organs, p- 131.


IN MAN. 737


a seminal impregnation, and thus facilitate the secretion of semen
in the manner before described; so the vesicule seminales are
likewise furnished with a similar set of vessels, which, by absorb-
ing the inert watery part, render the remaining semen more
powerful.

“ But I very much doubt whether genuine semen is ever ab-
sorbed during health; still more that it ever passes, as is some-
times asserted, into the neighbouring veins; and most of all, that
by this absorption, if it does occur, unseasonable venereal appe-
tites are prevented: since, if we compare the phenomena of
animals, procreating at particular periods, with the constitu-
tion of those which are castrated, we must conclude that this


220 eee


him that Jobn Hunter found them full of the same kind of fluid as the vesicule.
I believe, however, that we are unacquainted with the pure secretion of the
testes, and that far the greatest portion of an emission is secreted by the vesiculz
seminales and prostate gland; and that therefore some persons may, by forcing
down, occasion a discharge apparently identical with an emission, though not
containing a particle of matter furnished by the testes. The fact, mentioned
at p.779., of emission occurring for a long period after the removal of both testes,
—till the removal had much deranged the whole genital system, forcibly cor-
roborates this idea.* The difference discovered by Mr. Hunter between the
fluid found in the human vesicule seminales after death and that of an emission
is nothing more than might be expected if we were certain that they were the
same +, and, as the matter squeezed out by some in straining exactly resembles
that of a regular emission, this fact alone would be fatal to Mr. Hunter’s
opinion, in regard to man, unless we relinquish the notion of the fluid of human
emission being chiefly true semen from the testes. In the herisson and rabbit
the vesicle opens separately from the vas deferens, so that in these animals it
cannot be a seminal receptacle; and yet in the rabbit Prevost and Dumas found
seminal animalcules in the vesicle, showing, perhaps, that the organ itself secretes
a genital fluid.

In different species of brutes the fluid of emission may be furnished in dif-
ferent proportions from the testes, vesicula, and prostate, and the effects of
pressure from straining are unknown in them. Additional vesicule seminales
are sometimes seen opening separately. Cuvier says that the muscular part of
the urethra in brutes is full of semen at rutting time, so that it may pass into
the additional vesiculz.


* Dr. Otto says that he found semen in a vesicle nine months after castration.
Seltene beobachtungen, t.i. p. 131.

+ In the two men opened by J. Hunter soon after death, the vesicular fluid
was actually much less brown than usual.


3c 4


738 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


absorption is rather the cause of ungovernable and almost rabid
lust.

“ We conceive that this end is accomplished in a very different
mode,” — “ by nocturnal pollutions, which we regard as a natural }
excretion, intended to liberate the system from the otherwise
urgent superfluous semen, more or less frequently, according
to the variety of temperament and constitution.’

‘‘ The semen is never discharged pure, but mixed with the
prostatic fluid, which is very much of the appearance of the white
of egg, and has acquired its name from the organ by which it is
produced, —an organ of some size, of a peculiar and very com-
pact texture, lying between the vesicule seminales and the bulb
of the urethra, and commonly denominated prostate gland.» It
is composed of minute cells, from which excretory ducts pro-
ceed, opening by twenty or thirty orifices into the urethra on the
sides of the verumontanum.

Hence, as well as from the secretion of the vesicula seminales
and urethral mucus, some men have perfectly performed the act
of copulation, though unfruitfully, after castration.° Many such
accounts are suspicious ; but, in a man castrated by Sir Astley
Cooper, the complete power of coition was said positively to


1 «Ch. R. Jaenisch, De pollutione nocturna. Gotting. 1795. 4to.

Aug. Gottl. Richter, Specielle Therapie, vol. iv. p. 552. sq.

C. W. Hufeland, dbhandl. der Kinigl. Akademie der Wissensch. in Berlin,
1819. p. 170.”

m << T willingly grant that barbarous nations, of a phlegmatic temperament and
copulating promiscuously, do not require this excretion; but I must contend
that it is a perfectly natural relief in a young man,— single, sanguineous, full of
juices, with a strong imagination, and living high, although enjoying the com-
pletest health.”

Blumenbach has not been able to discover that nocturnal pollution happens to
any animal except man ; but a person who had been keeper of the beasts at Exeter
Change and the Surrey Zoological Gardens for twenty years, informed me that
he had often seen male animals, chiefly of the feline and canine kind, agitated in
sleep, and wake up with an emission, and had seen seminal discharges where
they had slept ; and that they, especially the canine, as well as the great ele-
phant Chuny, which was shot, would onanise by striking the penis on the
ground or rubbing it against something, and some by shaking themselves. At
Turin the keeper also assured me that the great elephant onanised continually
against the ground in March and April. Monkeys, I was told, actually mas-
turbate (manu-stuprate) like many boys.

» « Morgagni, Adversar. Anat. iv. fig. 1, 2.”

© See examples collected by Schurig, Spermatologia, p. 395. sq.


IN MAN. 139


remain for twelve months after the operation, and afterwards
rapidly declined? ; and in another case of castration by Professor
Wilson complete copulation was occasionally performed for a year
or more.4

The generative powers are not impaired by the removal
of one testis: the Hottentots have been said frequently to
deprive their sons of one, on arriving at eight years of age", from
the belief that monorchs are swift runners. We read in Varro
that if a bull is admitted to a cow immediately after both testes
are removed, impregnation takes place, — “ Exemptis testiculis,
si statim admiseris, concipere (vaccas).” §

« The male urethra is the common outlet of three different
fluids, — the urine, semen, and prostatic liquor. It is lined with
mucus, which proceeds from numerous sinuses dispersed along
the canal.t We find it surrounded by a spongy texture, upon
which lie two other spongy bodies", of much greater thickness,
constituting the major part of the penis. The penis is terminated
anteriorly by the glans —a continuation of the spongy texture —
and usually covered by a delicate and very moveable skin, which
is destitute of fat, and, at the corona of the glans, forms the
preputium, and freely moves over the gland, nearly as the eyelids
do over the eyeball. The internal duplicature of the preputium,
changing its appearance, is reflected over the glans, like the al-
buginea of the eye, and is beset at the corona with many Littrian”*


P Obs. on the Structure and Diseases of the Testis, p. 53. sq. 4to. London,
1830.

a Lectures on the Structure and Physiology of the Male Organs, &c,. p. 132. sq:
London, 1821.

* Wilh. ten. Rhyne, De promontor. Cap. bon. spei, 22. pag. m. 64, and others
quoted by Schurig, Spermatologia, p. 60. Sparmann informs us that this custom
no longer prevails.

S De Re Rustica, ti. 5. See De Graaf, De muiier. org. Senerat. inserv. p. 82.

“¢ J. Ladmiral, Effigies penis humani. LB. 1741. 4to.”

u « Ruysch, Observat. anat. Chirurg. Centur. p. 99. fig. 75—82.

And his Ep. problemat. xv. fig. 2. 4. 6, 7.

T. H. Thaut, De virge virilis statu sano et morboso. Wirceb. 1808. 4to.
fig. 1.

The distinguished Home has clearly and faithfully displayed this truly cellular
or spongy texture of the cavernous bodies of the penis, that was lately in general
confounded with the blood-vessels in which it abounds,
Po HE pr iss. sq.”

x « Morgagni, ddversar. Anat. 1. tab. iv. fig, 4. i. k.”


Phil. Trans. 1820.


740 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


< i) in mM


iy
i ali
Ss


S\ ‘


jie


a,a,a,a. The bladder opened
crucially.

b. Right ureter.

c. Its opening into the bladder.

d. Left ureter.

e. Its opening into the bladder.

Jf. Base of the trigon vesicale.

g. Its summit, forming the luette
vesicale.

h. Swollen portion of the veru-
montanum.

i. Its summit, continuous with the
canal of the urethra.

k. Excavation of the verumonta-
num

1,1. Openings of the ejaculatory
canals at its sides.

m,m. External surface of the
prostate, cut.

n,n. Section of the prostate.

0, 0. Orifices‘of its excretory ducts,

Pp; p» Membranous part of the
urethra,

q; q- Cowper’s glands,

7,7. The openings of their ducts
into the urethra.

8, 8, 8, s. Bulbof the urethra, cut.

t, t, t, 4. Corpus spungiosum ure-
thre, cut.

u, u. The glans, also cut.

v, v, v. The prepuce, cut and
turned back.

w, w. The urethra divided longi-
tudinally, so as to show its
inner surface.

X, x, x, x, Corpora cavernosa penis.

y; y» Bulbo-cavernous muscles.

z, z. Ischio-cayernous muscles.

1,1. Vasa deferentia.

(Loder. )


IN MAN. 741


glands, similar to the Meibomian of the eyelids, and secreting a
peculiar smegma.” ¥

The corpus spongiosum of the urethra, and the two corpora
cavernosa, have the appearance of cells, but are really veins
freely communicating with each other, and much larger in the
corpora cavernosa than in the corpus spongiosum. The arteries
ramify between them, and Miller says that some project into
the veins, and pour blood directly into them.

“The virile organ, thus constructed, possesses the power of
erection, — of becoming swollen and stiff, and changing its situ-
ation, from the impetuous congestion and effusion? of blood into
its corpora cavernosa either by corporeal or mental stimulus, and
of detumifying and collapsing after the return of the blood.”


y « This smegma in young men, especially when they are heated, is well
known to accumulate readily and form an acrimonious caseous coagulum. The
inhabitants of warm climates are particularly subject to this inconvenience, and
the chief use of circumcision appears to be the prevention of this accumulation.
We know that for this reason Christians, in the scorching climate of Senegambia,
occasionally cut off the preputium, and that uncircumcised Europeans residing
in the Kast frequently suffer great inconvenience. Guido de Cauliaco, the ce-
lebrated restorer of surgery in his day, who flourished in the middle of the four-
teenth century, said that circumcision was useful to many besides Jews and
Saracens, ‘* Because there is no accumulation of sordes at the root of the gland,
nor irritation of it.” Chirurg. Tr. vi. doctr. ii. p.m. 111.”

* «Vide Theod. G. Aug. Rooze, Physiologische Untersuchungen. Braunsv.
1796. 8vo. p. 17.”

a « A phenomenon worthy of remark, even from the light which it promises to
throw on this function in general, is the erection so frequently observed in those
who are executed, especially if strangled.

Consult, besides Garmann’s compiled farrago (De Miraculis Mortuorum,
I. xi. 7. sq.) &

Morgagni, De sed. et caus. morb. xix. 19. sq.”

As Gall is right in placing the seat of sexual desire in the head, this kind of
erection may be explained by supposing the irritation, arising in the cerebellum
from the great accumulation of its blood, to produce a correspondent irritation
in the organs of generation: thus the epileptic paroxysm is not unfrequently
accompanied by an emission. Nocturnal emissions occur most frequently after
a person has been long in bed and supine, —the cerebellum being below all the
rest of the encephalon, if the occiput is, as usually, raised by a pillow. That
may, however, be explained by the urine accumulating in the bladder during the
continuance of repose, and stimulating the generative parts connected with this
receptacle the more readily in the supine posture ; and this view is countenanced
by the large quantity of urine generally made on waking after nature h


eas ) as been
thus relieving the chaste unmarried man.


742 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


Accumulation of blood, it is supposed, may be produced in
three ways. 1. By a mechanical impediment to its return: but
there is no reason whatever to ascribe ordinary erection to com-
pression. 2. By an increased flow of blood to a part, so that the
vessels receive it faster than they convey it away. Here the
vessels of the part itself in which the accumulation exists are said
by some to act more violently than usual; by others, the neigh-
bouring larger vessels which supply these: their frequency of
action, however, is not increased, but always remains correspond-
ent with that of the heart. Were the vessels of the part itself to
act more violently than usual, that is to say, to contract to a
smaller and relax to a greater dimension than usual, (though an
ordinary alternate contraction and relaxation are hypothetical,)
more blood would indeed subsist in them during their relaxation,
but less than usual would subsist in them during their contraction,
and there could be no accumulation, no inflammation. If the
neighbouring large vessels act more violently than usual, (though
their ordinary alternate contraction and relaxation are also hypothe-
tical,) they may be conceived to produce an accumulation of blood
and a distension of the capillaries and veins. 3. If the vessels of
any part become dilated, and do not contract in proportion, this
circumstance will be sufficient to produce an accumulation, with-
out any necessity for supposing an increased action of the neigh-
bouring larger vessels. ‘This explains inflammation: and in Bichat’s
Anatomie Descriptive, this explanation is given of erection. The
arteries and the corpora cavernosa (which always contain florid
blood) spontaneously dilate, and accumulation ensues. For this
purpose it is not necessary that they should be muscular, but Mr.
Hunter asserts their muscularity: in a horse he found them mus-
cular to the eye, and they contracted upon being stimulated.

The heart, however, as in all cases of what is called increased
determination of blood, lends its powerful aid by acting with aug-
mented force.

As to the final cause of erection, the organ, by acquiring
increased bulk, firmness, and sensibility, becomes adapted for
affording and experiencing to the utmost extent the effects of
friction both as exciting pleasure and as stimulating the secreting
vessels; the increased length and narrowness of the urethra render
the emission more forcible. >


> Mr. Shaw pointed out a venous network running along the inside of the
urethra, but accumulated at what is called the membranous part, connected with


IN MAN. 743


‘«‘ When in a flaccid state, the penis is considerably bent at its
origin from the neck of the bladder ¢, and thus perfectly adapted
for the discharge of the urine, but quite unfit for the emission of
semen‘, because the beginning of the urethra then forms too
acute an angle with the openings of the seminal vesicles.

“The emission of semen is excited by its abundance in the
vesicles, and by sexual instinct ; it is effected by the violent tentigo
which obstructs the course of the urine, and, as it were, throws
the way open for the semen ; by a kind of spasmodic contraction
of the vesicule seminales; by a convulsion of the levatores anié
and of the acceleratores urine ; and by a succussion of the whole
system, short and less violent, though almost of an epileptic
nature, and followed by depression of strength.

The discharge of semen resembles the discharge of the fluids
of other glands. It is excited by the abundance of the fluid,


the corpus spongiosum, and forming two columns with a groove in the middle.
This must principally assist in narrowing the canal during erection, and, as the
columns unite before the prostate, must also contribute to prevent the semen
from moving towards the bladder, or the urine from flowing from the bladder,
Med. Chir. Trans. vol. x.

© *¢ See Camper, Demonstration. anat. pathologic. L. ii. tab. iii. fig. 1.”

4 « Gysb. Beudt, De fabrica et usu viscerum uropoieticorum. LB. 1774. 4to.
reprinted in Haller’s Collection of Anatomical Disputations, t. ili. tab. iii.”

€ < Carpus in Mundinum, p. 190°. and 310.”

f « For which reason Zeno, the father of the Stoic philosophy, called the loss
of semen the loss of part of the animating principle.”

Zeno’s practice was conformable to his principles. He is recorded to have
embraced his wife but once in his life, and then out of mere politeness.

Zenobia, the celebrated Queen of Palmyra and the East, was as extraordinary
a wife. She never admitted her husband’s embraces but for the sake of pos-
terity, and, if her wishes were baffled, she reiterated the experiment in the
ensuing month. (dugustan History, quoted by Gibbon, Decline and Fall, &c.
vol. ii. p. $8.)

Epicurus, Democritus, &c. were nearly of the same opinion with Zeno; and
the Athlete, that their strength might be unimpaired, never married. The
Rabbies, in their anxiety to preserve their nation, are said to have ordered, with
the view of preventing the loss of vigour, that a peasant should indulge but
once a week, a merchant but once a month, a sailor but twice a year, and a
studious man but once in two years, Moses forbad indulgence before battle.
Many plants die as soon as they have flowered: stags and fish are emaciated
after the sexual season, and the latter are no longer fit to eat: while the pre-
vention of fructification by the remoyal of the sexual organs renders annual
plants biennial and the latter triennial.


74:4: THE GENITAL FUNCTION IN MAN.


by mental or local stimulus, but most by mechanical irritation of the
extremity of the excretory duct, for in such a point of view must be
regarded the friction of the glans penis in copulation. The fluid is
accumulated in the bulb of the urethra, since it must be accumu-
lated somewhere to be emitted so copiously, and no other use can
be assigned to the bulb, and, if the vesicule do not receive it, no
other part than the bulb can; besides, it is upon the bulb that the
muscular contraction of the venereal paroxysm first acts. ‘The
semen acting as a stimulus to the cavity of the bulb of the urethra,
the muscles of that part of the canal are thrown into action, the
fibres nearest the bladder probably act first, and those more
forward in quick succession, and the semen is projected with
some force. The blood in the bulb of the urethra is by the same
action squeezed forward, but, requiring a greater impulse to propel
it, is rather later than the semen, on which it presses from behind ;
the corpus spongiosum, being full of blood, acts almost as quick
as undulation, in which it is assisted by the corresponding con-
striction of the urethra, and the semen is hurried along with a
considerable velocity.”*


® Hunter, Observations on the glands situated between the rectum and bladder,
called vesicule seminales, |. c. 45.


745


CHAP. DOxEx.


OF THE GENITAL FUNCTION OF WOMAN IN GENERAL.


“ As the male organs are fitted for giving, so the female organs
are fitted for receiving, and are correspondently opposite to the
former. In some parts, the organs of both sexes are very analo-
gous to each other in structure. Thus the clitoris, lying under
the pubes in the superior commissure of the labia, agrees in many
respects with the penis of the male, although distinct from the
urethra, and therefore imperforate, and extremely small in well-
formed women. It is recorded to have been, in some adult
females, of as comparatively large size as we stated it usually to
be in the feetus, and these instances have probably given rise to
most of the idle stories of hermaphrodites.* Like the penis, it
has its corpora cavernosa, is capable of erection, is covered with
a prepuce, and secretes a smegma not dissimilar from the Lit-
trian. >


« « Vide Haller, Comment. Soc. Scient. Gotting. vol. i. p. 12. sqq.

And among the moderns, D. Clarke in Sir Everard Home, Phil. Trans.
1799. p. 163.”

b <¢ Tn warm climates it, too, is liable to accumulation and acrimony, and has
hence been the occasion of the custom of female circumcision in many hot parts
of Africa and Asia. Carst. Niebuhr has given a view, executed to the life, of
the genitals of a circumcised Arabian female, eighteen years of age, whom he
himself was singularly fortunate in examining during his Oriental tour.
Beschreib. von Arabien, p.'77. sq.

And Osiander, Denkwiirdigheiten fiir die Heilkunde, &c. vol. ii. tab. vi. fig?”

This custom is mentioned even by Strabo. Burckhardt states that “the daugh-
ters of the Arabs, Ababde and Djaafere, who are of Arabian origin, and inhabit
the western bank of the Nile, from Thebes, as high as the cataracts, and generally
those of all the people to the south of Kenne and Esne, as far as Sennaar,
undergo circumcision, or rather excision of the clitoris, at the age of from three
to six years.” The healing of the wound is contrived to close the genitals, ex-
cepting at one point for the passage of the urine, and, as the adhesions are not


746 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


«From the clitoris the nymphe descend, also occasionally of
great size®, which has been the source of other idle tales4, and,


nnn EEE


broken through till the day before marriage, and then in the presence and with
the assistance of the intended bridegroom himself, no doubts of the fair’s vir-
ginity can harass his breast. T'ravels in Nubia, p. 332. sqq.

The same traveller, as well as Browne and Frank, relates that many slave
girls have their genitals sewn up, and, like eunuchs, become more valuable on
account of their unfitness for sexual connection. ‘‘ Mihi contigit,” says he,
“‘nigram quandam puellam, que hane operationem subierat, inspicere. Labia
pudendi acu et filo consuta mihi plane detecta fuere, foramine angusto in
meatum urine relicto.” He adds, “ Apud Esne, Siout, et Cairo, tonsores sunt,
qui obstructionem novacula amovent, sed vulnus haud raro lethale evenit.”

The adhesion may prevent admission of the male organ, but, like a dense hymen,
does not always prevent impregnation. In the Med. Chir. Trans. vol. Xi.,
afemale of the Eboe nation is mentioned as having been at an advanced
stage of pregnancy, in Jamaica, notwithstanding that, in consequence of
this operation, performed upon her when a child, in her native land, “a
cicatrix extended from the mons veneris to within an inch of the anus,
where there existed a small orifice barely sufficient for the introduction of
a small female catheter, through which orifice the urine and menses exuded.
The adhesion being removed by an incision with a sharp-pointed bistoury, the
delivery was easily accomplished.” A case is mentioned by Professor Rossi
(Archives générales, Oct. 1827), of impregnation with no other canal than one,
just sufficient to admit a small sound, opening within the anus. Examples of
the necessity for cutting or tearing the hymen, at the time of labour, may be
found in Ruysch, Mauriceau, and F. Hildanus, &c., and in the Transact. of the
London Medical Society, vol. i. P. 2. When the hymen is imperforate, impreg-
nation obviously never occurs, and an incision is required for the escape of the
accumulated menstrual fluid. See v. c. Ambrose Paré, lib, xxiii. c. xlii. or the
Med. Records and Researches. Harvey mentions a beautiful white mare belong-
ing to the queen, in which the entrance of the vagina had been fastened up by
iron rings to prevent her being covered, but, to the surprise of every body, she
was one day found to have foaled, and her offspring, in coming forth, had
lacerated the vagina on one side of the rings, which still retained their situation.
De Partu Evxercit. p. 557. Opera.

© « Their number likewise has occasionally varied. Vide Neubauer, De
triplici nympharum ordine. Jen, 1774. 4to.”

4 « J allude to the singular ventral skin of the Hottentot women. Wilh. ten.
Rhyne, from personal inspection long ago, considered it as enormous pendulous
nymphe. De promontorio b. spei, p. 33.

I have treated this point at large in my work, De Gen. Hum. Var, Nat, 242.
ed. 3.

Steller relates something similar in regard to the Kamtschatkan women.
Beschreib. v. d, Lande Kamtschatka, p. 300.”


IN WOMAN. 747


like the clitoris, possessing a high degree of sensibility. They
appear in some measure to direct the stream of urine, because the
opening of the urethra, which is very short in females, lies under
their commencement ; and it is frequently ciliated, as it were, with
small papillary folds.’

The clitoris and nymphe are termed the inner half ring, and
compared to the corolla; while the labia and mons veneris are
called the external, and compared to the calyx, of flowers.

‘Under the termination of the urethra lies the opening of the
vagina, surrounded by various kinds of crypt, v. c. the lacune
uretherice of De Graaff, and the orifices of the prostates, as they
are improperly termed, of Casp. Bartholin®, which secrete an
unctuous mucus.)

*“‘ Across the opening of the vagina the Hymeni is extended, —
a membrane generally circular, and found, as far as I know, in the
human subject only, of this form and in this situation.


Blumenbach, on the authority of Le Vaillant, states it to be a prolongation
of the labia, but we are now certain that W. ten. Rhyne was correct, and that it
is a prolongation of the nymphz, which often hang five inches below the labia.
(Dr. Somerville, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. vii. 1816. Barrow, T'ravels into the In-
terior of Southern Africa, vol.i.) It is this same tribe of Hottentot women that have
another connate singularity in the same quarter, common also to a variety of their
sheep, and the source of all the charms of the Hottentot Venus — a brilliant ex-
ample of denomination on the principle of dwcus a non lucendo, mentioned at
p- 702., and of whom an account is given by Cuvier, Mémoires du Muséum,
t. ili. p. 269.

© «T find the opening of the urethra surrounded by very beautiful cutaneous
cilia of this kind, in a remarkable specimen of the genitals of a woman upwards
of eighty years of age. The hymen is entire, and all the other parts most per-
fectly, and, as it were, elaborately, formed. They are preserved in my museum,
and my friend and colleague, Osiander, has represented them in a plate. l.c.
tA. Ve

f «« See J. James Huber’s plates of the uterus, among those of Haller, fase. 1.
fabs tie fig, Io ge

& « Tbid. fig. 1. b. b. — fig. 5. d.”

h ¢¢ Such also are the two foramina, very frequently observed in living women
by J. Dryander, at the extremity of the vagina. Nic. Massa, Epist. Medicinal,
t. i. page 123. b.”

i « John Wm. Tolberg, De Varietate Hymenum. Hal. 1791. 4to.

Osiander, |. c. tab. i.—vii.”

k « Handbuch der vergleich, Anat. p. 472. Respecting parts somewhat analogous


3D


748 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


“The remains of the lacerated hymen become the caruncule
myrtiformes, which are of no regular number, and are infallible
signs of the loss of virginity. !

“‘ The vagina, ascending between the urinary bladder and rec-
tum, consists of a very vascular cellular parenchyma, is sur-
rounded inferiorly by the constrictor cunni™, and lined internally
with a very soft coat, which is marked by two very beautiful
columns of ruge™,—an anterior and posterior ®, pouring forth a
mucus into its cavity.

“Upon the superior part of the vagina rests the uterus, sus-
pended on either side by its broad ligaments.

“Its cylindrical cervix? is embraced by the vagina, and perfo-
rated by a narrow canal, which, like the vagina, is marked by
ruge denominated the arbor vite, and is generally lined with a
viscid mucus at each opening, but particularly at the superior or
internal.

“The substance of the uterus is peculiar, — a very dense and


in some brute females, see the distinguished Duverney, Mém. préseniées, &c.
physical class, t. ii. p. 89.”

1 Cuvier declares that he has found the hymen in very many mammalia (Leg.
d Anat. comp. t. v. p. 131, 132.), overthrowing the doctrine, so strenuously main-
tained by Haller, of its existence for moral purposes. And, were it confined
to the human female, the various size of its aperture, and the various firmness of
the organs, must ever leave those in uncertainty who can on their marriage
indulge in sensual doubts. We read, in Hume, that Henry the Eighth, who
certainly had his share of experience, boasted his discrimination (History of
England, ch, xxxii.); but in the East the difficulty was in ancient times pro-
verbial. (Proverbs, xxx. 19.) The lover of Italian literature knows how ex-
quisitely natural is every description of Boccacio’s, and will recollect his story
of the daughter of the Sultan of Babylon: — “ Essa, che con otto uomini forse
diecemilia volte giaciuta era, allato a lui (al Re del Garbo) si coricd per pulcella,
e fecegliele credere, che cosi fosse: e Reina con lui lietamente poi pit tempo
visse: epercid si disse: Bocca basciata non perde ventura, anzi rinnuova, come
fa la luna.” (Decamerone, Giornata seconda, Novella vii.)

m « Eustachius, tab. xiv. fig. i. XX.

Santorini, Zab. Posth. xvii. 1. 1.”

" « Huber, De Vagine Uteri structura rugosa, necnon de Hymene. Gotting.
1742. 4to.”

° “Vide Haller, Icones Anat, fase. ii. tab. vi. fig. 1, 2.”

P © Roederer, Icones Uteri Humani, tab. vii. fig. 2, 3, 4.”


IN WOMAN. 749


compact parenchyma‘ abounding in blood-vessels, which run in
a curious serpentine direction’, and the veins are destitute of
valves. It has also on its external surface a supply of lymphaticss,
and of nervest, which occasion its remarkable sympathy with
other parts.

“The uterus is covered externally with peritoneum; its inter-
nal cavity is small, and lined, especially at the fundus, with a soft
and very delicate spongy membrane, which is composed, ac-
cording to some, of colourless arteries and veins, and", according
to others, of lymphatics.” *

The muscularity of the uterus is denied by Malpighi, Walter,
Ribke, &c.y, and by Blumenbach, who says, “I have never yet dis-
covered a true muscular fibre in any human uterus which I have
dissected, whether impregnated or unimpregnated, recent or
prepared ; and it must be allowed, by those who maintain the
muscularity of the uterus, that the fibres, which they call muscu-
lar, have qualities very different from those of all others in the
system, especially since they themselves entertain doubts of the
existence of nerves in the substance of the uterus, without
which one cannot imagine a true muscle. I am daily more con-
vinced that the uterus has no true irritability; but, if any part of
the body has, a vita propria, perfectly correspondent with the
peculiar motions and functions of the uterus, which are not refer-
able to any properties common to the similar parts, and which
appeared to the ancient physicians and philosophers so peculiar,


,
1 «J. Gottfr. Weisse (Pres. Rud. Boehmer) De Structura Uteri non muscu-


losa, sed cellulosa vasculosa. Vitemb. 1784. 4to.

I. G. Walter, Was ist Geburtshiilfe. Berlin, 1808. 8vo. p. 54.”

r <¢Td. De Morbis Peritonai, tab. i. ii.”

* «Mascagni, tab. xiv.”

t « Walter, Tab. Nerv. Thorac. et Abdom. tab. 1.

J. F. Osiander, Commentatio premio Regio ornata, qua edisseritur uterum
nervos habere. ‘Gott. 1808. 4to.”

u ¢ Ferrein, Mémoires de l Acad. des Sc. de Parts, 1741. p. $75.”

x « Mascagni, l.c. page 4.”

y ¢‘ Consult, besides the great Malpighi, Walter, Betracht, iiber die Geburstheile
des weiblichen Geschl. p. 25. sq.

Chr. H. Ribke, Ueber die Structur der Gebihrmutter. Berl. 17938. 8vo.

But chiefly J. F. Lobstein, Magasin Encyclopédique, redigé par Mu.urn,
vol. xlix. 1803, t. i. page 357. sq.”

oD 2


750 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


that the uterus was by them denominated an animal within an
animal.”

But its muscularity is allowed by Morgagni, Mery, Littre,
Astruc, Ruysch, Monro, Vieussens, Haller, &c.#: and Sir Charles
Bell gives the following description of the muscular structure of
this organ : —

“ The muscularity of the uterus is proved by direct ocular
demonstration of the fibres in dissection, by the thickness of the
fibres corresponding with their degree of contraction, by the
visible action of the human uterus during life, by the resemblance
of the laws of its contraction (as felt and as perceived in its
consequences), to those which govern the contraction of other
hollow viscera, and lastly, by the vermicular and intestinal motions
of the uterus, as seen in experiments upon brutes.”

“The most curious and obviously useful part of the muscular
substance of the uterus has been overlooked; I mean the mus-
cular layer of fibres which covers the upper segment of the
gravid uterus. The fibres arise from the round ligaments, and
regularly diverging, spread over the fundus until they unite and
form the outermost stratum of the muscular substance of the
uterus.”

“ The substance of the gravid uterus is powerfully and dis-
tinctly muscular ; but the course of the fibres is here less easily
described than might be imagined. Towards the fundus the
circular fibres prevail ; towards the orifice the longitudinal fibres
are most apparent; and, on the whole, the most general course
of the fibres is from the fundus towards the orifice. This pre-
valence of longitudinal fibres is undoubtedly a provision for dimi-
nishing the length of the uterus, and for drawing the fundus
towards the orifice. At the same time these longitudinal fibres
must dilate the orifice, and draw the lower part of the womb
over the head of the child.

“ In making sections of the uterus while it retained its natural
muscular contraction, I have been much struck in observing how
entirely the blood-vessels were closed and invisible, and how
open and distinct the mouths of the cut blood-vessels became


* «TI have spoken of these points at large in my program, De vi vitali sanguini
deneganda, c. Gott. 1795. 4to. p. 15. sq.”

“ « See, for instance, Sue, Mém. présentés, vol. v.

L. Calza, Atti dell’ Acad. di Padova, t. i. ii.”


IN WOMAN. 751


when the same portions of the substance of the uterus were dis-
tended and relaxed.” ‘ A very principal effect of the muscular
action of the womb is the constringing of the numerous vessels
which supply the placenta, and which must be ruptured when the
placenta is separated from the womb.”

“ Upon inverting the uterus and brushing off the decidua, the
muscular structure is very distinctly seen. The inner surface of
the fundus consists of two sets of fibres, running in concentric
circles round the orifices of the Fallopian tubes. These circles at
their circumference unite and mingle, making an intricate tissue.
Ruysch, I am inclined to believe, saw the circular fibres of one
side only», and not adverting to the circumstance of the Fallo-
pian tube opening in the centre of these fibres, which would
have proved their lateral position, he described the muscle as
seated in the centre of the fundus uteri. This structure of the
inner surface of the fundus of the uterus is still adapted to the
explanation of Ruysch, which was, that this produced contraction
and corrugation of the surface of the uterus, which the placenta,
not partaking of, the cohesion of the surface was necessarily
broken.

«¢ Further, I have observed a set of fibres of the inner surface
of the uterus which are not described. They commence at the
centre of the last described muscle, and having a course at first
in some degree vorticose, they descend in a broad irregular band
towards the orifice of the uterus. These fibres co-operating with
the external muscle of the uterus, and with the general mass of
fibres in the substance of it, must tend to draw down the fundus
and lower segment of the uterus over the child’s head.

“ T have not succeeded in discovering circular fibres in the os
tincee, corresponding in place and office with the sphincter of
other hollow viscera, and I am therefore inclined to believe, that,
in the relaxing and opening of the orifice of the uterus, the
change does not result from a relaxation of muscular fibres sur-
rounding the orifice. Indeed, it is not reasonable to conceive
that the contents of the uterus are to be retained during the
nine months of gestation by the action of a sphincter muscle.
The loosening of the orifice, and that softening and relaxation


b Discovered by Weitbrecht, and first accurately observed by Dr, Hunter.


3p 3


752 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


which precede labour, are quite unlike the yielding of a mus-
cular ring.” ©

«‘ From the angles of the roof or fundus of the uterus arise on
each side the Fallopian tubes4—narrow and tortucus canals,
running in the upper part of the duplicature of the broad liga-
ments, similar in texture to the vagina, except that they are in-
ternally destitute of ruge, and lined by a very soft and delicate
spongy substance.

“ The extremity which opens into the abdomen is not only
larger than that which opens into the uterus, but is surrounded
by laciniated and, as it were, digitated fimbrie, peculiar and ele-
gant in structure, that are probably of great importance in con-
ception, since they appear to become turgid, as well as the tubes
themselves, during the venereal cestrum, and to embrace the
ovaria over which they lie.

“« The ovaria, or, as they were termed previously to the time
of Stenonis¢, the female testes, are composed of a tough and al-
most tendinous covering, and a dense and closely compacted
cellular substance, which contains in each ovarium about fifteen
ovula, called Graafian, viz. vesicles, or rather drops of albuminous
yellowish serum, which coagulate like genuine white of egg, if
the recent ovarium is plunged into boiling water.”

They exceed the testes in weight and every dimension, both in
man and all other mammalia.

“ Such an albuminous drop appears to be the chief fluid which
the female contributes in the business of conception, and it is
probable that, during the adult state, these drops become mature
in succession, so that they one by one force their way, and finally
burst the covering of the ovarium and are received by the abdo-
minal extremity of the Fallopian tube.

** Besides the albuminous drop which escapes from the ovarium,
another fluid, improperly styled female semen by the ancients, is
poured forth during the venereal cestrum.” Blumenbach says
that “ its nature, source, and quantity are enveloped in no less


© Med. Chir. Trans. vol. ivy.
“ « Fallopius, Observ. Anat. p. 197.”
* « For Stenonis was the first who asserted that the testes of women were


analogous to an ovarium, in 1667. See his Elementor. Myologie Specimen.
page 117. sqq.”


IN WOMAN. 753


mystery than its office.” It is certainly sent forth suddenly when
delight is at its height; but whether it is more than common
mucus may be doubted.


a. Section of fundus of uterus. 0. Section of its anterior part. cc. Small
portions of its external surface near its edge. dd. Section of the anterior part
of the neck. ee. Section of the anterior edge of the lower opening of the neck.
* Posterior edge of the lower opening of the neck, g. Cavity and posterior
wall of the uterus: up the wall is a median prominence bifurcating above to-
wards the superior angles of the organ. h. Cavity of the neck. 7%. Section of
the anterior wall of the vagina. i. Cavity and posterior wall of the vagina.
ll. Very fine canals traversing the angles of the uterus to become continuous
with the Fallopian tubes. _m. Cavity of the left Fallopian tube. . Dilatation
of this cavity near the pavilion of the tube. o. The pavilion slit open, and sur-
rounded by fimbriz. _p. Fringe uniting the pavilion with the ovary. q. Left
ovary completely divided longitudinally. 7 7. Vesicles in the ovarian tissue.
s. Ligament of the ovary. ¢ Right Fallopian tube entire. wu. Its pavilion.
». Right ovary. ww. Portion of peritoneum forming the corresponding broad
ligament.


General sexual differences of form and structure are observable among but few
plants ; insects are the first that display them among invertebrate animals ; and
in some insects the difference is as complete as in the highest, and indeed the male
may have not the least external resemblance to the female. General sexual dif-
ferences are not unusual in the crustacea. Among vertebrate animals, the general
sexual differences are slight in fish and reptiles; more evident in mammalia ;
and striking in birds, which in so many other respects resemble insects. In man,
the difference pervades every part of the body ; and, if the oyaria or testes are ab-
sent, not well developed, or removed, the sexual character is impaired, and the
characteristics of the opposite sex are more or less acquired. The hair, feathers,
nails, horns, claws, and canine teeth are constantly seen more abundant, larger, or
more beautiful in the male brute, orseeninitonly, The stature is generally lower
in the female, the breadth greater, and the whole bulk less, and this even in dicecious


f « Respecting this still problematical fluid see Carpus in Mundinum,
P. exeviii. sqq. and cccviii.
Harvey, De Generatione Animal. p. 95.
De Graaf, De Mulierwm Organis, p. 194.”
B.D 4


754 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


plants; but in many classes the female is taller, and perhaps largeraltogether than the
male. Some male plants and brutes have odorous secretions by the skin or organs
connected with it far stronger than the female, or exclusively. In some insects
the male or female has certain members peculiarly shaped, or larger ; or members
not seen at all in the other sex. Many male insects change their skin more fre-
quently than the female.

The lower orders of animals are remarkable for possessing extraordinary power
of generation. The polygastric are fissiparous * and every part of the body is thus
generative, and some also gemmiparous, and even oviparous. Porifera are gem-
miparous, and each sends forth thousands of buds in a season, and lives during seve-
ral. Zoophytes are gemmiparous. The freshwater polype or hydra will shoot out
gemmze or buds, which develop into new beings, and these before they are detached
may develop others, and these also others; and the young will attach themselves
to substances, so that when the parent moves on they may be torn away : it is
fissiparous also. In the ramified horny tubular zoophytes, the gemmez or
buds are formed in vesicles which present themselves at different parts of the
body. Something is seen developing itself at the bottom within, which extends
upwards, drawing with it a narrow portion like a chord. This at length disap-
pears, and the bud is developed, and moves freely by its cilia in the vesicle ;
and, as soon as the lid drops off from the free extremity of the capsule, the bud
feels the water in which it is destined to live, and swims away, to attach itself to
some hard substance and become developed into a polype. In the acalepha the
seat of the buds is more determinate, being different in different species. In the
echinodermata, not only is this the case, but distinct organs are seen for the pro-
duction of the bud: in the asterias, two glandular and vesicular sacs in each of the
radiated divisions of the body; in the echinus, five. In the lowest articulated clas-
ses, as the cystic entozoa, for instance, the cysticercus, coenurus, and echinococcus,
there is no distinction of sex, but buds are developed from their internal parietes,
and, becoming detached, float loose in the parent sac. The long flat articulated
teenioid entozoa and the distoma hepaticum have ovaries, but no distinction of
sex. In the long cylindrical entozoa, the acanthocephalus and nematoid, the
sexes are distinct, and impregnation takes place internally, as seen in the echi-
norhyncus and ascaris. The sexes are generally distinct in those parasites which
attach themselves to the exterior of other animals, as the lernaz, chondrocanthus,
achtheres ; and helminthoid articulata are supposed each to contain male and
female organs ; but the office of what are spoken of as male organs is considered
by Dr. Grant to be unknown. Cirrhopods and the highly organised annelides
are all of one sex, and some of the lowest of the latter, as the stylaria paludosa, have
been seen to divide transversely into several new animals. The earth-worm is her-


® See Spallanzani’s admirable Observations et Expériences sur les Animalcules.
He found a small portion detach itself from the bodies of some, the bodies of
others split longitudinally, of others transversely, of others both longitudinally and
transversely into four parts; and the new animalcules soon acquired the size of
the parent and experienced the same changes in their turn. See also the ac-
count of the planaria, p. 254. supra. Division and growth proceed so rapidly in
the polygastrica, that one individual has been computed to be able to give origin
to a million in seven days.


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 755


maphrodite, and two individuals mutually impregnate each other, — thus having
double joys. Gaudeant bene nati! The myriopods, arachnida, and crustacea
have but one sex in each individual. Insects have not only distinction of sex,
but the external characters of the two sexes are often so different that the male
and female scarcely seem to belong to the same genus or even order. There is
also great variety in the structure of their genitals. In regard to the mollusca,
the ascidia and oyster cannot go courting, as they are settled from the moment of
their birth, and therefore these acephala and many other higher mollusca which
have imperfect means of locomotion, as among the gasteropoda, have no distinc-
tion of sex ; some are solely female, and some are supposed to be hermaphro-
dite. So with the pteropods. In the pectinibranchiate gasteropoda, comprising
almost all the inhabitants of univalve, unilocular, and spiral or turbinated shells,
and in cephalopods, each sex is in a distinct individual. Like cephalopods and ver-
tebrate animals, fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds, and mammalia have distinction
of sex. The male and female genital organs of animals hitherto spoken of are
closed at their upper extremities, and the canal which opens externally is con-
tinuous with the most internal part. This form remains in the male in all these
classes and even in man: but from the cartilaginous fishes onwards through all
the vertebrata the ovary is insulated and close, and its contents have to burst
through its walls to enter the oviduct. In all the vertebrata the sexual organs
are double and symmetrical in early existence, but their development proceeds
unequally on both sides in the females of birds and monotrema, or the existence
of one oviduct is the last remnant of their unsymmetrical arrangement, so com-
mon in the invertebrata and especially in the molluscous tribes. At the early
stage of existence the genitals of the two sexes in the highest vertebrata are
very similar ; and even at full development in the lowest, so that many fishes have
been regarded by some as all females, where there probably was distinction of sex
in individuals, The two sexes of fish not only resemble each other closely in
their genitals, but also in the rest of their body, as in higher vertebrate ani-
mals before puberty, just as though they were invertebrate animals in which there
is no distinction of sexual organs and therefore the rest of the body of all is alike.
In the highest cartilaginous fish, — the reptile form of fish, — rays and sharks, a
marked external and internal sexual difference begins. The females are larger,
and the males have more beauty and variety of colour. The sexual functions of
fish, as of inferior tribes, is more subjected to the influence of season, and they
have fewer instincts in regard to their future progeny than the higher classes.
In the osseous fishes, in which the structure of the sexual organ is the most
simple, there is no sexual intercourse, but the male impregnates the ova after their
separation from the female. They are usually discharged all at once in a mass.
Jn viviparous kinds, as in almost all animals in which impregnation takes place
internally, the ova are developed successively ; and the young are often very
large before by a strong action of their tails they burst the outer membrane
of the ovary, which, as in higher animals, communicates by a small opening
with the smali intestine. The females of the oviparous proceed, without impreg-
nation, in order to spawn in places suited to their ova and the young, at their season
of generation, “ often in vast shoals to a different climate, or to the shallow shores
of the sea, or ascend estuaries and overleap cataracts,” while the males follow


756 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


them to impregnate the discharged ova. The parents “ leave to nature the deve-
lopment and rearing of the embryos and young, attached by their glutinous ex-
terior to rocks or plants. In the syngnothus the ova are received from the anus
into a Jong external abdominal pouch, formed by two lateral folds of the skin,
in which they are hatched, like the ova attached to the false feet under the post
abdomen of a lobster, or like the young in the abdominal pouch of a marsupial
quadruped, or in the dorsal cells” of a pipa. ‘* The male of the Surinam toad
— bufo dorsiger spreads the newly discharged ova over the rough back of the
female, and there impregnates them, exposed upon the surface and adhering. The
female betakes herself to the water, and the skin of the back, at first without
cavities, extends over them in the form of open cells, where not only the ova are
hatched, but where the young remain till they have passed through their me-
tamorphosis, lost their gills, acquired feet, and are ready to accompany their parent
to her wonted dungeons and solitary haunts. The male of the little bufo obstreti-
cans assists in extricating the large ova from its mate, impregnates them, and fixes
them in clusters by glutinous filaments to its own thighs. It thus retains the
developing ova till near the period of their hatching, when it betakes itself to
the water; the ova burst, and the male parent, cleared of its burden, seeks its
accustomed rocky retreats.”

Like the highest cartilaginous fish,—rays and sharks, the amphibia have a local
and general sexual distinction, and their ovaries are distinct and unconnected with
the oviducts. Their sexual distinctions are often increased at the breeding season.
‘“‘ The longitudinal dorsal serrated crest of the male tritons, and the hands of many
of the male frogs, undergo a considerable change in size and form, corresponding
with the periodical changes in the generative organs within, and we observe the same
kind of changes produced periodically in the external dorsal cells of the female
pipa. Sometimes the whole anterior extremities of the male frogs enlarge at the
breeding season, and theexternal colours become more lively, as in the sides of the
finny tribes in the season of procreation.” Their generative organs are symmetri-
cal on the two sides of their body, and have extraordinary fertility. In regard to
frogs ‘the ova, seized by the wide infundibula of the oviducts, imbibe through
their chorion, a transparent gelatinous secretion as they pass through their canals,
which envelops the whole yolk, and which swells to a great size by absorbing
water when the ova are discharged from the body into that medium.” “ The
testicles, and the whole of the genital parts of the male, swell at the breeding
season, like those of the female; and the male frogs, which are smaller than the
female, leap upon their back, and, embracing their abdomen firmly with their en-
larged tuberculated wrists, remain in that situation several weeks. The females
betake themselves with their burden to the water, where from the density of that
element the weight they support is diminished, and where they are excited to the
expulsion of the ova and assisted in that process by the pressure of the adhering
and embracing armsof the male. As the ovaare expelled, they are impregnated
externally by the effusion of the seminal fluid from the cloaca of the male,
without the aid of an organ of intromission, as in the lowest oviparous fishes.”
The small number which are not devoured by other animals are developed
much like those of osseous fishes, and are burst by the action of the black un-
coiling tail of the embryo, As the lowest animals are exposed incessantly to


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 757


causes of destruction, without the means of foresight or escape, they produce in
myriads, a large portion of which perish before they arrive at maturity. In pro-
portion as animals have more intelligence and more means of defence, by possess-
ing a higher organisation, the number of progeny is diminished, and the young
are retained longer in connection with the body of the parent. ‘ The internal
mode of impregnation, and consequently the internal development of the em-
bryo, to a variable extent, becomes a normal character, from the ophidian rep-
tiles through all the higher orders of vertebrata. By the gradual development
and ascendancy of the organs of excitement, and the consequent increased
connection of pleasure with the generative function, it becomes more subject
to the will and feelings of animals, less regulated by the seasons, Jess influ-
ential in the economy, and more precise and limited in its results. The male
fluid is no longer thrown indiscriminately over myriads of ova already dis-
charged and detached from the body of the female, but is conveyed, with great
precision, by the activity of the villous surface of the oviducts, to excite a
limited number of ova, and commence the development of the young while
yet within the body of the parent. Purkinje and Valentin say that they have
seen vibratory cilia in rapid action in the living mucous membrane of the oviducts
and Fallopian tubes of reptiles, birds, and mammalia, and also on the mucous
lining of the lungs for half an hour after death, by viewing the detached mem-
brane in water under the microscope.”’” In the ophidian reptiles the sexes are
distinct, the sexual organs are double and symmetrical, though very similar
in their permanent form and situation in each sex, the external differences
of the sex are not well marked, and impregnation takes place internally. The
male and female serpents in their amours “dart their tongues, rub their necks
and their glittering skins together, twine their bodies round each other, roll upon
the ground, and bring their ani into contact.’? The ova arrive at different
degrees of development in the oviduct, and are often hatched there, but are
generally deposited in the ground under bushes, long grass, or stones, or
in the cavities of decayed trees; and the rearing of the young is left to
nature. Geoffrey found that, if common snakes were kept in water, the ova
remained in the ducts till they were hatched, so that the animal could be
made viviparous or oviparous at pleasure. The male organ is generally double,
bifurcated, and covered with recurved stiff spines at its lower extremity ; each
half has a bifurcated glans in boas and pythons. The male and female or-
gans of the saurian reptiles agree in general with those of the ophidia. The
penis of crocodilian sauria is an imperfectly divided corpus cavernosum, grooved
below, and forming a tube by the meeting of its sides during erection. The penis
of the lacertine, iguanian, and sincoid sauria is double throughout. The ova are
hatched out of the body by the heat of the climate which they inhabit. Some
are viviparous, as the Seps, which is almost a serpent. The eggs of the iguana
of South America are large, and consist chiefly of yelk, and are used as articles
of food. The alligator of Guiana deposits about sixty in the loose grass, covers
them with dried leaves or stones, and defends them boldly when they are attacked.
The alligators bellow like oxen in the season of love. Their eggs, too, are used
in Carolina as food, The crocodiles of the Nile copulate lying on their sides ;


758 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


the males fight fiercely for the females, which are in smaller number; and the
females deposit eggs larger than those of a swan, twenty together, three times,
after short intervals, in cavities dug in the sand with their muzzles, watch and
assist the escape of the young, defend them from the males which are very fond of
eating them up, and even feed them, some say, from their crops like pigeons.
The chelonian reptiles differ in no point of generation remarkably from the sau-
rian and ophidian, and, like them and others in which the approach of the sexual
organ is rather difficult, have the penis disproportionately long. The penis has a
double corpus cavernosum, the lower median groove of which forms a canal
by the meeting of the sides, as in crocodiles, during erection.

Birds, like insects, have high mental endowments, and far more than mere
sexual desire. ‘* They select a safe retreat, most carefully construct their nests,
watch over the products of generation with parental care, and provide for the diffi-
culties and dangers which attend the helpless condition of the young.” Yet the
condition of the generative organs is scarcely higher than that of the lowest reptile
which throws its eggs into the water and leaves them for ever; for the eggs are
developed out of the body. As these are hatched by the close contact of the ma-~
ternal abdomen, they require a strong shell, which must at the same time be brittle
for the escape of the young. The existence of two oviducts sufficient for. their
safe transmission would be impossible ; and hence one set of genital organs (the
right ovary and oviduct) atrophies, while the left increases. Even when the
testes are of different sizes, the right is the smaller, showing the existence of a
law prevailing in both sexes, though less powerful in the male. “ The cock,
like the male frog, leaps upon the back of the female, seizes her head with his
beak, fans her with his wings, and pushes her tail to one side, and, when the
ani are juxtaposed, the male fluid, or the male influence, is hurried on by the
active lining of the oviduct to impregnate at ence numerous developed ova,
which descend in slow succession through the open elastic pelvis to be hatched
externally.”” The seminal vessels end in two papille in the cloaca, which cor-
respond with the double penis so common in serpents and reptiles. The un-
impregnated female can periodically discharge crops of ova, as the sexless coral
does its gemmules ; but their development requires the male infiuence. The testes,
as in all the vertebrata hitherto spoken of, and the inferior mammalia, lie within.

In the mammalia not only is each sex found in a different individual, but
usually the general distinction of the two is pervading and intense, the sexual
organs double and complicated, and one or both parents occupy themselves
with the care of the young after their disclosure from the mother. The ova-
ries are comparatively far smaller than those of the lower classes, and contain
but few ova. The oviducts, still distinct from the ovarium, as in all the ver-
tebrate tribes hitherto mentioned above the osseous fishes, continue also dis-
tinct from each other, as in these, through their whole course, in some of the
inferior mammalia, — as the marsupialia, monotrema, and rodentia, so that
these are said to have a divided uterus. In the higher, they are united ; and,
if so at their lower part only, the uterus formed by them is said to be horned,
as in ruminating and most other herbivorous animals, and in some carnivora ;
and, if they are united to a higher point, we have the triangular uterus of the


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 759


quadrumana or the more pyriform human uterus. The females have a cli-
toris for excitement, but it is small: single in the highest ; divided in those
animals which have the penis bifid, and supplied with a bone, when the penis has
one. Its presence is much more constant thanin reptiles and birds, as well
as its development greater.

** The openings of the female urinary and genital organs are as close in the mo-
notrema, and nearly as close in the marsupials, as in oviparous vertebrata ; but,
as we ascend, we find the openings more separate. The cloaca, or cavity re-
ceiving the opening of the digestive, urinary, and genital organs in oviparous
vertebrata, is in mammalia divided by the descent of the rectal vestibula, so that
it opens by a true anus; and the urethro-sexual canal is separated from the rectal,
as we ascend from the monotrema, and the rodentia and edentata, through the
higher order of quadrupeds. ‘The original abdominal situation of the testes of
the higher mammalia and man”’ is. permanently “ preserved in many of the
lowest mammalia, as in the cetacea and the monotrema; in others they descend,
guided by the gubernaculum testis, to a variable extent, towards the abdominal
ring, as in the seals and the walrus; in others they pass out through the abdomi-
nal ring only at the rutting season, to swell externally, and afterwards in their
more collapsed state to be returned into the abdomen, as in numerous genera of
burrowing rodentia; and in most of the higher order of mammalia, as in the
carnivorous cheiroptera, quadrumana, and man, they pass down early into an
inguinal scrotal cavity, and remain permanently external to the abdominal cavity.
They come down earliest into this region in man.” The epididymis and vasa
efferentia enlarge in inferior mammalia during the season of generation, which
is more regular and periodical than in the higher tribes. The vesiculz seminales
are very irregular in their form and inconstant in their existence, being large
reservoirs in many of the lowest quadrupeds, as the rodentia and pachydermata,
and the higher orders of cheiroptera, quadrumana, and man, and absent in many
intermediate animals among the ruminantia, the monotrema, marsupialia, and
carnivora. Cowper’s glands are larger and more subdivided than in man. The
prostate is commonly double, composed of many large branched follicles, and
more constant than the vesicule. The glans penis has often recurvated horny
spines, as in reptiles, to fix it during long copulation, and the same animals
have frequently a bone in the penis to support the urethra.

‘* The penis is still spiny and bifid, and lodged in the cloaca in the ornitho-
rynchus, as in reptiles; it is bifid in many marsupialia, concealed in the cloaca
in some rodentia, very large and concealed beneath the exterior parietes of the
abdomen in the cetacea, suspended along the abdomen in the herbivorous and
carnivorous quadrupeds, and hangs free in the cheiroptera and quadrumana, as
in man.” The ovum, having escaped from the ovary, attaches itself by one or
more points to the interior of the uterus, where it is matured to a variable extent
in different orders, is hatched in the act of expulsion, “ naked, feeble, and help-
less,”’ at its birth, and it requires suckling and parental tending. The situation
of the breasts varies according to the facility of sucking; and the number of
the nipples correspond with the number of young usually produced by the ani-«
mal, — ordinarily two when the breasts are thoracic; they may have a single open-
ing as in the ruminants, or rany as in most of the mammalia, — (See Dr.
Grant's Lectures in The Lancet, No. 590. 593. 597.)


760 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


The following is a general anatomical view of the grades of the organs of
generation in animals, compiled from Burdach ; —

The ovarium may be a single tube, closed at its inner extremity and open at
the outer: and the ovum is produced at the closed end, and passes on to the
outer, becoming more perfect as it proceeds. A fluid is secreted into this blind
canal, as into the ducts of glands, condenses, and becomes an ovum on the free
surface. There may be many such tubes, opening into a common excretory
duct; or this may be of great size and take a different direction, so that the
tubes appear as branches and it the stem. If these are bound together by cel-
lular membrane, they have the appearance of a gland.

The ovarium may be cellular, and the fluid of the ova be secreted into close
cells, the walls of which it bursts as it advances to maturity. These cells may
be merely spaces in the tissues or be cavities of distinct vesicles, — the cellular
ovary may be interstitial or vesicular. The cavity of the interstitial is produced
solely by the fluid secreted in the tissue taking the form of an ovum in it and
thus producing a cavity, from which in a certain time it bursts: in some cases
there is a cavity for it to burst into, and this cavity may serve as a receptacle and
conductor, or as a receptacle only, ‘These are are successively higher grades,
and in some fish, chelonian reptiles, birds, and the mammalia, the highest form
of ovarium is found, —the vesicular-—a collection of ‘vesicles in a modified
cellular substance, covered by peritoneum, and, in the mammalia, invested, be-
neath the peritonzeum, with a peculiar coat, called albuginea. Each vesicle has
a semitransparent external coat of cellular membrane, and a thicker, less trans-
parent, and softer internal, with fine granules on its inner surface.

The product of the ovarium, or ovum, is in vegetables termed the seed. At
first it is a cellular exerescence, below which are several trachez, and, lengthen-
ing more and more, its bore contracting at the same time and becoming a peduncle,
ultimately forms the umbilical chord. At the same time, three parts become dis-
tinct — an external membrane —/esta ; an internal — tegumen ; and the nucleus;
placed one within the other, but touching at their base only —the chalaza,
The summit of the nucleus projects through an opening, termed micropyle, in
the two membranes. At this summit fecundation oceurs when it comes
in contact with a point in the inner wall of the ovary where a chord terminates.
In the nucleus a cavity now takes place, which increases, and in which the
embryo forms.

The animal ovum is produced from the partial condensation of the liquid se-
ereted in the ovum ; which liquid is called the embryotrophe, as nourishing the
embryo, and forms both the coverings of the ovum and the embryo itself. The
embryotrophe is the yelk, usually yellow, and contains more or less albumen and
fatty oil. In many animals, a white nutritive substance, called the white, is
added to it in concentric layers. The covering of the ovum, produced by the
condensation of the external part of the embryotrophe, resembles cuticle, and
is not an obstacle to the penetration of the fluids of the ovarium or testicle, or of
their influence. The germ is composed of two parts, —the one a mass of gra-
nulations on the surface of the yelk, — stratum proligerum ; the other a vesicle
— vesicula proligera, and situated in or below the stratum ; both which become
confounded during fecundation or the exit of the ovum from the oyarium, so
that the stratum only exists and becomes the embryo. Baer discovered the


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 761


ovum in the ovarian vesicle of the mammalia, in regard to which it previously
was supposed not to be formed in the fluid of the vesicle till after this had burst.
The ovum of oviparous animals abundantly absorbs the fluid of the ovarian
vesicle, so that its exterior is almost closely applied to the latter; whereas, in
mammalia, the ovum absorbs the ovarian fluid in very small quantity, whence
this accumulates, and distends the vesicle to from fifteen to fifty times a greater
size than the ovum, which is one 20,000th part of the bulk of the mother, in
woman.

The testicle has various grades, like the ovarium. It may be tubular
or glandular: the former showing its tubular form externally, and consisting
of a simple tube or branches; the latter having its canals aggregated into a
mass.

In vegetables, the semen, or contents of the grains of the pollen, is called
fovilla, and is a mucilaginous liquid, mixed with drops of oil and grains of starch,
and inflammable, Its chief part is pollenine—a white and light inflammable
powder, insoluble in water, alcohol, ether, oils, and alcalies. It has been lately
found by M. Meyer of Berlin to contain entozoa.

The ovarium and testis have many parts of comparison and contrast. The
ovary is the original organ of generation, and the testis is added in higher systems
only. Their purpose is the same: the elementary form of each in the lowest scale
of animals is tubular ; and the testis remains tubular, though its tubes are, in the
higher animals, conglomerated into a mass. They are each as generally double
or symmetrical in animals. The higher the point in the scale, the less is the
resemblance, as the ovarium undergoes a regular progression, which does not
take place with the testicle. The globular form indicates completion, — an ac-
tion confined to itself, and is found in the ovary; the lengthened shape of the
testis indicates an action in relation to something external: the highest kind of
ovarium is close ; the testis always opens externally : and the ovarium, even in
vegetables, is the more internal or central organ : in almost all animals, — in all,
except some which have it in the lowest degree of development, it is situated in
the abdomen. In some mammalia the testis is outside the abdomen, except
during the season of heat; in the higher mammalia, after having once quitted
the abdomen, it never re-enters; and in man only is it made completely extra-
abdominal, by the complete cohesion of the portion of peritoneum between the
testis and the abdominal ring.

The median organs of generation are those which stand between the pro-
ducing and the discharging organs. ‘The female median organs, or oviducts as
they are termed, whether spores or ova are transmitted, are not found in vege~
tables, nor in some of the lower animals which produce spores, nor in others which
produce ova, as the medusa, asterie, some annelide, and some fish and reptiles ;
while others of the lower animals, that even propagate by spores, have them.
The oviduct of the inferior animals is a continuation of the ovarium, and is its
excretory duct: but, in those of them whose tubular ovaria form sinuses in which
the ova are produced, the oviduct portion is distinguishable by its freedom from
sinuses and by the smoothness of its internal surface.

In higher animals, as all reptiles, birds, and mammalia, and a few fish, the
oviduct is detached, and an extremity of a funnel shape liesclose to the ova-
rium ; but it is detached in vertebrate animals only. The oviduct may be ho-


762 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


mogeneous, or may be heterogeneous — have a distinction of parts. If homo-
geneous, whether continuous with, or detached from, the ovarium, it may be
solitary or compound. The functions of the oviduct are motion — transmission ;
and formation, on the accession of an impregnating fluid, furnished by itself or
from without, or of a fluid to nourish and complete the ova. In many animals

ther organs are added to the oviducts, as particular vesicles, cylindrical tubes,
or glandular tissues, and appear to constitute an inferior formation ; indeed they
may be partial rudiments of uterus. None of them exist in the mammalia; and
their median organs are heterogeneous, are the oviducts and womb, or a reservoir
attached to the outer extremity of the oviduct. When the oviduct is of a certain
size, and acquires the character of mucous membrane, a muscular coat and a
fold of peritonzeum, it also acquires the form of the digestive tube, being narrow
at one part like the oesophagus or intestine, and broad at another like the sto-
mach orczecum. This resemblance is observable in most mammalia, but chiefly
jn marsupial animals. In quadrumana and edentata, the walls of the dilated
portion or womb are thicker than in any other mammalia, but infinitely less thick
than in woman, in whom only it loses all resemblance to intestine, and acquires
a peculiar structure, solid, resisting, spongy, and has a greater thickness than in
any other animal, In some lower mammalia, a portion of peritonzum runs be-
tween the ovarium and the beginning of the oviduct, establishing a sort of cavity,
in which these lie opposite to each other; and here the horns of the uterus can
hardly be distinguished from the oviducts. The muscular fibres of the uterus
of most mammalian brutes are stronger than in women, and have a peristaltic
motion. Before we arrive at a single uterus, we observe the ends of the oviducts
of marsupial animals dilated into wombs (uterus multifidus), which are not united
into one organ; there is a straight central body, and at each side a curved canal, with
one end opening into the base of the central cavity, the other into the vagina. The
vagina itself is two in the kangaroo. The uterus may be thus double (u. duplex),
and the vagina single, as in most rodentia ; or it may be double and have but one
external opening (u. bicollis); or it may be one cavity at its neck, and divided
above, as is peculiar to ruminants (uw. bicorporeus) ; it may be single except at
its fundus, which is prolonged into horns (u. bicornis simplex); it may be single
except at the very terminations of the oviducts (u. biangularis). If the organ is

perfectly single in some edentata and quadrumana, still it is more elongated in
all, and less decidedly distinguished from the oviducts and vagina, than in woman,
in whom elongation remains to the oviduct only, which has no other office in her
than that of transmission.

Fish with vesicular testes are the only animals that have no organs for the
emission of semen. The vas deferens may be single, and then have one cavity,
as in hermaphrodite mollusca and digenous gasteropoda; or be divided into two,
as in cephalopoda; or it may be double, even when there is but one testis.
When the testis is double, the vasa deferentia may unite into one ; either really,
as in fish, or only in external appearance, as in the bear, &c.: or they may re-
main double, as in all mammalia, as well as in birds, reptiles, &c. In many
animals, they have dilatations here and there. Various accessory parts, in the
form of vesicles chiefly, are found connected with the vas deferens in different
animals. In mammalia, vesicula seminales are never found without the pro-
state and Cowper’s glands, In the hedgehog and rabbit, they open separately from


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 763


the vasa deferentia ; — muscular fibres are supplied to them in the larger brutes,
and they have often been seen to move on the application of various stimulants.

The median organs of the two sexes agree in being conductors — in beginning
by a large portion,—the oviduct by the pavilion or funnel-like expansion, the vas
deferens by the epididymis.

In woman the median organs — the oviduct and uterus, are more developed,
and more peculiar in structure, than the internal or external; in man the in-
ternal and external — the testes and penis more than the median. The lower
degree of the median male organ is shown by the vas deferens being con-
tinuous with the testicle, while the oviduct is distinct from the ovaries; by the
median male organs at their highest development possessing appendages, while
the median female organs lose them at the highest. The median male organs
serve merely to conduct, and that in but one direction ; the female to conduct
and develop or form, and to conduct in two directions. The purely conducting
part, — the oviduct, is therefore much shorter absolutely than the male corre-
sponding part —the vas deferens; and shorter relatively to the uterus than the
vas deferens to the vesicule seminales ; while the reservoir, the uterus, is of very
great size. The uterus being the predominant part has a round ligament, while
the testis has its gubernaculum, converted indeed into cremaster and cellular
envelope. The lower we descend among animals, the less difference do we ob-
serve between the median male and female organs, and the greater analogy indeed
of both to the other organs of the system.

The oviducts sometimes terminate externally near the solitary common element-
ary opening, as in the rotifera, some polypes, and acephala; or near the mouth,
as in the holothuria; or near the anus, as in some acephala, gasteropoda, and
most fishes; or in the lower surface near to the mouth or anus, as in the
earth-worm, leech, ascaris, and strongylus. Sometimes they open in con-
nection with other organs ; — with the digestive, as in some polypes, and in the
actinia, in which they open into the upper part of the alimentary canal; with
the respiratory, as in the ascidia, in which they end in the branchial sac ; with the
urinary organs, as in the tortoise, in which they end in the neck of the bladder.
Sometimes they have a common opening with the digestive and urinary organs,
termed cloaca, as in most insects, and in birds. The female genitals terminate
in a distinct and proper external apparatus in mammalia only. The vagina has
muscular fibres, both longitudinal and transverse in brutes; but its mucous
membrane has far less ruge than in woman. Its length bears a greater pro-
portion to that of the uterus, and greater accordingly as the perfection of develop-
ment is less: and in the same proportion is it less separated from the uterus by
a projecting opening. It has the same direction as the uterus; lies below the
rectum ; and, in those lower mammalia whose uterus is double, it sometimes also
is double.

Fish and birds have a clitoris, though destitute of vagina ; and, the lower the
mammal brute, the more does the clitoris resemble the penis. In marsupials,
tardigrada, and the ornithorhyncus, all which have a bifid penis, the clitoris is
bifid ; and in the bear, raton, lion, cat, and most rodentia, it has a bone, as well
as the penis. It approaches more to the size of the penis in the cetacea, most
marsupials, rodentia, carnivora, and quadrumana, in the latter of which its length


3 5


764 THE GENITAL FUNCTION


at least equals that of the penis. In some it still more resembles the penis in
having the urethra more or less connected with it: — this opens at its base in
the agouti; the urine running along a semicanal in the ostrich, &c.; or the
urethra being contained in it in the maki and lori.

The nymphe exist in but few mammalia ; such as the elephant, lion, and por-
cupine.

In insects, arachnida, and crustacea, valvuliform parts are found around the
external orifice of the female organs: but birds are the first animals in which any
thing like labia are found.

The vasa deferentia may terminate externally by a simple opening, which may
be applied to the female opening, or to the eggs after their discharge ; or it may
terminate in a penis to be introduced into the female organ. The simple
opening is, however, prominent and supplied with caruncles. It may lie on the
surface, as in mollusea, crustacea, arachnida, and some fish; while ‘in others it
opens in common with the urethra, or in the cloaca, or upon or projecting from
the cloaca, as in many reptiles and birds.

In some animals, the penis is imperforate and serves merely to excite and de-
light the female, as in the earth-worm, crab, and some others. It may have a
groove to direct the semen, as in hermaphrodite mollusca and some reptiles.

The perforated penis is sometimes lodged ina cavity, sometimes only ina
sheath. It may leave its cavity by retroversion, the inner portion pushing forward
the outer, as the finger of an introsuscepted glove may be pulled out, or by
elongation. Retroversion occurs in some mollusea, the crab, the bee; and the
cavity may be the common genital or a respiratory cavity as in the first, or a pe-
culiar one as in the last two. The free perforated penis occupies various cavities,
but never the common genital nor the respiratory ; — the rectum, or a cavity com-
mon to it and the anus, in the ascaris lumbricoides ; or a tubular cloaca, that is
an union of ureter and rectum, as in the seal and beaver; or a cavity proper
to itself, as in some hermaphrodite mollusca. °

The penis, which is always external, and seems to have brought its cavity
out with it, and to have converted it into the sheath called prepuce, is seen
in mammalia only. In carnivora, ruminants, pachydermata, solipeda, amphi-
bia, and cetacea, it is only the half of a cylinder, and, this being fixed to the
abdomen, the tube is completed by the abdominal integuments. In the cheirop-
tera and quadrumana it is a complete tube, and the penis is always detached
from the trunk, hanging below the pubes.

The external organs of generation are the more different the higher the station
of the animal. In the lowest, sexual distinction is impossible externally. The
‘vasa deferentia end in mere orifices: then they are prolonged in the form of a
hollow cylinder, resembling a vagina, but which being free on its surface is ca-
pable of eversion and becoming a penis; then we haye a penis, which is a vagina
constantly everted, but remaining ina cavity except at the moment of generation ;
and then the penis of most mammalia, situated externally in a sheath: and lastly,
that of quadrumana and man. In the lower again, the female organs end in
projecting papilla, as in crabs and spiders: then we have a clitoris, with crura
as long again as the stem. When there are many organs they become connected
with the external genitals. In the gasteropoda, the ureter opens into the oviducts


AT LARGE IN LIVING NATURE. 765


and the vasa deferentia. Ejection being the characteristic of the male, the
connection is most striking in him: both systems have a common orifice in car-
tilaginous fishes : and, in the human subject, the urinary receives the genital con-
duit in the male, while the genital receives the urinary in the female. The
urethra has a tendency to be enveloped by a corpus cavernosum in the female ; as
the urethra, however, does not form a free cylinder, but ends in a cavity, this
cellular body can extend itself only on the wall of the cavity in a split form
like the rudiment of the corpus cavernosum of the penis of birds, which thus
forms the nymphe, and extends to the clitoris only without giving it a glans.
What is the bulbo-cavernosus in the male is the constrictor vagine in the fe-
male. The hymen, which limits the portion of the genital organs free from
union with the urinary, has its parallel in a small cutaneous fold situated at
the extremity of the vasa deferentia. What is scrotum in the male is labia
in the female; and it is split like labia in many rodentia, and has no hairs
on its inner surface.

In vegetables the sexual organs do not appear till the plant is perfect, and
they fall off when they have performed their function a single time. In the lower
animals the sporcyst, which is the first rudiment of generation, is cast off
and reproduced. When sex exists, the product of the organs of generation
may be frequently renewed, as in lower animals having but one cavity for
the formation and elimination of the ova: while, in the male, semen may be
secreted at seasons only; and in man only does this its secretion and discharge
continue all the year round. In a middle degree, when the ovary has a ca-
vity distinct from that in which its functions are accomplisked (the hollow
interstitial ovary), or no cavity nor oviducts (full interstitial ovary), the very
parts which produce the ovaries are renewed, for the cells are not permanent.
In the most perfect form the ovaries produce but once, the number of cells
being originally fixed, and each cell furnishing but one ovum. Five hundred have
been counted in the fowl; sixteen to twenty-four in the sheep; while from
fifteen to thirty exist in a woman. In the ovary of middle degree, many ova
are usually formed and expelled at once; in the perfect kind of ovum, either
one only is matured at once, or not at any rate more than twenty. Yet, even
in the former case, if ova are discharged but once during life, the ova within
the ovary differ in size, as though the earliest, after a certain time, had been
arrested, and made to wait for the later ones; and, if several discharges take
place during life, still, besides the ova ready for a discharge, a second, and
even a third, series of minute ova may be detected for future discharge,

If a vegetable has evident organs of generation, these may be in the same flower
or not. If in the same flower, the male organs may become erect and incline
towards the female: or the female may approach the male: or both may ap-
proach each other. Ifin different flowers, the male impregnating matter may be.
conveyed to the female organ by the wind, insects, &c.


to


35


766


CHAP. XXXI.


THE MENSTRUA.


*


« An important, and indeed the most frequent, function of the
uterus, during about thirty years*, is to afford monthly discharges,
termed catamenia in Greek, menstrua or menses in Latin, and
courses in English,—a law imposed upon no other species of
animalb:— Woman, in the words of Pliny, is the only menstru-
ating animal. The females of no nation, hitherto explored, are
exempt from this law‘, since it is among the requisites in the
female sex for the propagation of the species.

‘‘ The commencement of this function usually occurs,” "in this
climate, “about the fifteenth year,” and more frequently earlier
than later, ‘‘ preceded by symptoms of plethora, by a sense of
heaviness in the chest, and of tension in the loins, by lassitude of


2 « Consult, besides many others, F. C. Nagele, Erfahrungen tiber Krankh. des
weibl. Geschlechts. Manheim. 1812. 8vo. p. 265.”

b «Most writers upon Natural History, and among the rest Buffon, allow
the existence of a periodical discharge of this kind in some other animals, espe-
cially in certain simizw. But, after carefully observing the females of the species
of simiz mentioned by him, (v. c. of the simia sylvanus, and cynomolgus, the
papio maimon, &c.) for a number of years, I easily discovered that these sup-
posed catamenia in some did not occur at all, and in others, of the very same
species, were merely a vague and sparing uterine hemorrhage, observing no
regular period.” en

¢ «There is hardly occasion at present to refute the unfounded assertion, that
in some countries, particularly on the continent of America, the women do not
menstruate. This opinion appears to have originated from the circumstance of
the Europeans, who visited those countries, and saw innumerable women nearly
naked, never observing any menstrual stains upon them. For this there might
be two reasons, First, the American women are, by a happy prejudice, regarded
as infectious while menstruating, and retire from society into solitary huts, to the
benefit of their health. Secondly, their extreme cleanliness, and the modest po-
sition in which they place their limbs, would prevent any vestige of the catamenia
from being observable, as Adr. Van Berkel expressly states, Reisen nach Rio de
Berbice und Surinam, p. 46.”


THE MENSTRUA. 767


the limbs, &c.” All the vessels of both the internal and external
genitals become turgid, whence all the parts are fuller, redder,
softer, and warmer, and the uterus even descends alittle. At
first a reddish fluid generally flows from the genitals, becoming
by degrees of a more bloody colour, and at length completely so.
This has a peculiar odour, coagulates but imperfectly, and differs
also in other respects from blood. It continues to flow slowly for
‘ some days, and the unpleasant symptoms above described cease
in the mean time,” the discharge becoming at length paler and
less abundant. Often the breasts feel full and uneasy, ge-
neral feverishness occurs, and existing diseases are augmented.
The eyes are often dull, surrounded By a dark circle, and the
skin may have a peculiar odour, and the temper be irritable.

‘This red discharge returns afterwards about every four weeks,
and continues about six days, during which time a healthy woman
is supposed to lose, perhaps, from five ounces to half a pound of
blood.” Some women menstruate but two days; some ten: some,
whatever the period, moderately ; some immoderately. Some men-
struate every three weeks ; some every five. All peculiarities of
the function may be hereditary, like every point of function or
structure in the uterus and every other organ. The quantity is
usually commensurate with the warmth of the climate.

“ This action is usually suspended during pregnancy or suck-
ling.

“It entirely ceases after existing about thirty years; and, con-
sequently, in our climate, about the forty-fifth year of age.”¢ I
have known some menstruate after fifty: some menstruate after
the function had ceased at the usual period, and been absent for
many, in one case for even ten, years. But in such cases there
often is pain at the time, and ultimately uterine disease.

“By some, the vagina, by others, and with more probability,
the uterus, is considered the source of this discharge. Instances
of women menstruating although pregnant, or bovine the uterus
imperforate, or inverted and prolapsed, do not favour the former
opinion, but prove only the extraordinary compensating powers
of nature, who successfully employs new ways, when the usual
one is obstructed. On the other hand, the dissection of many


a «TI, Helm. Spitta, Commentatio premio Regio ornata, sistens mutationes in
organismo et economia feeminarum cessante fluvus menstrui periodo. Gotting.
1818. 4to.”

Si 3


768 THE MENSTRUA,


women who have died during menstruation has discovered the
cavity of the uterus bedewed with the catamenia.e We say
nothing of the 4 priori argument — that the purpose of menstru-
ation is probably to render the womb fit for pregnancy and for
nourishing the foetus.” Still the vagina may furnish the dis-
charge occasionally, as when women menstruate during preg-
nancy after the neck of the womb has become distended.

“The investigation of the causes of the periodical return of
this hemorrhage is so difficult, that we can obtain nothing beyond
probability, and must not dare to offer any thing merely conjec-
tural.”¢ It is usually more abundant in proportion to the general
plethora and local excitement: most abundant, therefore, in
highly fed and indolent women ; and often very abundant in newly
married wives. The power of local disposition is shown in the
facts of venesection not in general preventing the discharge more
than any thing else equally disturbing the whole system; and of
the discharge stopping sometimes in plethoric women, and con-
tinuing freely in the most spare. We sometimes witness a periodi-
cal discharge from the aérial or alimentary passages, or from an
ulcer, or even from the urinary mucous membrane, that of the
eye or ear, from the breasts, or even from the sound skin, and
chiefly then from the umbilicus or fingers.

“The proximate cause is supposed to be a /ocal® plethoric


e « See, for example, Morgagni, 4dv. Anat. 1. tab. ili, M.M.M.” Ihave
seen this frequently. It proceeds through the sides of the capillaries, like any
secretion, and, being dark and venous, must be furnished by them near their
conversion to veins,

£ «JZ, H. Chr. Niemeyer, De menstruationis fine et usu. Gott. 1796. 8vo.”’

8 «Those who feel interested in this inquiry may consult, among other
writers, Abr. D’Orville, Disguisitio (Pres. Haller), cause menstruii flucus.
Gotting. 1748. 4to. ;

Gisb. Verz. Muilman, dn ex celebrata hactenus opinione de plethora universali
vel particulari vera fluxus menstrui causa explicari possit? LB. 1772. Ato.

Theod. Traug. Jaehkel (Pres. Krause), detiologia flurus menstrui. Lips.
1784. 4to.”

h « The universal plethoric orgasm, as it was termed, which some formerly re-
garded as the cause of menstruation, has been long since refuted by more en-
lightened physiologists. To the arguments of the latter we may be permitted
to add the instance of the celebrated Hungarian sisters (described in Buffon)
who, from monstrous formation, were united together. Although the same blood
flowed in each, on account of the union of the abdominal blood-vessels at the


THE MENSTRUA. 769
congestion, — an opinion with which the symptoms preceding
menstruation, and the abundance and nature of the uterine ves-
sels, agree very well.” '

I have known some women bear children before they had ever
menstruated, and others after menstruation had entirely ceased.
Many authors relate instances of women being mothers without
ever menstruating. Dr. Foderé attended a woman who had men-
struated but once, and that in her seventeenth year, although
thirty-five years of age, very healthy, and the mother of five
children.’ Morgagni mentions a mother and daughter who both
were mothers before menstruation. De la Motte saw cases of
this kind.k Sir Everard Home mentions a young woman who did
not menstruate till after her pregnancy.! Dr. Merriman mentions
that he attended a lady who had not menstruated for a year and
a half previous to her delivery.™

Neither is the pleasure of coition requisite to impregnation ; for
the mother of one of Napoleon's generals, as well as of other
children, told a friend of mine, “ Qu’elle n’avoit eu que le douleur
d’enfanter ; ” and the late Dr. Heberden has the following pas-
sage :— ‘Duo mariti mihi narrarunt uxores suas in venerem
-fuisse frigidas, omni ejus cupiditate et voluptate carentes; sepe
tamen gravidas factas esse, et recte peperisse.”" Gall has known
similar cases.° There can therefore be no reason why a woman
should not be impregnated while asleep, if it is possible for her
not to be roused. Ina preternaturally sound sleep this appears
to have been accomplished.? Dr. Brachet mentions two para-
plegic women, without the least sensation in the vagina, who,
notwithstanding this, were impregnated, and went their full time.


loins, they differed frequently both in the period and the quantity of their men-
struation.”

i Médecine Légale, t.i. p. 393. A case is mentioned of a woman who had
three sons, and never menstruated, nor had lochia. Lphem. Natur. Curios.
Dee. ii. ann. 1. p. 114. sq.

k Traité complet des Accouchemens, p. 53

1 Phil. Trans. 1812. p. 11.

m™ Med, Chir. Trans. t. xiii. p. 347.

2 Commentarit de morborum historia et cwratione, cap. 43.

° Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. ili. p. 253.

P See the Causes Célébres (Foderé, 1. c. t. i. p. 500. sq.) for an account of a
priest and what he thought a dead body.

3E 4


770 ' THE MENSTRUA.


He divided the limbar portion of the spinal chord in a bitch, put
her to the male, and found her impregnated.4

Many women menstruate during the first five months of preg-
nancy. Dr. Heberden mentions one who always menstruated the
whole nine: she had lain in four times. Mr. Mayo was informed
by a woman that this had been her case in each of seven preg-
nancies. .

Women sometimes menstruate during suckling ; but, when this
happens, it is not generally till two or three months have elapsed
after delivery. The milk is often vitiated in these cases, and de-
ranges the alimentary canal of the infant.

The reason that menstrual blood does not coagulate is its
deficiency of fibrin: it is, therefore, really not blood. “It has
the properties,” says Mr. Brande, “ of a very concentrated solu-
tion of the colouring matter of the blood in a diluted serum.’ s
Having less fibrin, it has less azote and more carbon. Hence it
is retained in a liquid form in the uterus for years, in cases of im-
perforate hymen; and stains of linen from it are more readily
washed out than those from blood; and hence it putrefies far
more slowly than blood if the air is excluded, and may be kept
liquid and undecomposed ina bottle for yearst; though, if the
air be admitted, it absorbs azote, loses carbon, and therefore
putrefies rapidly. J

To regard women during menstruation as unclean is certainly
very useful, though the custom among the American women of
leaving their husbands’ tents at this period for separate hovels is
said by Hearne to give a pretence for quitting the good men
whenever they are sulky, — even twice or thrice in a month.
Moses set a woman apart for seven days, and enacted that any one
who touched her, or even any thing she had sit upon, should wash
his clothes and be unclean till evening ; and, if he lay with her,
should be unclean‘for seven days.* But menstruating women have
been regarded as mysteriously deleterious. The American Indians
forbid them to walk near where there is fishing or hunting, or to


1 Recherches Expérimentales, p. 251. sqq.

" Outlines of Human Physiology, 1837, p. 392.

° Phil. Trans. 1812.

* Lancet, vol. xiv. p. 250.

" Journey from Prince of Wales Fort to Hudson’s Bay, &c. 1795. p. 333. sq.
x Leviticus, xy.


THE MENSTRUA. Td


cross the path where deer, &c. have been carried, lest success
should be averted. In Pliny’, a menstruating woman is declared
the most pernicious thing in the world, a igich in fruit, destroy-
ing grafts and hives of bees, drying up fields of corn,: causing
iron and copper to rust and smell, driving dogs mad, and disgust-
ing even ants with their food, &c. &c. In this country, it is firmly
believed by many that meat will not take salt if the process is
conducted by a menstruating woman.

Gall says that, when he practised at Vienna, “he soon noticed
that during a certain time few women menstruated, and at another
a great many menstruated at once. As this frequently occurred,
it excited his attention, and made him fancy that perhaps men-
struation followed some law. He therefore kept a journal, in
which he marked the periods of a considerable number of women
for many years. It resulted that women are divided into two
great classes, each class having a different period. The women of
the same class all menstruate within eight days ; after this time,
an interval of ten or twelve days follows, in which very few women
menstruate. At the end of these eight days begins the period of
the second great class, all the individuals of which also menstruate
within eight days. Suppose a woman of this class begins to
menstruate on the first of the month, she will have finished on the
eighth, if her catamenia continue eight days. Another, whose
catamenia last but three days, will finish on the third; or, in case
she did not begin till the fifth, she equally will finish on the
eighth, and so the rest; all who are regular having an interval of
twenty-one, twenty-five, or twenty-six days. The following are
the two periods of women, each belonging to a different class,
such as they really occurred. In 1818: January 19,3; Febru-
ary 16, 1,29; March 14, 28; April 10, 25; May 8, 23; June 5,
30, 19; July 26,17; August 21,13; September 18, 9; October
16, 8; November 14, 5; December 12, 2. It appears that each
woman menstruated thirteen times in the year; and that she, who
began on the 3d of January, menstruates for the fourteenth time
on the last of December.

“ There are always women Gen through some accidental
cause, have menstruated out of these two great periods; but
after one or two months they usually return to the class to which


Y Hist. Natur. vii, 13.


772 THE MENSTRUA,


they belong. Women out of health, young persons who have not
yet fully completed their growth, and women who are near the
final cessation of the catamenia, are the most subject to these
irregularities.

“‘ During my travels I continued my journal; and, what struck
me the most was, that the two periods coincided in all countries,
at least in Europe. At the same time that women menstruated
in Vienna, Berlin, Hamburgh, and Amsterdam, they menstruated
also at Bern, Copenhagen, Paris,” &c. 2

Some women have always peculiar symptoms before, during, or
immediately after, menstruation ; as violent headachs or some ab-
dominal disturbance ; and morbid affections in many women are
aggravated at the period, or just before, or after.


* Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. iv. p. 355. 8qq-


773


CHAP. XXGXT.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


“ Wr now come to the functions for which the genital organs.
are given us, — to conception and the propagation of the species,
in treating of which we shall first merely describe the phe-
nomena that are observed in that admirable and truly divine
process, and afterwards investigate the powers by which they
are produced. ®

«Tn the first place, it is worthy of remark that the human race,
unlike most animals, does not copulate at certain periods of the
year >, but that with it every season is favourable to the flame of
love.

«When a woman receives a man®, and both burn with that
animal instinct which is superior to all others in universality and
violence, the uterus, swelling 1 imagine with a kind of inflamma-
tory orgasm d” «draws in, as it were, the semen ejaculated by
the male®, and appears to pour forth a fluid of its own against it ;


4 «Qn all the subjects of this section, consult, among many others, Fr. B.
Osiander, Observationes de homine, guomodo fiat et formetur, in the Comment. Soc,
Reg. Scientiarum recent. vol. iii. p. 25. vol. iv. p. 109.” ‘

b « Unless the observation first made by Wargentin, in Sweden, — that there
is a greater proportion of births in September, which corresponds to the preceding
December, be considered as relative to this point. Swensk. Vetensk. Acad. Had-
lingar. 1767. vol. xxvill. p. 249. sq:”

© « Of the various circumstances of this admission, I have spoken in my work
De gen. hum. variet. nat. p.17. sq. 3d edit.”

d <¢ J, the two instances of uteri seen by Ruysch, immediately after impreg-
nation.

The one of a common woman, murdered by her paramour immediately after ,
connection. -Adversar. Anat, Med. Chirurg. Dec. i. tab. ii. fig. 8. The other
of a married woman, impregnated a few hours previously, and killed in the act
of adultery by her husband. Thesaur. Anat. vi. p. 23. sq. tab. v. fig. 1.”

e «Tf we consider the impetus with which the semen is emitted, and, as it
were, swallowed by the uterus, and how small a quantity is proved, by experi-


774 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


the tubes become rigid, and their fimbrize embrace the ovaria, in
one of which a ripe Graafian vesicle bursts like an abscess, and
its albuminous drop of fluid, being absorbed by the abdominal
opening of the tube, is conveyed to the womb.”

Mr. Cruikshank, on inspecting the genitals of a female rabbit
during heat, observed appearances nearly similar to those de-
scribed by Harvey, Graaf, Ruysch, Diembroeck, &c.£ He found
them all prodigiously turgid with blood. The vagina was absolutely
of a dark mulberry colour, and on the ovaria were prominent
spots which injection proved to be vascular and which were swollen
Graafian vesicles; the contents of the vesicles, however, remained
transparent : the Fallopian tubes were also nearly black, writhing
in an extraordinary manner, having a strong peristaltic motion,
and embracing the ovaria with their fimbriated extremity so
closely as to lacerate on an attempt to disengage them. These
observations were all confirmed by Mr. Saumarez. During co-
pulation, this state of the organs must be carried to the highest
pitch of intensity : and the same condition of course takes place
in the human female. That the semen is intended to enter the
uterus is highly probable, even from the circumstance that the
male and female orifices together form a cross,— that of the male
urethra being vertical, and that of the uterus horizontal, — an
arrangement that gives every chance for the semen to enter. Had
they both been circular, horizontal, or vertical, the chances against
their being exactly opposite would have been very great. Their
different form makes their opposition certain, however much the
glans or os uteri may incline from the centre during emission.

Harvey could never detect semen in the uterus after copu-
Jation.i Nor De Graaf in the vagina. Verheyen found a large
quantity in the uterus of a cow six hours after copulation. !
nt ee Oe ee
ments on brutes, to be sufficient for impregnation, we shall be able to explain
those well established cases of conception, where the hymen was imperforate, —
cases commonly brought forwards in support of the existence of a seminal aura.”

* Boerhaave, Prelectiones Academica, with Haller’s notes, t. vi. p. 113. sq.

5 Phil. Trans. 1797.

n 4 new System of Physiology, Sc. vol. i. p. 837,

' Harvey, De Generatione, p- 228, &c.


* Regn. De Graaf, t. i. p- 310.
 Verheyen, Sup, Anat. tract. 5. cap. 3,


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 775


Galen always discovered it in the uterus of brutes after copu-
lation.™ Leeuwenhoeck, in the case of rabbits. Ruysch found
it not only in the uterus, but in the Fallopian tubes of two women
killed soon after connection.» Postellus, Riolan, Carpus, and
Cheselden also believed they found it in the uterus.° Haller
once found it in the uterus of a sheep, forty-five minutes after
coition.P Fallopius frequently found it in the tubes.‘ Haller
very justly remarks that some of those, who believed they saw
semen in the uterus, probably saw mucus only. He inclines,
however, with almost all physiologists, to the opinion that the
semen does enter the uterus. The length of the penis, the force
of emission, the peristaltic action of the vagina during the heat of
some brutes", the existence of a bifid glans with two orifices in
the penis of the males of some species the females of which have
two ora uteris, the remarkable fact of the ora uteri being hori-
zontal while the opening of the male urethra is vertical, which
must give every chance to the entrance of the semen into the
uterus, are circumstances of no little weight in favour of the
opinion that the semen does penetrate at least into the uterus.
John Hunter, however, actually saw it projected into the uterus
of a bitch which he killed by dividing the spinal chord while
she was united with the male.'


m Galen, De semine, lib. i. c. 2.

2 Thes. Anat. and Adversaria Anat. Medic. Chirurg.

© Boerhaave, Prelect. Acad. Haller’s note to p. 182. t. vi.

P Haller, Elementa Physiol. t. viii. p. 22.

9 Opera, i. fol. m. 421.

" See, for instance, Dr. James Blundell, in the Med. Chir. Trans, vol. x. p.266.

S Account of the Structure of the Wombat, by Sir E. Home. Phil. Trans.
1798.

t Sir E. Home, Phil. Trans. 1817. Mr. Saumarez, |. c. p. 429.

Mr. Saumarez observed in two instances, when two hours and a half only
had elapsed after coition, and before corpora lutea were formed, globular, pearl-
coloured bodies, as large as a pin’s head, which, on being squeezed, burst, and
discharged a very subtle fluid to some distance. Dr. Haighton commonly met
with them.

The well known instances of conception, where the admission of the male organ
into the yagina was prevented by the great strength of the hymen, are sometimes
cited against the opinion that the semen passes beyond the vagina, but certainly
with no weight. 1. Because the most minute portion of semen is sufficient to
impregnate ; — Spallanzani mixed three grains of frog’s semen with a pound and
a half of water, and with a little of this mixture fecundated nearly all the nu-


776 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


Dr. Haighton, with the view of ascertaining whether it is ne-
cessary to impregnation that the semen pass along the Fallopian
tubes, made a number of experiments on the effects of tying and
dividing them in rabbits at different periods relative to coition.®
The peristaltic action of the tubes, and their adhesion to the
ovaria during the venereal ardour, argue strongly in favour of the
semen being conveyed along them, because we can hardly suppose
these circumstances to begin to occur at this period for the pur-
pose of conveying the contents of the Graafian vesicle, as this
does not burst till a considerable time after copulation. Dr.
Haighton, indeed, says that these changes in the tubes did not
take place in his experiments (all made, however, after copulation)
till long (forty-eight hours) after copulation, — till the ovaria were
about to discharge into them their vesicular fluids. In this he
agrees with Bartholin, De Graaf, Schurig, Deswig, and Lang, who
maintained, like him, that the semen, at least as far as examination
went, does not enter the tubes.* But Mr, Cruikshank and Mr,
Saumarez, two of the latest experimenters, assert the contrary in
the detail of their experiments, and, as Haller remarks of the old
partisans, the negative experiments of the former cannot overturn
the positive testimony of the latter, —“Eorum experimenta
negativa non possunt affirmantium fidem evertere:” Sbaragli,
Verheyen, Hartman, and Duverney could find no change in the
state of the tubes at any time, although their negative observ-
ations are completely overthrown by the positive observations of


merous posterity contained in the threads taken from the female; and, after
mixing three grains with even twenty-two pounds of water, he fecundated some.
(Dissertations, vol. ii. p. 191. English transl.) 2. Because the vagina has an
action of its own sufficient to move the semen onwards to the uterus: —it is
seen during the cestrum of brutes (and also the uterus in a lower degree) to have
a peristaltic movement; it often firmly embraces the human placenta; and Dr.
Hamilton, the present obstetric professor of Edinburgh, mentions, in his lectures,
having attended a physometric patient whose vagina sucked up air from without,
as appeared from the emission of air ceasing in the warm bath, and Dr. Monro
(secundus), likewise, was perfectly satisfied that the woman drew in the air. Any
canal supplying the place of vagina, howéver small, probably executes the same
absorbing action, or conveys the influence of the absorbing action of the womb.

“ Experimental Enquiry, §c. by John Haighton, M.D, Philos. Trans. 1797.

* Haller, Liem. Physiol, and notes to Boerhaave, 1. c.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. i


all others who have inquired experimentally into the subject.
Besides, the great abundance of blood in the genital organs,
during the sexual ardour, must cause the tubes to enlarge and
apply themselves to the ovaria: this, as Haller mentions upon the
authority of Hartsoeker, occurs even in the dead body by means
of injection,

Dr. Haighton, however, to prevent the semen from passing
along the tubes, divided one of them in virgin rabbits, and, after
the wound was healed, admitted the animal to the male. The
ovarium on this side contained yellow bodies, which appear after
vesicles have burst, equally with the other, proving that the
Graafian vesicles had burst, although the semen could not pos-
sibly have reached the ovarium.¥ No foetus, notwithstanding,
was discoverable in any instance: on the other side (for in the
rabbit the uterus is double) foetuses were found equal in number
to the yellow bodies or corpora lutea. Dr. Haighton concludes
that impregnation may take place without the advance of semen
along the tubes. His conclusion is perfectly just, according to his
test of impregnation, — the escape of the contents of a Graafian
vesicle. But I apprehend this to be no more deserving the title
of a test of impregnation than the emission of the semen mascu-
linum. Impregnation is that change wrought by means of the male
semen in the contents of a Graafian vesicle, which enables them to
become a developed foetus. Now this was never effected when
the tube was divided : — although the presence of corpora lutea
proved vesicles to have burst, yet a foetus was in no one instance
discovered: in other words, the contents of the Graafian vesicles
were in no one instance impregnated. Hence I conclude, with the
old physiologists before the time of Harvey, that the conveyance
of semen beyond the vagina, — where it may come in contact


Y The divided end of the tube was found totally impervious. The experiment
succeeded when one tube only was divided: the division of both deprived the
animal not only of fertility but of sexual desire, and caused the ovaries to shrink,
and even the division of one had this effect in some instances. If the tube was
divided after coition, the result was the same, provided the operation was per-
formed before the contents of the vesicles had entered it; for, if too much time
had elapsed, the ova were transmitted to the uterus and grew to maturity.

It is said that the division of the vas deferens sometimes has the effect of causing
the testis to atrophy, and of both vasa deferentia to destroy sex ual desire ; so that
this simple operation may be a substitute for castration. See Lancet, vol. xiv.
No. 247. In an experiment by Sir A. Cooper, atrophy did not result. 1. ¢.


778 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


with the contents of an ovarian vesicle, is absolutely requisite to
impregnation; and perhaps the state of the tubes during the
heat of some brutes, and the occasional growth of foetuses
in the tubes, abdomen, and in the ovaria themselves”, render it
likely that the semen passes even into the tubes. But Dr. Haigh-
ton’s experiments were unnecessary for this conclusion, because
pathological observation proves sterility to be an invariable con-
sequence of complete obstruction in any point between the os
externum and ov ria, —in the Fallopian tubes, in the uterus, or in
the vagina. ®@
When the obstruction in such cases is so far within as to allow
the deposition of the semen, the sterility disproves the notion of
Bartholin and Stenonis, — that this fluid operates by absorption.
Dr. Haighton imagines that the bursting of the vesicle is the
sympathetic effect of the semen in the vagina or uterus.» Now


* The foetus has frequently remained in the ovarium. See, for instance, the
Phil. Trans. 1680-3, and 1797 and 1820; also Schurig’s Embryologia, p. 824. sq.
where Bohn, Grundius, Ortlob, Blasius, and Littre, are quoted.

Such cases do not militate against the probability of the approximation of the
semen masculinum to the ovarian contents being necessary for impregnation,
because the tenuity of the vesicles, when ready for this operation, is such as we
may suppose presents no barrier to the influence of the male upon the female
fluid, especially if we reflect that oxygen and blood affect each other through a
piece of moistened bladder. Indeed it is possible, even, that the vesicle bursts
and the two fluids come into actual contact, but that imperfect rupture or some
other cause detains the ovarian fluid till it has acquired permanent adhesions.

4 Schurig, Gynecologia, pars ii, p. 172. Morgagni, Ruysch, &c. &ce.

Dr. Blundell repeated his uncle’s experiments, with this variation, that he pro-
duced the obstruction not in the tubes, but in the uterus or vagina. Impreg-
nation was of course equally prevented, and the ovarian vesicles burst as usual.
Med. Chir. Trans. vol. x.

> « That the semen first stimulates the vagina, os uteri, cavity of the uterus, or
all of them.

“ By sympathy, the ovarian vesicles enlarge, project, and burst.

“ By sympathy, the tubes incline to the ovaria, and having embraced them
convey the rudiments of the foetus into the uterus.


2


“ By sympathy, the uterus makes the necessary preparations for perfecting the
formation and growth of the foetus, and,

“ By sympathy, the breasts furnish milk for its support after birth.”

There is reason, however, from one passage, to suppose that Dr. Haighton
believed the semen to pass no farther than the vagina. After dwelling upon the
opinion opposite to his own, he says, “ The difficulties which were opposed to
the conveyance of the semen by the tubes, were, as we should expect, intended to


7


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY, 779


although on the side where the tube was divided the ovarium did
discharge the contents of some vesicles, it is not proved to have
done this through the operation of the semen. The venereal
ardour alone was shown in the observations of Mr. Saumarez as
well as in those of Mr. Cruikshank (and the same has been re-
marked in the human female’) to produce, among the other great
changes of the sexual organs, the enlargement of the vesicles.
Nay, we are certain that it will occasion the rupture of the vesicle
without any commerce with the male. The hens of poultry lay
eggs (incapable indeed of being hatched), aithough separated
from the cock,—a circumstance proving that in them the cestrum
is sufficient to enlarge and burst a vesicle, apply the tube to the
ovarium, and occasion it to convey away an ovum. Aristotle and
Harvey relate that many birds lay eggs from mere titillation; the
latter proved it experimentally in the thrush, in the sparrow, and
in a favourite parrot belonging to his wife. Blumenbach is satisfied
with the accuracy of the accounts which he has read of corpora
lutea in virgins; and since he wrote4 we have been furnished with
abundant instances of their appearance in virgins not only of our


prepare the way for a different explanation ; therefore physiologists, by a very
natural transition of thought, were led to suppose that the presence of semen in
the vagina alone was sufficient to account for impregnation :” and he immediately
proceeds to relate his experiments. In fact I know this to be his opinion, because,
in a MS. of his lectures that I rendered full and accurate by taking my notes in
Latin, I find it said of Haller for believing that the semen always enters the
uterus, ‘* Now it is surprising that a man like Haller should do so, who, from
his works, would seem to form his opinions, in general, on sound reasoning ;” and
Ruysch’s cases are quite ridiculed, because this anatomist, “being now of an age
when most other people can see but little, set about looking for something won-
derful, and discovered what nobody had ever seen before, viz. semen in the uterus
and Fallopian tubes.”

© In the body of a young woman, eighteen years of age, who had been brought
up in a convent and had every appearance of being a virgin, Valisneri found five
or six vesicles protruding in one ovarium, and the corresponding Fallopian tube
redder and longer than usual, as he had frequently observed in brutes during
heat. Bonnet gives the history of a young lady who died furiously in love with
a man of low rank, and whose ovaria were turgid with vesicles of great size.
Blancaard, Schurig, Brendelius, Santorini, and Drelincourt, mention analogous
facts. Haller’s notes to Boerhaave’s Prelect. Acad.

4 Spec. Physiol. &c. anno 1788, quoted infra, p. 781.

3 F


780 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


own kind, but among quadrupeds. Sir Everard Home? asserts that
the corpus luteum is not a formation that fills up the cavity of a
ruptured vesicle, but a substance in which the ovum is produced,
and consequently no proof of conception. However this may be,
the case remains the same; for he has repeatedly seen ovaria of
both human and quadruped virgins that had discharged ova. In-
deed he revives the old opinion of Kerckring , — that ova grow
to maturity in succession and are discharged without copulation.
I think it pretty evident that, although the semen has no share
in bursting the ovarium, the high excitement of copulation con-
tributes very considerably to it, since the inferior degree of ex-
citement which occurs during the heat of brutes and in the
lascivious states of the human virgin is sufficient frequently to
effect the discharge of ova. It is perhaps impossible otherwise to
explain the fact that ova are so commonly expelled from the
ovaria and impregnated whenever a connection is arbitrarily or
casually brought about. Hen pigeons, if kept with males, lay not
only at an earlier age, but all the year round, instead of merely
in the spring.

The vesicles burst in different animals, and perhaps in the same,
at various periods from two hours to seven or eight days after
coition. Inthe rabbit, Mr. Cruikshank found them burst in two
hours ; Dr. Haighton saw them bursting at the end of forty-eight
hours; De Graaf on the third day; M. Coste most frequently
found them burst on the second or third day: in the dog, Haller
once found them burst on the following day, and always before the
sixth; MM. Prevost and Dumas not before the sixth or seventh.
Kuhlemann saw them burst in the sheep at the end of the first day.

«« After the escape of this drop from the ovarium, the lips of the
wound are closed by an external cicatrix, and the vascular mem-
brane which contained the drop is converted into a corpus luteum. §
This is at first hollow and full, as appears to me, of plastic lymph >,


©. Phil, Trans.:1819.

* Anthrop. Ichnogr. 1. 3. and 12. quoted by Schurig. ‘‘ Tam conjugate
quam virgines hee ova sexpissime excernunt, insensibiliter quidem, quia non
advertunt, nec quicquam de iis suspicantur.”’

® « See J. Chph. Kuhlemann, Observat. circa negot. ‘generat. in ovib. facta.
Gotting. 1753. 4to. c.f. ae.”

n « See Everard Home’s contrary opinion respecting the origin of the corpus
luteum and its relation to the ovum, Phil. Trans. 1817, p. 255. and 1819, p.59.””


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 781


which in progress of time becomes a fleshy nucleus’, sur-
rounded by a thick, remarkably vascular, cortex.k” These
characters of the external cicatrix, the internal cavity, the
firmness and vascular nature of their substance, rendering them
capable of injection, distinguish them, it is said, from spurious —
corpora lutea that are independent of impregnation.!

After two years a little substance no larger than a grain of millet,
or even merely a dark spot, remains.


Ovarium of a woman who died in the
fifth month of pregnancy.


The corpus luteum, in common
with the whole ovarium, is divided and
laid open, and is seen to be hollow.—
(W. Hunter.)


‘‘ After the impregnation of the womb, the canal which runs
along the cervix of the uterus is thoroughly closed, especially
towards its superior or internal orifice,” with jelly-looking secretion,
‘so that superfcetation, properly so called ™, cannot naturally take


1 « See W. Hunter, Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus, tab. xv. fig. 5. tab. xxix.
fig. 3. tab. xxxi. fig. 3.”

k «Tt isa celebrated question, of great importance both in physiology and
forensic medicine, and much agitated of late years, whether a corpus luteum is
the consequence of a fruitful coition only, and therefore an infallible sign of con-
ception, or whether it may occur independently of coition, and therefore exist in
virgins. We trust that we have established the truth of this point, and shown
the conditions under which a corpus luteum may occasionally be formed even in
virgins. Specimen physiologie comparate inter animantia calidi sanguinis vivipara
et ovipara, in the Commentat. Soc. Reg. Scientiar. Gotting. vol. ix. p. 109. sqq.”

1 Dr, Montgomery, Cyclop. of Pract. Med. article Prranancy.

m « That different conceptions may occur from the repetition of copulation
after very short intervals is proved by the instances of adulterous women who
have brought forth twins resembling different fathers in the colour of their skin:
viz, of black women who have brought forth a black and a mulatto, and of
European women who have brought forth a white and a mulatto.”

An instance of superfcetation of this description occurred to the late Mr.
Blackaller of Weybridge. A white woman of very loose character left her
husband, and sometime afterwards returned pregnant to her parish, and was de-
livered in the workhouse of twins, “‘one of which,” says Mr. Blackaller, in an


oe 4


782 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


place. There are scarcely any constant and infallible signs by
which the woman herself can be very certain of the changes that
occur within during conception.”


account which he sent me, “was born of a darker colour than I have usually
observed the infants of negroes in the West Indies; the hair quite black, with
the woolly appearance usual to them, with nose flat and lips thick: ’’ the second
child had all the common appearances of white children. Another is recorded
by Dr. Dewees.* ‘The mother was a servant in Montgomery County, and, on the
report that she was pregnant, a black and a white man both ran away from the
estate. Her mistress was present at the birth of the black and the white twins, and
they were afterwards often seen by Dr. Dewees. One occurred at Rouen in 1806,
in which there was a white and mulatto child, and the woman, the chére amie of a
white, confessed, on close examination, that she had twice yielded to the em-
braces of a negro when she supposed herself four or five months advanced in
pregnancy. (Annales de Montpellier, quoted in the Journal de Médecine, t. xii.)
The case of a married negress, who one morning admitted a white to her arms
as soon as her black husband had risen, and produced a black and a mulatto, is
recorded by Dr. Moseley as having occurred within his own time at Jamaica.
( Tropical Diseases, p.111.) One was recorded in 1821, by M. de Bouillon ; a
negress brought forth a negro and a mulatto child, and confessed having received
the embraces of a white and a negro the same evening. (Bulletin de la Faculté de
Médecine, 1821.) The most recent occurred in the Lying-in Hospital of Berlin, ©
January 25th, 1832, where a woman brought forth female twins, the one white,
the other half caste. She confessed an intercourse with a negro shortly after
conceiving by her husband. (Dublin Journal, from Hecker’s Berlin Weekly
Medical Newspaper, Jan. 1834.)

We may, therefore, agree with Pliny (Hist. Nat. vii, 9.), who asserts that
«‘ Ubi paululum temporis inter duos conceptus intercessit, utrumque perficitur ;”’
and believe his account of a girl in Proconnesus who produced twins, one re-
sembling her master, the other the bailiff, having favoured both on the same day;
no less than the other case of the same kind to which he alludes, and that there
was some foundation for the story of Hercules and Iphicles.


The uterus has been sometimes wanting (Lieutaud, Sandifort, Morgagni,
Stein, Theden, Schmucker, Engel, Girdwood, in the London Med. Gazette, 1837,


" «Ad, El. Siebold, De diagnosi conceptionis et graviditatis sepe dubia. Wirceb.
1798. 4to,

Gm. Theoph. Kelch, De symptomatibus et signis graviditatis earumque causis,
Regiom. 1794. 4to.””


* Cox’s Philadelphia Medical Museum, vol. i. The case usually quoted oc-
curred in America (South Carolina), and may be found in Buffon,


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 783


The pulse becomes quicker, and the blood buffy. The: cata-
menia generally cease, though sometimes they continue, but
seldom after the cervix is distended; and in a few women they
continue during the whole of pregnancy, in whom they are pro-


the subject the woman murdered by Greenacre), sometimes destitute of anterior
opening (Plouquet), and sometimes double (Ephemerid. Natur. Curios. Dee. 3.
Ann. 7. and 8. Obs. 35. Cent. 9, Obs. 75. Phil. Trans. vol. iv. 1699, &e. &c.
Med, Facts and Observations, vol. iii. translated from the German, Med. Chir. Trans.
vol. xvii. ), in which last case superfoetation has been imagined possible at any period
after the first conception, provided each uterus have a distinct orifice, and the
unimpregnated happen not to have a decidua crassa, as it sometimes has, or, though
it have, happen not to have its cervix obstructed by this, as it was in a case dis-
sected by Dr. R. Lee. (Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xvii.) It has been removed after
inversion and when diseased, and lives have been saved by this operation. (v. ¢.
Newnham, Jnversio Uteri. Davis, ibid. T. Windsor, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. x.
O5G. 2G.)


A dissection is described by Dr. Granville (Phil. Trans. 1818), of a woman
who had borne eleven children, male and female, and who died soon after being
delivered of twins of both sexes. The right half only of the uterus was found
developed, the left extending scarcely balf an inch from the centre and shaped to
a perfectly straight line: the left tube and ovary did not exist. This proves, if
the proof were required, that one ovary is, like one testis, sufficient, not only for
procreation, but for the procreation of offspring of both sexes. The writer
thinks the case useful in proving also both that twins and twins of different
sexes may come from the same ovary, contrary to the opinion of all physiologists,
he says, except Sir Everard Home. The not very uncommon fact, however, of
three or more children being produced at a birth has always proved the former
circumstance, and the opinion not held by Sir Everard Home was relinquished
acenturyago. The doctrine of each ovarium furnishing a different sex, is
indeed found in Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, Lactantius—a_ superstitious
father of the church, Rhases, and Avicenna ; but has been so long exploded, that
Dr. Parsons, in his Enguiry into the Nature of Hermaphrodites, p. 43., written
a century ago, declares it “cannot but seem obsolete before even a capacity of
the lowest class.” A sow from which John Hunter extracted an ovarium far-
rowed eight times afterwards and produced seventy-six pigs. This was known
to Sir E. Home.


As each foetus, where there are more than one, may possess a separate placenta
and chorion, and may come into the world solitarily, at the distance of some months
perhaps from the other delivery, we see how easily practitioners may fancy a
superfcetation, when there is simply an expulsion of twins, triplets, &c. at dif-
ferent periods. Still, I think, there can be no doubt of many cases of the si-
multaneous. birth of children apparently of different periods, as well as of the

Dold


784 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


bably furnished by the vagina. Some always menstruate up to a
certain time of their pregnancy, and some have menstruated
during pregnancy only. Frequently nausea and even vomiting
occur, and chiefly in the morning: they may begin at conception,
or at any subsequent time; this, however, is usually about the
twelfth or sixteenth week ; they may cease at any time, but gene-
rally, if they begin early, they cease at from the twelfth to the
sixteenth week: they may continue till delivery. Cardialgia, and
longings for particular articles of food, sometimes singular ‘or
even disgusting, are often noticed. The circumstance of longing
during pregnancy is rather curious. Many pregnant women
long for certain nice articles of food, and become much dis-
tressed if not gratified; but others for coals, sealing-wax, flax,
tar, chalk, raw meat, and live fish. Tulpius mentions a lady
who devoured 1400 herrings in her pregnancy. But Ludovicus
Vives tells us of a woman who longed for a bite in the back of a
young man’s neck, and would have miscarried if not gratified ;
and Langius, of another who had set her heart upon biting a
baker’s shoulder, which she saw bare and white as he carried
his bread to the oven every morning. The husband’ bribed the
baker at so much each bite. The poor fellow stood two very
manfully, but, when a third was talked of, his courage failed. A
woman at Andernach on the Rhine longed for her husband, and
is declared to have murdered him, eaten what she could, and
salted the rest for another day.© One pregnant woman longed for
a priest’s heel and bit at it, ‘‘nihil illius clamorem expavescens,
quo deorum hominumque fidem et subsidium ille implorabat.”
Another ate 20lb. of pepper in her pregnancy: another, a live
carp from head to tail: another bit off the heads of twelve
mullets and ate them: another brought bread, dipped it in the
grease-tub of a ropemaker, and devoured it greedily.P, One lady
informed me that in all her pregnancies she acquired a disgust of
tea, and after the first month or two an intense longing for
salads. These longings and aversions are no doubt affections


birth of children apparently of the same period at intervals of a few months.
See examples by Dr. Maton, Trans. of Col. of Physicians, vol. v.; Foderé,
Méd. Légale, t.i. ; and by Dr. Dewees, Philad. Med. Mus. vol. i.

© Shenkius, l. c. de Graridis. P Ephem. Nat. Cur. an. 2,


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 785


of the brain, and approaches to monomania of the organ of
the instinct of feeding ; and we not only often notice them, but
a greater or less change of the mental character. The sweetest
temper may become peevish, and a degree of disturbance amount-
ing to absolute monomania may occur. Gall saw “ four instances
of women who in their ordinary state had not the least inclination
to steal, but who in their pregnancies were violently impelled to
it.”4 The face may grow pale, and even sallow; the eyes be encir-
cled by darkness, or grow hollow; the whole system become thin
and feverish, so that the person a little resembles one labouring
under an organic disease ; the legs may swell. The areola of the
nipple turns dark, and this is most remarkable in women who have
not often been pregnant, because frequent pregnancy produces
in it a permanent dark hue. If the female was growing, growth
may be suspended. Ulcers may not heal, and teeth may become
carious. Neuralgic toothache is very common in pregnancy : and
other neuralgiz are sometimes experienced. Some pregnant
women always have a cough: I knew one always hoarse ; and va-
tious singular sympathies take place in different women. The
blood of pregnant women has usually a buffy coat. Dr. Thackrah,
as well as others before him, found the quantity of fibrin to be in-
creased, as well as that of the red particles and albumen." The se-
cretions are often altered in their sensible qualities. If the breasts
‘are secreting, the milk may become disgusting to the child: if not
refused, it may disorder the child’s system. Discoloration, and even
more intense diseases of the skin, may take place. On the other
hand, a pregnant female may improve in her health, and may grow
fat. Existing diseases may be mitigated, suspended; or cured.
Even phthisis pulmonalis is often suspended, though to become
more quickly fatal after delivery or after weaning, for suckling
acts in some respects like pregnancy, though less powerfully.
Immediately after impregnation the uterus begins to grow more
soft, vascular, and turgid. Its inner surface soon pours forth a
quantity of soft matter, which at length becomes organised into
false membrane precisely as happens in the case of inflamed se-


4 Fonctions du Cerveau, t. i. p. 450. Temporary insanity is not uncommon
after delivery. F
" An Enquiry into the Natiwre and Property of the Blood. London, 1834
p. 147. sqq.
3 F 4


786 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


rous membranes; so that in about a fortnight the “ internal surface
becomes lined with plastic, and, as it were, inflammatory, lymph
(fibrin), which forms the tunica caduca or decidua of Hunter.
This is said to consist of two laminee, —the crassat investing the
uterus,” except its cervix, ‘‘and the caduca refleca, so denomi-
nated from being, after the ovum begins” “to take root in the
decidua, continued ” closely ‘* over the other parts of the ovum,
just as the” close or visceral portion of the “ peritoneum is con-
tinued over the abdominal viscera.” The reflexa is the finer
and formed later, being never found unless when an ovum is dis-
coverable in the uterus. The fibrin of the crassa blocks up the
uterine extremities of the Fallopian tubes as well as the cervix, ac-
cording to Boehmer, Samuel, Lobstein, Moreau, Velpeau, Burdach,
though this is not always the case with the very extremities of the
Fallopian tubes, and a bristle may thus sometimes be passed a short
way through the orifice.x The ovum, entering the uterus, plunges
into the decidua crassa, and pushes this before it as it expands by
growth, and thus obtains this close additional coat—the reflexa.’
An opening, or rather concavity, therefore, exists for a time in
the decidua where the ovum entered its substance: but this is
soon closed up by the abundance of its fibrin. If the Fallopian
tube through which the ovum passes is blocked up, the ovum
has only to expand behind the decidua crassa, and thus pro-


s « Areteus Cappadox (De Causis et Sig. Morb. Diuturn. 1. ii. c. ii. p. 64.
sq-, Boerhaave’s edition) seems the first who gave a true account of the origin
of this membrane, the more accurate knowledge of which we owe to Wm. Hunter.
After the revival of anatomy, Fallopius restored the knowledge of it. Observ.
Anat. p. 207.

It is the chorion, either simply called so, or the spongy, tomentous, fungous,
filamentous, reticulated, of the following age; the involuerum membranaceum of
B.S. Albinus.

The first delineation of it was given, as far as my knowledge extends, by
Ruysch. Thes. Anat. vy tab.i. fig. 1. F.B.C.G.”

* « This is called cr ibriform by the distinguished Fr. B. Osiander.”

“ « By Osiander, the membrane, ovi crassa. See B. S. Albinus, Annotat.
Acad. 1. i. tab. iii. fig. i. e. W. Hunter, |. ¢. tab. xxxiii. fig. 1—4.”

* See Dr. R. Lee’s cases, Med. Chirg. Trans. vol. xvii. 1832.

Y W. Hunter, Burdach, Burns, Bojanus, Boch, Carus, Moreau, Velpeau,
Wagner.


* Burdach, Die Physiologie als Erfahrungswissenshaft. Leipzig, 1826, sqq. §344:


-


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 787


duce the reflexa; if the tube is not blocked up, the ovum
passes into the cavity of the decidua crassa first, and then
buries itself in the soft substance of this membrane at some
part or other of the uterus, and as it expands still raises a
portion before it in the cavity of the decidua crassa, and this
portion thus becomes the decidua reflexa.* At the part of the
ovum which remains attached and does not push the decidua
before it, there is no decidua reflexa, and this portion of the
decidua crassa becomes the maternal half of the placenta, pre-
sently to be described. The ovum thus lies between decidua
crassa and reflexa on the one hand, and decidua crassa and ul-
timately maternal placenta on the other ;— universally encased in
crassa, and to a great extent also in reflexa. (See infra, p: 799.)

Aboveacentury and a half ago, De Graaf maintained from care-
ful observation that the germ exists in the ovarium.> The fact
was violently opposed, and generally rejected. But, in 18927,
Baer announced the discovery that a mature, though unfecun-
dated, ovarian vesicle of a bitch contains a membrane loosely
applied against it and composed of granules united by a solid
and transparent substance°: that the fluid within is viscid, yellow,
and pellucid : that the granulations are particularly accumulated
at one spot, forming a disc, perforated at its centre, and thus
annular (discus proligerus) : that in the centre of the disc, at some
distance from it, but surrounded by a clear fluid which seems
to attach the ovum to its inner edge, lies the ovum, spheroid,
seldom above 3} 5 of an inch in diameter, and consisting of an
external membrane fine and transparent, and an internal thick and
opaque and inclosing a little cavity. The subject was further in-
vestigated by Coste, Bernhardt, and Valentin. The last observed
in mammalia that within the external membrane of the ovum was
a layer of yellowish granulations united by a limpid viscid fluid
and apparently similar to the yelk itself of an egg; and at the
surface of this, immediately under the external membrane, was the
vesicula proligera, or germinal vesicle, a simple membrane contain-


@ Burdach, § 344. Boch has described and represented an ovum in the act
of pushing the decidua crassa before it. Diss. de Membrana decidua Hunteri.
Bonn. 1831. 4to.

> De mulierum organis generationi inservientibus, cap. xii. Lugd. Batay. 1672.

© Epistola de Ovi Mammaliwm et Hominis Genesi. Lipsiz, 1821,

“ Handbuch der Entwickelungsgeschichte der Menschen, p. 20.


788 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


ing a viscid limpid fluid, and discovered already in the cicatricula
of birds by Purkinje in 1825: so that the germ did not lie within
the substance which is analogous to the yelk, as appeared when
the fluid within the outer membrane was supposed to be such,
but lay outside the yelk as in the eggs of birds. The most ex-
ternal membrane, — that of the ovarian vesicle, bursts when the
vesicle is mature, and the true ovum, or germ, and its membranes
pass along the Fallopian tube.

Dr. Martin Barry has recently published a most elaborate mi-
croscopic paper on the subject ®, and finds more or less error in
these accounts. He contends that the external vesicle of the
ovum, or ovisac, as he terms it, is originally elliptic, and becomes
more spherical afterwards ; first perfectly transparent, and at last
translucent only : and thatit is at first exceedingly small, so that a
cubic inch would contain upwards of 200,000,000 in the ox, and he
has seen them in the dog measure only +3, of a Paris line, or z3'z5
of an English inch. That it is often at an early stage found without
organic union in a cavity of the proper substance of the ovum,
or of the walls of a Graafian vesicle; and in the latter case,—that
of an ovisac being parasitic, it may be either within a covering
subsequently obtained by the ovisac to which it is parasitic, or
in this covering itself. That, when the ovisac is originally pro-
duced, it forms itself around both a number of peculiar granules,
more orless elliptic, generally flattened, measuring from +}5 to 34,5
of a Paris line, or from =45 to z+55 of an English inch, trans-
parent, having each at least one nucleus, and being often punc-
tate apparently from minute oil globules, and soluble in water,
and, as well as the granules, a pellucid and partially coagulable
fluid. That in the midst of these is concealed the most primitive
element of the ovum,—the germinal vesicle and its contents.
That, after the production of the germinal vesicle and its contents,
the peculiar granules and oil-like globules accumulate, and conceal
it, thus giving it an envelope; but that the liquefaction of some
globules, or the addition of some other fluid, at length renders it
visible in the centre of the ovisac. The formation of the oil-like
globules with a pellucid fluid indicates the incipient production of
yelk: and at a certain stage of its production two membranes
form around it,—the internal, or proper membrana vitelli, and the


© Phil. Trans. 1838.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. — 789


external, or true chorion. The germinal vesicle is at first in or
near the centre of the yelk; but subsequently passes to its sur-


Ovum of the mole. 440 diameters.


6 Germinal spot (yellowish).
c Germinal vesicle.


ee vel


Jf Chorion.,
209° \ espera wal 1 : -
/ Eo SAY Fo 003 Oo to WW itng & Tunica granulosa in the course of for-
‘Aa | Dr 0% 0 AGT,
q 33, rN, . mation.
Boye? 2
Ve h Ovisac,


iz Blood vessels.


,


0
Sud ng
i

00 ,


face. In the rabbit, after coition, the membrana vitelli, previously
so thin, becomes very thick ; and the chorion, imbibing fluid into”
its interior, becomes distended, so that a minute space exists be-
tween the two membranes. The thickening and distension after-
wards increase considerably, as appears by the state of the ova in
the Fallopian tube. In birds, mammalia, amphibia, and fish, there
are germinal vesicle and contents, yelk, and membrana vitelli ; but
in mammals only is a true chorion given in the ovary. In the
other three classes the substance expelled from the ovary is only
a yelk ball; in mammals, a true ovum. When the ovum is
mature, the peculiar granules form themselves into three parts :
1. A covering of granules, —tunica granulosa, investing the chorion ;
2. A lining to the interior of the ovisac,— membrana granulosa ;
3. Between these a central mass of granules with chords which
extend from the membrana granulosa and suspend the ovum, —
retinacula. The ovisac itself is formed around the peculiar
granules, at a very early stage, — before these have given rise to
the three parts just mentioned. It is supported in the centre by
the equable diffusion of the granules in the fluid; a coat of dense
cellular tissue is produced outside the ovisac soon after the
ovum is completely formed ; and the union of the two is a Graafian
vesicle.£ From the centre of the yelk, and therefore of the whole
Graafian vesicle, the ovum passes gradually to the periphery, and,


f What is termed the calyx in birds, amphibia, and fishes, hanging from the
evary, and invested partly by its substance and sometimes by peritoneum, is
,
thought by Dr. M. Barry to be ovisac and this external coat.


790 * CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


what is interesting, always to that portion of the periphery which:
is directed towards the surface of the ovary; the retinacula dis-
appear on one side and grow shorter on the other, to effect this
change of place, and they now retain the ovum in its new situ-
ation, and probably contribute by pressure to the attenuation of
the Graafian vesicle at the point of the exit of the ovum. Granules
escape when the Graafian vesicle bursts, and these are chiefly
tunica granulosa and ruptured retinacula. The tunica granulosa
accompanies the ovum into the Fallopian tube.

Dr. Wagner has discovered a spot on the inside of the germinal
vesicle, —the germinative spot. £

Dr. M. Barry observes that, in mammalia, myriads of ovisacs
with their*contents are formed which never reach maturity, whe-
ther parasitic or not, and that a continual disappearance and fresh
formation of ova go on at a very early age. The order of form-
ation in the ovum of mammailia is, therefore,

1. Germinal vesicle and contents.

2. Envelope of oil-like globules and peculiar granules.

3. Ovisac around this envelope.

4. Yelk within the ovisac and around the germinal vesicle.

5. Proper membrane of the yelk, while the yelk is incipient.

6. Chorion.

7. Proper covering of the ovisac; the peculiar granules ar-
ranging themselves about the same time to form the

Tunica granulosa,
Retinacula,
Membrana granulosa.

Those of these structures which exist in other vertebrata appear —
in the same order of time.

The period at which the ovum arrives in the uterus probably
varies. In 1817, Mr. Bauer found the ovum in it onthe eighth
day, as he thought"; M. Velpeau believed that he examined one
aborted on the fourteenth after having been apparently in the
uterus for two or three. But Burdach considers every account of
the detection of the ovum in the human uterus before the end of a
fortnight unworthy of credit. The rabbit goes 28 days; the dog
63; the sheep 135; and the ovum is not detected in the uterus


®& Lehrbuch der Vergleichenden Anatomie, s. 351. Leipzig, 1834—~—5,
h Phil. Trans. 1817.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 791
of the rabbit before the end of the fourth day; of the dog, before
the eighth, and even then some ova are in the oviduct; and of the
sheep before the nineteenth : — in none of these earlier than the
expiration of a seventh of the whole duration of pregnancy. A
fortnight is one twentieth of the duration of human gestation. If
they arrived in the uterus at the end of a seventh, they would not
arrive before the fortieth day.

“The ovum consistsi of two proper velamenta or membranes,
besides an external covering.”

The exterior membrane is “‘the chorionk of the moderns, the ex-
ternal surface of which is, from the first, nearly covered with inex-
pressibly beautiful knotty flocculi ; whence it has been called the

Alocculent, leafy, or mossy, chorion. By means of these flocculi
which are the rudiments of the fcetal portion of the future placenta,
the ovum takes root, as it were, in the uterine decidua,” and
becomes firmly fixed to the uterus at a variable period in the
second or third month. They are described by M. Velpeau!
as not vessels, but merely granulated filaments which serve after-
wards for the developement of the vessels of the placenta. They
are very evident at the end of three or four weeks; appear to be
only spongioles or suckers to nourish the feetus, till, at least half
being implanted in the decidua and ceasing to be further de-
veloped, the rest become the rudiments of the placenta, in which
vessels are developed. At the full period the chorion, covered
by the decidua and placenta, is retiected ever the root of the
chord, which it covers as far as the abdomen of the foetus. The
chorion may be separated into two layers, and Meckel has found
fluid between them; the external is termed by Burdach, Exo-
chorion. Its inner surface is connected by fibrils or delicate
vessels with the outer surface of the interior layer, which is
termed Endochorion. It gives the sheath to the vessels of the


1 « Respecting the membranes of the ovum, and their connection with the
uterus and embryo, vide J. F. Lobstein, iiber die Erniihrung des Fetus. Halle,
1804. 8vo.” :

k « The membrana media of Rouhault, Haller, &c., the vasculosa of Osiander.

For the various synonyms and homonyms of the membranes of the ovum,
consult Haller, Llem. Physiol. vol. viii. P. i. p. 194. sq: and Tabarrani’s letter
to Bartaloni, Atti di Siena, t. vi. p. 224. sq.’

' Embryologie, ou Ovologie Humaine, §&c. Alf. L. M Velpeau, &c.
1883.


Paris,


792 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


chord, and is regarded by Burdach as the original covering of the
ovarium and analogous to the vitellary membrane which encloses
the yelk and reniform membrane of the proligera in birds. The
endochorion or inner layer is entirely vascular and cellular mem-
brane, and this second and internal layer is not found before the
end of the seccnd month, when the veins and arteries of the
embryo, extending beyond its navel, and expanding with cellular
membrane, produce it.

The interior membrane is “styled amnion™,” “ delicate,
but remarkably tough.” In the first month its relations are
with the chord only, which seems to perforate it in order
to arrive at the front of the spine and lose itself in some of
the abdominal viscera; and, when the abdominal parietes are
formed, it becomes continuous with the epidermis of the fcetus.
Though its vessels contain no blood, it is undoubtedly vascular,
and, when diseased, vessels are evident in it.

«These two proper membranes of the ovum differ very much from
each other in size” at the end of the first month. ‘ The chorion
appears a large bladder, to the interior of which the amnion,
like a much smaller bladder, adheres in that part only which
nearly corresponds with the centre of the external flocculent
surface of the chorion.” The amnion is not detected before
the sixteenth day. About the eighteenth it appears as a vesicle
at the back of the embryo and continuous with its ends and
edges, the embryo resting upon it. At length the embryo is
found within it, from the circumstance of the walls of the trunk,
originally open, now closing in front, so that the attachment of
the amnion becomes limited to the navel.

«« The remaining space between the chorion and amnion is filled
by a clear water, which may be called the /iquor chorii, of doubt-
ful origin and short duration.” It is reddish, transparent, of the
consistence of albumen, and, though abundant while the embryo
is in the chorion only, decreases on the amnion becoming en-
closed in the chorion.

« For, since the amnion increases -more rapidly than the cho-
rion, and approximates to the latter even during the first months
after conception", in proportion to its approximation must this


”


™ “ The membrana tenuis of Osiander; in French, la coiffe.””
" « See Hunter’s figures (imaginary indeed), |. c. tab. xxxiv. fig. 9. 8. 7,”


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 793


fluid necessarily be absorbed. Occasionally the liquor chorii is
excessive, and maintains them separate till birth, giving a sort of
dropsy or “ false waters.”

‘* The internal membrane of the ovum is filled, from its first
formation to the last moment of pregnancy, with the liquor amniv,
an aqueous fluid, of a yellowish colour, nearly inodorous, of a
bland and scarcely saltish taste, and compared to albumen, from
which, however, more accurate investigation proves it to differ
considerably.” P It consists of about 1:2 of albumen, osmazome,
sugar of milk, ptyaline, soda, and hydrochlorate of soda, lime,
and phosphate of lime, with 98-8 of water.

“Its source” “cannot be referred tothe foetus or umbilical
chord, because it exists in abortive ova containing neither.” Bur-
dach contends that it is imbibed from the fluids of the mother
by the chorion and then by the amnion: for, not only, when Dr.
Mayer injected coloured fluid into the trachea of a pregnant rab-
bit, was it found in the liquor amnii 4, as saffron and mercury are
when taken by pregnant women, but Dr. Otto found the skin of
a foetus of five months of a reddish brown and as hard as parch-
ment, wherever it was in contact with the liquor amnii, in a woman
poisoned by sulphuric acid, although no other organ than the
skin was affected.’ ,

** Jts quantity is inversely as the size of the foetus. —

“ Hence we may conjecture that its use,” at least after the early
periods, “is rather to defend the foetus while nearly gelatinous,
and most liable to suffer from external injuries, than to afford
nourishment, which latter opinion is, indeed, refuted by the nu-
merous instances of full-grown and well-fleshed foetuses destitute
of a head.s”


© « Paul Scheel, at the end of his Commentat. de liquoris amnii aspere arteriea

fetwum humanorum natura et usu. Hafn. 1799.  8vo.

C. H. D’Zondi, Supplementa ad anat. et physiol. potissimum comparatam,
Lips. 1806. 4to.”

p « Steph. J. Van Geuns, De natura et utilitate liquoris amnii. Ultraj. 1793.
4to.”

4 Med. Chir. Zeitung. 1817. t. ii. p. 431.

" Burdach, § 462.

S « Consult the distinguished Tiedemann, Anatomie der Kopflosen Missge-
burten. Landshut, 1813. fol. p.52. D. Welge, a medical practitioner at Goslar,
and formerly a favourite pupil of my own, has enriched my museum with an ex-
cellent example of this kind, 7x. a twin female feetus without head, arms, blood-


794 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


«© The emBryot, which swims in this fluid, suspended by the
umbilical chord, like fruit by its stalk, begins to be formed about
the third week after conception®: at first it appears of rather a
globular shape, resembling a little bean or kidney, from which the


An abortion of about six weeks.


Outside is the chorion, all flocculent.
Inside the amnion, firm and more trans-
lucent than the arachnoid. Within the
amnion is the embryo, attached to it by a
short, unseen, chord. The vesicula um-
bilicalis spoken of at p. 796. sq. is also
represented, attached to the centre of the
body by a fine thread. — (Sommerring )


rudiments of the extremities grow, and on which the face is at
length formed, &c.*”

Dr. Pockels, however, declares he has seen the embryo on the
fourteenth day, one twelfth of an inch in length.

«“ By nature woman is uniparous, conceiving but one foetus.
Frequently, however, she produces twins, the proportion of which


vessels, or thorax, born (what is particularly worthy of notice) alive, after a
perfect and vigorous sister, for it repeatedly extended and bent its legs before it
perished on being seized with a general horripilation.”’

t « C, Fr. Burdach, De primis momentis formationis fetus. Regiom. 1814.
4to.””

u « There is no oceasion in our times to refute the false remarks and figures,
published by Mauriceau, Kerckring, and others, of foetuses ®ne or a few days old.

The reasons of my fixing upon this time, I have explained at large in the
Medicin. Bibliothek. vol. ii. p. 673. sq.

How remarkably this was afterwards confirmed by fact, will be found in the
same work, vol. iii. p. 727.” '

x « Those, who have not an opportunity of inspecting the fragile primordia of
our race, may consult the excellent plates in Ruysch’s Thesaur. Anat. vi. tab. ii.
fig. 2,3, 4, 5.8.10. Thesaur. x. tab. iii. fig. 1.

Also B. S. Albinus, Annotat. Acad. 1. i. tab. v. fig. 4, 5.

Trew, Commerc. Litter. Noric. 1739. tab. iii. fig. 4, 5.

Abr. Vater, Mus. anatom. propr. tab. viii. fig. 2. 4, &e.

And, instar omnium, SOmmerring’s cones Embryonum Humanor. Francof.
ad Meen, 1799, fol.”


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 795


to single births Siissmilch estimates as 1 to 70.7 In these cases,
each child has usually its own amnion, whereas there is a common
chorion.@” .

During fifty-seven years, above 78,000 women were delivered
at the Dublin Lying-in Hospital, and the proportion of women
producing twins or more was about 1 in 57>: and during a subse-
quent period of seven years, of 16,617 births, 480 children were
twins; and of these, 245 were males. ¢

According to the registers of the Lying-in Hospital of Paris,
during twenty years, 37,441 deliveries occurred; in 36,922 of
which was only one child; in 444, two; and in 5, three. No
greater number occurred, nor even for forty years before, in
the whole of which sixty years were 108,000 deliveries. Of 54
twin deliveries, taken at random from the list, 15 were of a boy
and girl; 13 were of girls; and 26 were of boys, — nearly half
of the whole number.4


= « The proportion is not very constant, and is liable to national variety.

Egede expressly mentions the infrequency of twins among the Greenlanders,
Descr. du Groenland, p. 112.

Their remarkable frequency, on the contrary, among the people of Chili is
asserted by Molina, Saggio su la Storia Naturale del Chili, p. 333.”

a « See Denman, Engravings tending to illustrate generation and parturition.
Lond. 1787. fol. tab. ix.

Twins are very rarely contained in a common amnion. Vide J. de Puyt,
Verhandel. der Zeeuwsch Genootsch. te Ulissingen, t. ix. p. 423. sq.

Consult Hor. Garneri, Mém. de V Acad. de Turin, 1809. Append. p. 89.”

® John Cross, Sketches of the Medical Schools of Paris, p. 192.

© Dr. Collins, Dublin Journ. of Med. and Chem. Science, Nov. 1831.

¢ Edinb. Journal of Med. Science, Jan. 1827, p. 366. sq.

From a census of England and Wales, it appears that between 1810 and
1821 —a period of ten years —1,664,557 males were born, and 1,590,510 females.
(Population Abstract, p. 154.) In the fifty-seven years, at the Dublin Lying-in
Hospital, the male births were to the female as 10 to 9. (Mr. Cross, l.c.) Of
16,617 born there, in 7 years from 1826, there were 8,548 males, and 8,069 fe-
males; 4,987 were first children, and of these the males were 2,622. (Dr. Col-
lins, l. c.) According to Dr. Hufeland (£dinb. Phil, Journal,'vol. iii. p. 296. sq-),
the number of males in Germany was as 21 to 20, born from 1811 to 1820 in-
clusively: the number of males exceeded that of females every year, and in the
whole was 1,664,557, while that of the females was 1,590,510. He states
that the numbers over the whole earth are as 21 to 20, and that this pro-
portion occurs daily in a population of 10,000,000, weekly in one of 100,000,
monthly in one of 50,000, yearly in one of 10,000; in small societies, every
10 or 15 years. Burdach suggests that the excess of male births may be


8G


796 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


Four children are sometimes produced, and even five; but this
is the highest number known, except in the case of the wax
matron, who, for a judgment, onge lay in of as many as there are
days in the year. Some women produce more than one child at
a birth repeatedly, and Gottlob mentions one who blessed her
husband with eleven children at three births. The greater the
excess of children born together, the greater their nrortality.

There is a common notion, that, if twins are of different sexes,
the female cannot breed. This I know is erroneous.°

«« The medium of connection between the mother and child are
the umbilical chord and the placenta in which this is distributed.

“‘ The umbilical chord, which appears coeval with the embryo,”
though Dr. Pockels dates its appearance from the third week, and
is covered by an inner coat from the chorion, and an outer from
the amnion, “ varies exceedingly in length and thickness, in the
place of its insertion into the placenta, in its varicose knots, &c.”
M. Velpeau observes that swellings exist along it in the earlier
months, separated by contractions, and generally disappearing be-
fore the fourth month. ‘“ It always consists of three blood-vessels
twisted spirally together, viz. a vein running to the liver of the
foetus, and two arteries arising from its internal iliacs or hypogas-
trics. They are separated from each other by cellular septa of


explained by the circumstance of males being generally older than the women
whom they marry, according to the effects of disparity of age mentioned above
at p. 709. More boys thay girls die before fourteen years of age, and thus
perfect equality is produced at puberty. The surplus of males has been thought
greater among legitimate than among illegitimate children. The proportion of
still-born males to still-born females has been thought greater than the proportion
among those born alive. But Dr. Collins (1. c.) found that, of the 16,617 births ,
498 were premature (infra, p.822.) ; of these the still-born were 293 ; and of these
again the males were 255. A larger proportion of illegitimate than of legitimate
children are still-born.

Among different species of plants and brutes there is much variety in this
respect, in some the sexes being equal, in some the male predominating. But
Burdach, considering the female to be the primitive sex, that whose sexual organs
by elongation become the male, that which exists when there is but one sex,
that which is absolutely necessary, for which the male is formed, and for a large
amount of which a small proportion of male infusion is sufficient, sees it no
wonder that in general females predominate greatly in plants and brutes,

* See abundant instances of such females breeding, in the London Med. Re-
pository, 18238.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 797


various directions, and are throughout narrowed internally by
nodules, or the guasi-valves of Hoboken.” They have not been
found by M. Velpeau before the first half of the second month of
gestation. They are not twisted spirally on each other, according
to him, before the swellings have disappeared. The twisting is
always in the same direction, “such,” in the words of Dr. W.
Hunter, ‘as would be produced by turning the child round upon
its navel as a centre, by pushing its head towards the right side
and its feet to the left.”

“They are collected into a chord by means of a cellular
membrane, which is full of a peculiar, very limpid, fluid, called
Whartonian, resembling gelatine in appearance, and is surrounded
externally by a continuation of the amnion.

** At the part of the chord which is united to the foetus, there
enters the wrachus* between the two umbilical arteries, and it
arises from the fundus of the urinary bladder. In the human
subject it is pervious but for a” time,—only the first three or four
months, “and, indeed, soon disappears altogether.” ‘It leads to
the allantoid.i” The “vesteula umbilicalis, found in human ova
between the chorion and amnionk, is not analogous to the allan-
toid!, but to the tunica erythroides which is seen inthe ova of
some mammalia, and to the vitellary sac of the incubated egg. It
is found in healthy human ova, the second or third month after
conception, too frequently and of too constant an appearance


f « W. Noortwyk, Uteri Humani Gravidi Anatome, tab. iii. fig. 5, 6, 7.”

& « Hoboken, Anatome Secundin. Human. repetita, p. 522. sq. fig. 38, 39, 40,

This structure is further displayed in the arterial branches of the placenta by
Aug. Chr. Reuss, Nov. Observ. circa Structur. Vasor. in Placenta Humana.
Tubing. 1784. 4to.”

M. Velpeau mentions a foetus at Brussels, whose umbilical chord was inserted
into its head. He has seen an instance of but one umbilical artery ; and he re-
fers to another.

h« J, Noreen, De Uracho. Gotting. 1749. 4to.

Ph. Ad. Boehmer on the same, at the end of his Anatome ovi hum. Secund.
sed deformis. Hal. 1763. 4to.”

i « Vide Fabr. ab Aquapendente, De Formato Fetu, tab. xii. xiii, xiv. xvii.
fg. 27. xxv.”

k « Vide Commentat, Soc. Reg. Sc. Gottingens. vol. ix. p. 128. fig. 1.”

| « Among the moderns who still compare it to this, are J. F. Lobstein, |. ¢.
tiber die Ernihrung des Fetus.

And C. H. D’Zondi, Supplem. ad Anat. et Physiol.”

362


798 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


to be regarded as accidental, morbid, or monstrous™;” but 1s
generally thought to disappear about the third month. A late
maker of good anatomical preparations, named Miller, declared
that the intestines were an elongation of its duct.» It appears to
be analogous to the yelk bag of birds, and to supply nourishment
during the earliest months. Though physiologists believe that it
disappears about the third month, Mr. Miller said he possessed
a series of human preparations of the placenta, exhibiting it on-
wards to even the ninth month. Hunter and Meckel had pre-
viously seen it occasionally at this late period. It, however, is not
larger when existing at this late period than at the third month.

The allantoid is very small, appears about the fourth week, and
nearly disappears at the sixth: in brute mammalia it becomes very
large.

Dr.Pockels has discovered another vesicle in the human sub-
ject, which he calls erythroid, and regards as the source of the
umbilical chord.

The chord consists at first of the umbilical vein and two umbilical
arteries, the urachus, some of the intestinal canal (more as the
embryo is younger), the vesicula umbilicalis, and an artery and
vein, called omphalo-mesenteric, belonging to the vesicle, that ac-


m « The opinions both respecting the natural constancy of the vesicula um-
bilicalis and its analogy to the tunica erythroides, I originally, as far as I know,
proposed fifty-three years since, in the first edition of my Institutiones (1787);
and in my Specimen Physiologie Comparate (1788) formerly quoted.

The connection of this vesicle with the intestinal canal of the embryo, and
indeed with the appendix vermiformis of the caecum, is shown by Laur. Oken in
his and Diet. G. Kieser’s Beytr. zur Vergl. Zoologie, §c. fasc. i. ii. Bamberg.
1806. sq.

See likewise Kieser’s Ursprung des Darmkanals aus der vesicula umbilicalis,
dargestellt im menschlichen Embryo. Goett. 1810. 4to.

But, on the contrary, Fr. Meckel shows it to be united with the diverticulum
of the small intestines (Diverticulum Littrianum), Beytr. zur Vergl. Anatomie.
vol. i. fase. i. Lips. 1808. p. 93.; and more fully in Reil and Autenrieth’s
Archiv. fiir die Physiologie, vol. ix. p. 421.

Consult, among many others, W. Hunter, Anatomical Description of the Human
Gravid Uterus (a posthumous work edited by Matthew Baillie). Lond. 1794.
4to. p. 40. sq.

B. N. G. Schreger’s Letter to SOmmerring, De functione placente uterine.
Erlang. 1799. 8vo.”

" Lancet, April 7, 1838


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 799


company the chord together till they reach the abdomen, when
the vein joins a mesenteric vein and the artery joins the superior
mesenteric artery.

‘‘ The blood-vessels of the chord pass to the placenta, of
whose origin from the leafy surface of the chorion that is united
to the pectpuA CRASSA we formerly spoke. Hence we discover
how the substance of the placenta” has a two-fold origin, “¢ being
formed from the decidua and uterine vessels on the one hand,
and from the umbilical vessels distributed upon the chorion on
the other.”


An abortion of ten weeks.


aa, The only portion of the chorion now flocculent, the smooth part having


grown disproportionately.
6, Vesicula umbilicalis, covered by the amnion, and lying in the narrow extre-


mity of the ovum.
c, Filament running from the vesicle to the embryo, across the umbilical chord.


d, A hernial sac, consisting of a dilatation of the chord, and containing intestine.
e, The embryo withdrawn from the membranes.


‘


The decidua reflexa covers the whole ovum except where it is
attached to the crassa and by means of this to the uterus. Here
the crassa, not being expanded by the expanding ovum into reflexa,
becomes the maternal portion of the placenta. Thus the reflexa of
the ovum ends at the edge of the placenta ; and, before the portion
of the crassa to which the ovum adheres has become the maternal
placenta, the reflexa necessarily ends at the same part of the
crassa. (See supra, p. 787.)

3G 3


800 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


«< The increase of the ovum is irregular, the smooth part of the
chorion growing more rapidly than the mossy ; consequently, the
size of the placenta bears a greater proportion to that of the
ovum, the shorter the time that has elapsed since conception, and
a smaller, as the period of labour approaches.

‘«¢ As pregnancy advances, its texture becomes gradually more
compact ; furrowed and lobular on its external surface, which
lies towards the uterus, and smooth on the inner surface, which
is covered by the amnion, and lies next the feetus.” At full time
it covers about a quarter of the chorion, is six or eight inches
in diameter, twelve or fifteen lines thick at its centre, and thinner
at the sides, and about a pound in weight. “ It varies greatly in
size, thickness, figure, and situation or place of attachment to the
uterus ; generally it adheres to the fundus; it is equally destitute
of sensibility and true irritability.” No nerves are discoverable
init. Schott ° has demonstrated that from five to seven nervous
filaments pass from the left hepatic plexus in the region of the liver
to the umbilical vein, which one of them accompanies to the umbi-
licus, and that each umbilical artery receives from the hypogastric
plexus a filament which runs an inch and a half beyond the
inguinal ring. It is not only formed at first in distinct lobes,
but the vessels of contiguous lobes do not communicate: each
lobe independent, each has a distinct branch of the umbilical
vessels, and each is formed from one flocculus of the exo-
chorion. The foetal placenta is composed of ramifications of the
umbilical vessels, flocculi of the exochorion converted into
sheaths for them, soft spongy cellular membrane resembling
coagulated fibrin, and, according to Dr. Granville, of a cortical
membrane said by Baer to invest the ovum originally, and which
Dr. Granville maintains is what Dr. W. Hunter mistook for his
decidua reflexa.P Though the cortical membrane is destined for
absorption during the first months of pregnancy, Dr. Granville
declares that a portion still remains at the spot where the pla-
centa forms, and to serve the purpose of dividing into groups the
filiform vessels of the chorion that become part of the placenta,
and of covering these groups or cotyledons. These cotyledons
are ramifications of the umbilical arteries and veins, —subdivi-
sions of these vessels running horizontally on the foetal surface of

® Burdach, § 448.


» Dr. Granville, Graphic Illustrations of Abortion. London, 1833. p. iv. sq.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 80]


the placenta, —the terminations of the chord. Between them are
spaces in which the surface of the chorion is smooth and shining,
and clear of all vessels. The amnion accompanies the chorion to
form an exquisitely fine pellicle for the ramifications of the coty-
ledons. The two arteries separate a little before arriving at the
placenta, and then usually communicate by a transverse branch
before they ramify. Both they and the veins ramify in a radiated
manner on the inner surface of the placenta, and their branches
are of the finest description. Each artery penetrates a flocculus,
ramifies in its ramifications, and turns back to become a vein, un-


aaaaaa, Lobes of the external surface of the placenta.
bbbbbb, Grooves between them.

ccc, Circular sinuses around the circumference of the placenta.
ddd, External surface of the chorion.

ee, External surface of the amnion.

f, Umbilical chord.

gg, Section of it: the umbilical arteries.

h, Umbilical vein.


distinguishable in texture from the arteries. The ramifications of
each flocculus, artery, and vein, form a lobule or cotyledon. 4


i Burdach, § 448.
3G 4


OZ CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


‘“¢ Although all agree that the placenta is the chief instrument
in the nourishment of the foetus, the true mode of its operation,
and its mutual relation to the uterus and foetus, have given rise
to great controversies in modern times.” ‘ No anastomosis exists
between the blood-vessels of the uterus and of the chord.” In-
jections passed into the umbilical arteries neither escape nor
enter the maternal vessels, but return by the umbilical vein;
nor do injections passed into the uterine vessels find their way to
those of the chord. When the placenta is separated, blood issues
from the artery, but none from the feetal placenta ; or, if the pla-
centa is not separated, but the chord cut, the placental part
soon ceases to bleed. Dr. Hunter discovered that congeries of
arteries and veins proceed from the decidua, and penetrate
between the minutest branches of the feetal cotyledons, invested,
Dr. Granville finds, by projections of decidua*, but, however,
only lie amony, and are unconnected with, the foetal vessels of
the chorion. These maternal decidual vessels of the placenta
are supplied with blood from the uterus; for, if a pregnant uterus
is injected, the decidual or maternal vessels of the placenta become
filled; and Dr. Hunter discovered (and his observation is esta-
blished) natural apertures in the uterine surface of the placenta
if it is removed, through which the decidual vessels may be in-
jected as the chorial may through the umbilical arteries.s The
formation of the decidua being analogousto that of anadventitious
membrane on the pleura, vascular communications between the
lining membrane of the uterus and it take place as between an ad-
ventitious membrane and the pleura—by new and adventitious
shooting vessels. Dr. Hunter thought that the uterine vessels
passed through the decidua into cells, upon which the foetal vessels
ramified. Many deny the existence of cells, and conceive that
the uterine vessels simply ramify among the foetal in the pla-
centa. But the veins of the maternal placenta dilate into vesicles
at their roots. Very large openings, communicating with the veins
of the uterus, and produced by laceration, are seen on the inner
surface of the uterus when the placenta has been separated from
it. Although the placenta itself is not formed in the earliest
months, the vessels of the decidua and chorion exist and must
lie among each other as they do afterwards in the placenta. Still,


" Dr. Granville, 1. ¢. p. xv. © Lc, pass


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 803
‘

“up tothe tenth week the decidual vessels are as yet slender,
straight, and insulated; while the umbilical vessels begin already
to arrange themselves in minute cotyledons.” * There being no
vascular communication between the maternal and foetal por-
tions of the placenta, the blood of the latter is supposed to im-
bibe nutritious fluid from the mother through the sides of the
vessels.

As there is no intermixture of blood, we are not surprised to
find that Hewson discovered the red particles of the blood of the
feetal chicken and viper different (or larger) from those of the adult
animals; or that MM. Prevost and Dumas observed them to be as
large again in the foetal goat as in the adult. The blood of the
feetus is darker than than that of the mother, less thick and
coagulable, without phosphates, contains but a small proportion of
fibrin, has a soft crassamentum, and grows but slightly scarlet in
the air. Imbibition, however, is provedby the detection, in thefeetal
blood, of prussiate of potass given to the mother*; by the odour of
camphor in the feetal blood a quarter of an hour after camphor
had been injected into the veins of a pregnant bitch”; bythe tinge
of the serum, urine, liquor amnii, teeth and bones of fcetal pigs,
after four ounces of madder had been eaten daily by the pregnant
mother’; by the tinge and odour of rhubarb, and its precipitation by
carbonate of magnesia, in the amniotic fluid, the first urine, and
in the serum of the blood of the umbilical chord, of six infants to
whose six mothers ten or fifteen grains of rhubarb had been given
by Dr. Granville every night for about a week up to the period
of delivery. The delicacy of the veins allowed Croupier and
Béclard to pass mercury from the umbilical vein to the maternal
veins of the placenta, but the texture of the arteries forbad imbibi-
tion. The water of coloured injections has passed from the feetal to
the maternal vessels when their texture had been impaired a whole
day by death, though the experiment did not succeed immediately
after death. Dr. Hunter conjectured that the foetus was nourished
by thousands of small lymphatic vessels which absorb nourish-


t Dr. Granville, l.c. p. xviii.

u Swprd, p- 160.

x Edinb. Med. and Surg. Journ. Lam uncertain of this reference.
Y Magendie, Précis Elém. t.ii. p. 578.

Dr. Mussey, American Journal of Med, Science, Nov. 1829.
SVG. py XX. Sas


804 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


ment from the mothers and carry it along the navel-string.» Wris-
berg’, Everhard, Pascoli, Needham, Roslin’, Uttinie, declared they
saw absorbents in the chord; in fact the funis has been called a
tissue of absorbents, with the exception of the blood-vessels.
Fohmann has delineated them extending in profusion from the pla-
centa along the chord, some stopping at the navel, others running to
the absorbents between the epidermis and cutis, and others towards
the groin to join the iliac glands. Lobstein and Meckel have failed
to discover them, and Burdach and Weber consider that Fohmann
injected mercury into cellular membrane only. The absence
of all direct communication between the ovum and mother in man
and mammal brutes is perfectly in accordance with what occurs
in oviparous brutes and in vegetables. The ovum is deposited in
the uterus to be hatched, and its stay there after leaving the oviduct
or Fallopian tube is its period of incubation ; whereas birds’ eggs
and seeds are hatched actually out of the body. The egg is closed
all around, and the embryo of the egg has no connection with the
mother. During the greater part of its life the vegetable embryo
has none, and absorbs the fluid only which is deposited from the
internal membrane of the seed.

Originally the vesicula proligera is supplied in the ovum with
nutritious substance for the germ ; and, as soon as the ovum has
escaped, it is nourished like a vegetable, growing in the tube and
uterus byimbibing the surrounding fluids at its surface. The vesi-
cula umbilicalis and perhaps the allantoid and erythroid are thus
supplied with nutritious substance. When the chord is produced,
this conveys nourishment from the surface of the chorion to the
embryo ; and, as soon as the placenta is produced, conveys it from
the placenta. We have seen that, before the placenta exists, the
whole surface of the chorion is flocculent, though in the earliest
periods the flocculi are not vascular. There must be a reason for
this; and we cannot doubt that the flocculi imbibe the fluid se-
creted by the uterus into the decidua, which at early periods is


> MS. Lectures, seen by Dr. Granville.

© Observ. circa Placente ac Funiculi Umbilicalis absorbentia Vasa. Gotting.
1790.

* Quoted by Schrager, De Functione Placente Uterine, ad virum illustrem
S. T. Simmerring, Epist. Erlange, 1799.

“ Ueber die einsaugenden Gefiisse des Mutterkuchens. Meckel’s Archiv. vol. ii.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 805


full of fluid and is in fact a mere pulp. The earlier the period,
the finer must they be, and the more easily will they imbibe. The
liquor amnii is accordingly more abundant, proportionally, the ear-
lier the period, and absolutely at the middle period than at the last,
for it then amounts to two lbs., while at full time it amounts to but
one lb., and Lobstein asserts that it contains less albumen towards
the end of utero-gestation than earlier ‘; and, before the placenta is
produced, it contributes importantly, in all probability, to nutrition
by means of the soft surface of the embryo. The surface of the
chorion absorbs a little to the latest period. Although the
liquor amnii is very aqueous, a calf has been just as well nou-
rished with it only as with milk for a fortnight 8, and, as the milk
is also immediately after birth very aqueous, the liquor amnii may
be sufficiently nutritious. Brugmans found the absorbents of the
chorion full in embryos removed from the uterus of brutes, when
those of the intestines were empty: and declares that, after
putting ligatures upon the limbs and plunging them in liquor
amnii, the lymphatics swelled with fluid below the ligatures and
subsided on the removal of the ligature. We shall find that some
parts are smaller at a subsequent part of foetal life than at a pre-
vious, that some disappear, and others atrophy in spots so as to be-
come perforated. These changes must supply matter for general
nourishment. We shall find also that the foetal stomach and in-
testines contain soft matters which must be more or less absorbed
constantly and afford support.

All seeds and eggs require atmospheric air, and produce in it the
same changes as the plant or animal in after life. In vegetables
and the lowest animals, and even during the primordial period
of the higher and of man, the chemical changes take place in the
embryotrophe in mass without any special apparatus. Organs,
however, soon form, but as much for nutrition as purification, —
the cotyledon of vegetables and the umbilical vesicle of animals.
The cotyledons absorb water and purify, and red blood is seen
first in the umbilical vesicle. Its contents and vessels in the human
embryo disappear about the third month, when the placenta forms.
[t is doubtful whether the cervical branchie effect chemical changes
in mammalia as they do in the Batrachians, or are mere vestiges


! Ueber die Ernaehrung des Fatus, p. 146.
© Weydlich, Lehre der Geburtshiilfe, t.i. p. 213.


806 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


of inferior organisation, — formed in accordance with a general
plan.

The foetal blood becomes purified in the placenta by the ma-
ternal, as the adult blood is purified in the lungs by the air. The
ramifications of the umbilical artery have no fibrous coat, are ex-
cessively thin, and so subdivided as to be little larger than a globule
of blood in diameter, smaller than the vessels of the adult lungs.
Berzelius says that Fourcroy is almost the only author who has
examined the blood of the foetus, and his observations " “ seem to
have been made by chance, and not to be deduced from any ex-
periment ;” “ credible authors have asserted that the eye cannot
distinguish between the arterial and venous blood of the foetus.” i
Bichat could observe no difference in the arterial and venous
blood of the umbilical chords of several guinea-pigs examined
while the mother’s respiration was still continuing after an open-
ing had been made into the abdomen, “ — les deux sangs offraient
une noirceur égale.”* So too in regard to dogs.! Meckel admits
no difference.

Yet Dr. Jeffrey™, Dr. Chapman", and Dr. Bostock® have seen
the arterial and venous blood differing in colour, and the latter
declares the difference to be so obvious that he “ feels surprised”
at the opinions of Bichat and Berzelius. Schutz, however, declares
the colour of the blood of the umbilical vein to be intermediate
between that of arterial and venous blood. Miiller observed no dif-
ference of colour in the arterial and venous blood of the chord
of cats, &c., but a great difference in the fluid of the fine rami-
fications.? The blood of the vein resembled arterial blood much
more than that of the umbilical arteries, in as far as it coagulated
less quickly, became soon covered with a thick membrane in the
air, gave out oxygen by heat, and became darker in vacuo and
when exposed to carbonic acid gas. Lavagna also observed the


h Annales de Chimie, t, vil. p. 162.

i Animal Chemistry. Translation, p. 41. sq.

k Recherches Physiologiques, p. 271.

' Anatomie Générale, t. ii, p. 344.

™ De Placenta.

® Dr. Chapman, Philadel. Journ. of the Medical and Physical Sciences, No. 1.
p- 10.

° Elements of Physiology, Ed. 3. p. 409.

P De Respiratione Fatus, p. 163. sqq-


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 807


blood of the vein to give a coagulum more solid and abundant
in fibrine than that of the umbilical arteries. We shall see that
the blood from the placenta goes direct to the brain by the infe-
rior cava, right auricle, and left ventricle ; and that of the superior
cava to the right auricle and ventricle and descending aorta
through the umbilical arteries to the placenta; so that the
former course is like that in after life through the pulmonary
veins and left ventricle, and the latter like that through the
right ventricle and lung. The head is much larger propor-
tionally than after birth; and that arrangement is evidently to
supply it with purified blood. If, before respiration, the chord
is compressed, the foetus dies before death could occur from
want of nourishment, and even sooner than from suffocation after
birth; and yet the blood could have proceeded without mechanical
impediment through the ramifications of the descending aorta in
the lower part of the body to the inferior cava, to pass as before to
the head. If the child breathes, the chord may be compressed
with impunity; when it breathes strongly, the blood ceases to
flow in the chord; if respiration is suspended, immediately the
blood flows again in the umbilical arteries. The same changes
were observed by Carus when he let young rabbits out of the
membranes, and afterwards plunged them under warm water.
The purification takes place between two fluids, as in the respir-
ation of fishes ; not, however, by instinctive movements, but con-
tinuously and passively, as in tadpoles.

The changes in the blood can, however, be dispensed with by
the foetus much longer than by the adult. For respiration may
be deferred a considerable time after birth, circulation continuing
even although the placenta has been expelled ; especially if the
temperature is maintained by a warm bath, according to Drs.
Chapman and Rousseau. When respiration has commenced, its
continuance is less dispensable, but for some time more so than
subsequently.

As the chick, in the egg, cut off from all intercourse with the
mother, requires its blood to be purified by the external air,
the egg does not hatch if the shell is varnished; and, if, during
the latter half of incubation, the shell is carefully opened, the
chorion, to use the language of Blumenbach, presents one of the
most splendid spectacles in the organic creation ; the arteries are
seen carrying blood of a bright scarlet, and the veins of a livid


808 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


red. As soon as an egg is laid, some of the water of the white
evaporates, and a space is left at the larger end between the layers
of the membrane of the shell, and this increases till it will
hold half a cubic inch of air. During incubation, eggs are always
placed obliquely, with the large end highest, and the rest of the
egg may be varnished with impunity if this is left bare. The eggs
of insects produce identical changes. Seeds produce the same
changes as plants, and, as germination requires darkness, germina-
ting seeds absorb carbon and exhale oxygen. It hasbeen remarked
that pure oxygen excites germinatingseeds so much that the young
plant is weak or perishes. Some vegetables cannot bear the air at
first, and require to be covered with a glass; and Dr. Paris con-
siders that the reason of a puncture in the large chamber of an
egg destroying the chick is that it allows the entrance of too
much air.t The foetus of the kangaroo has no vascular connection
with the mother, being surrounded by a kind of jelly, and is sup-
plied with external air by tubes opening into the uterus from
without for this express purpose. Some of those who believe in
placental absorbents conceive that the foetus may be nourished
by the absorbents only, and its blood purified by the purer fluids
of the mother. The umbilical vein is discovered some time
before the umbilical arteries, and appears originally to convey a
milky fluid which is found in the placenta, analogous to chyle, and
thus, according to the late Dr. Young of Edinburgh, to act asa
thoracic duct.

The temperature of the foetus is directly dependent upon the
mother, and not upon the chemical changes going on in itself or
its placenta. Autenrieth and Schutz took two foetuses from the
uterus of a rabbit, and allowed one to remain connected with the
placenta, but separated the other and killed it by dashing it violently
on the ground. Both cooled at the same rate, and originally
their temperature was 27°, while that of the mother was 30°. Still,
as chemical changes are going on, and as a child born at full time
can maintain a temperature above that of the air far better than
one born at seven months, we must presume that the foetus con-
tributes somewhat to its own temperature.‘


4 Comparative Anatomy. Translated by Mr. Lawrence, § 375.
" Trans. of the Linnean Society, p. 309.
8 Burdach, § 464.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 809


In 1819, a surgeon at Geneva, named Major, discovered the
sound of the feetal heart through the parietes of the abdomen.
For two years his announcement excited no attention: but in
1821, M. Kergaradec presented an able memoir to the Académie
Royale of Paris on the subject. Some, incapable of observation,
denied the fact: and, what they could not hear, they contended
others had not heard.t But, like others, I have witnessed it
repeatedly, and it is now established. Generally it is scarcely
perceptible till about the twentieth week ; and the rate of the
pulsation is from about 130 to 150 double sounds to the end
of pregnancy. They sometimes become very rapid while we are
in the act of listening ; and the extent over which they are heard is
about four fingers’ breadth. If the child moves, they are quickened.
The extent is less accordingly as there is less liquor amnii; though
the strength and clearness are even the greater. The spot at which
they can be heard is generally about the middle of the uterus,
and more to one side than the other, and this is usually the left.
If there are twins, there is a second pulsation at some distance ;
but very indistinct before the membranes have ruptured and la-
bour commences. Dr. Kennedy, in a case of twins, found the
pulsations of one to be 130 and of the other 145.

But M. Kergaradec discovered a second sound, of correspond-
ing character, synchronous with the mother’s pulse, in different
parts of the uterus, and chiefly near the funis. It was termed the
placental sound. But, though usually loudest in the neighbourhood
of the placenta, it is not always; is heard sometimes in opposite
spots, and when the child is dead, and even when labour is over :
so that it isascribed to the impediment to the course of the blood
through the great uterine vessels, occasioned by their contortions
or pressure, and possibly the compression of the great pelvic
vessels by the womb may contribute to it."

« During the progress of pregnancy, while the foetus and se-
cundines are increasing, the uterus of course undergoes important
changes *, not only in size, but in situation, figure, and especially


t The subject is fully treated in Observations on Obstetric Auscultation, by
Evory Kennedy, M.D. Dublin, 1832.

« Dr. Kennedy, 1. c.

x « L, Ph. J. Pott, Commentatio premio regio ornata de corporis famine gra-
vide mutationibus, §c. Gott. 1815. 4to.


810 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


in its texture, which is considerably altered both with respect
to its blood-vessels and the intervening parenchyma, from the
constant and great congestion of fluids that occurs in it.

«In proportion as the uterus increases, the blood-vessels from
being tortuous and narrow become more straight ¥ and capacious,
and the veins, near the termination of pregnancy, acquire so great
a bulk as to have been taken for sinuses by some anatomists. .

« The parenchyma becomes gradually more thin and lax,
especially in the part nearest the ovum, so that, although the
gravid uterus is very thick, particularly at its fundus, and in a
living and healthy woman is turgid with blood and replete with
vital energy, nevertheless it is soft, and its general nature (espe-
cially after death, when, as Arantius long since remarked, it al-
most appears lamellated if pregnancy was advanced b) extremely
different from the firm and compact substance of the unimpreg-
nated uterus.

“ The remaining important changes © of the gravid uterus, as
well as those still more remarkable ones which occur to the ovum
and foetus, we will briefly relate in the order of the ten lunar
months, according to which pregnancy is at present very conve-
niently calculated.

« As the uterus immediately after impregnation always becomes
turgid, so, increasing from that period in bulk and weight, it de-
scends rather lower into the upper part of the vagina, still retain-
ing its former figure during the first three months, except that its
fundus becomes a little more convex, and its anterior portion
somewhat recedes from the posterior, and that its cavity, before
extremely small and nearly triangular, becoming expanded by the
fluids of the ovum, accommodates itself to the subglobular form
of the latter. .


W. Wagner, on the same subject, Commentatio que secundam palmam tulit.
Brunsy. 1816. 8vo.”

y « y, W. Hunter, Anat. Uteri Gravidi, tab. xvi.”

z « Tbid. tab. xviii.”

a «y, B.S. Albinus, Annotat, Acad. i. ii. tab. iii, fig. 2.”

b « Arantius, De Humano Fetu libellus, p. 5. sq. 1579. Compare B. S. Al-
binus, Tab. Uteri Gravidi, ii.”

© * Among ‘others consult J. Burns, Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus. Glas-
gow, 1799. 8vo.—a work carefully and faithfully executed.”


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 811


‘The ovum itself, which about the termination of the first
month is of the size of a pigeon’s egg, and possesses both de-
cidue separate from each other and the minute amnion separate
from the larger chorion, commonly attains, near the end of the
third month. the size of a goose’s egg; the decidua reflexa
then very closely approaches to the crassa, and the amnion to
the chorion; the amnion is filled with a large quantity of fluid
which bears its name and defends from the pressure of the womb
the tender embryo that is now very small in proportion to it,
scarcely indeed equal in size to a young mouse, and hanging
headlong and rather unsteadily.2”

The decidua crassa arrives at its full growth soon after the first
month, and then gradually becomes less perceptible ; though some
maintain that it continues till delivery. The reflexa in the third
month is even thicker than the crassa, but soon afterwards wastes,
and after the fourth month unites with it into a delicate layer of
cellular membrane.

“ From the fourth month, the uterus becomes more oval or sub-
globular, and, its neck gradually softening, shortening, and almost
disappearing or rather extending laterally, it again tends upwards
and begins to rise to the superior part of the pelvis. At the same
time the tubes ascend with the convex fundus of the uterus, and
are extended and elongated, but adhere to the sides of this organ
so firmly, that half of their length only is separate from it, and,
at first sight, they appear to arise from the middle of it, — a cir-
cumstance which gave occasion to an erroneous opinion of the
enormous increase of its fundus.

« After this period, the foetus acquires a size more proportional
to the capacity of the ovum, and becoming, at the same time, con-
globated together, acquires a more fixed situation, which it pre-
serves to the end of pregnancy ; the head is inclined to the chest
and the back bent, and generally placed rather towards one side
of the mother.

“In the middle of pregnancy, — at the end of the fifth month,
so much has the uterus increased, that its fundus is nearly
between the navel and pubes, and pregnancy becomes externally
evident.

“ From this period, the foetus by its motion is generally more


d « », Doeveren, Specimen. Observ. Academ. p. 104. sq.”
S


812 CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY.


distinctly perceptible to the mother: this circumstance, however,
occurs at no definite time.

« The uterus and foetus continuing to increase during the re-
maining five lunar months, the fundus of the former reaches the
umbilicus about the sixth month; after the eighth, having risen
higher, it approaches the scrobiculus cordis. In the mean time,
the cervix is gradually obliterated, flattened, and attenuated.”
Towards the seventh month the fetus becomes more or less
covered with a yellowish substance, something like spermaceti,
of a nature between mucus and fat, termed vernix caseosa,
secreted by the cutaneous sebaceous follicles, and abundant
chiefly about the head, axilla, and groins.

“In the tenth month, the uterus, overwhelmed as it were with
its own bulk, —being eleven inches in length and nine or more
in breadth, begins again to sink.

«Each decidua, but especially the reflexa adhering to the cho-
rion, having for many months been growing thinner, now almost
appears a net-work of short white fibres.°

“The larger diameter of the placenta is now nine inches ; its
thickness one inch; its weight one pound or upwards.

“The length of the umbilical chord is generally eighteen
inches or more, — which is considerable if compared with that of
other mammalia.

«The weight of a common full grown foetus is usually about
seven pounds; its length about twenty inches.!”

A twin is seldom so large as a solitary foetus. Some assert
that twins generally weigh no more together at birth, others that
twins and even triplets do not generally weigh together above
four or five pounds more, than a single child. Sometimes one


e « Qn the various appearances of the decidua during the latter half of preg-
nancy, consult W. Hunter, Anat. of the Gravid Uterus, tab. xxiv. fig. 3, 4. tab.
xxix. fig. 45., comparing with these, tab. xxix. fig. 2.”

f « This weight and volume are remarkably large in proportion to the mother,
if compared with those of the offspring of many other mammalia. But, not-
withstanding, woman is so far from producing the largest foetus in this respect
among the mammalia, that she is far surpassed by some, especially of the
bisulca, and most by the Guinea-pig.” Sir Richard Croft attended a woman whose
child was born 15 lbs. in weight ; another was born at Penzlaw weighing 20 Ibs.


(Dublin Med. Journ, March, 1838.) ; on the other hand, the weight at birth has
not exceeded 3 lbs.


CONCEPTION AND PREGNANCY. 813


twin is far larger than the other: and occasionally one is al-
together blighted after a time, so as to be mistaken for a more
recent formation or the result of superfcetation. If seeds are sown
too near together, their growth is impeded. Dr. John Clark found
boys weigh in general nine ounces on birth more than girls: and
this is supposed to explain the greater proportion of still-born
boys than girls, while the smaller size of twins explains why the
proportion of still-born twin boys is less than of boys born singly.

“The quantity of the liquor amnii is too variable to be defined ;
but, when the fcetus is strong, it seldom exceeds a pound.”


& Phil. Trans. 1786.


ay dak ey


814


CHAP. XXXIII.
OF LABOUR AND ITS SEQUEL.


“Tue foetus, formed by the powers already described, and
being now perfect and at the period of maturity, has to come into
the world by means of labour. *

“This critical period occurs naturally (and physiology treats
solely of natural occurrences) at the end of the tenth Junar month
from conception, 2. e. about the 39th or 40th week ” — 280 days.

‘«‘ At that time, the pregnant woman is impelled to bring forth
by an absolute necessity, less under the influence of the will than
any other voluntary function.>”


a «By, B. Osiander, Handbuch der Entbindungskunsl, t. ii. P. i.”

> It was formerly believed that pregnancy might be extended to twelve months,
and even totwo years. With all deductions for error and temptation, I think a
few satisfactory modern cases are recorded of its protraction to one, two, and
even eight weeks, beyond the fortieth. *

Dr. Merriman has given the dates of the birth of 114 children calculated from
the day, inclusively, after the last mark of menstruation. There were 3 births in
the 37th week; 13 in the 38th; 14 in the 39th; 33 in the 40th; 22 in the 41st;
15 in the 42d; 10 in the 43d; 4 in the 44th. He vouches for the accuracy of
the statement.

Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xviii.


* See Dr.Smellie’s Treatise on the Theory and Practice of Midwifery ; Dr. Bart-
ley’s Treatise on Forensic Medicine, &c. Bristol. Foderé declares that to hisown
certain knowledge his wife went ten months and a fortnight in her two first preg-
nancies. M, Dulignac, long a surgeon-major, declared on a trial that in regard
to his three last children his wife was pregnant thirteen months and two weeks
with two, and eleven months with the other; and that he had discovered each of
these pregnancies between the fourth and fifth months by the motion of the child,
and watched them all to their termination. (Foderé, Méd. Légale, t. ii.)


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELZE. 815


It is ascertained that labour most frequently begins in the
evening and ends in the morning; the greatest number of births
of both living and dead children taking place in the three first
hours after midnight. :

“Physiologists have differed in their explanations of the causes
of so determinate and sudden an event. After all, the exciting
cause of labour must be ascribed to an established law of nature,
hitherto equally inexplicable with so many other periodical pheno-
mena; v.c. the metamorphosis of insects, the stages of exanthematic
fevers, crises, &c. &c.; nor has the mature ovum been inaptly
compared, ceteris paribus, to fruit, which, when ripe, falls almost
spontaneously to the ground, from the constriction of those ves-
sels which previously conveyed its nourishment. And in fact it
has been remarked that the human placenta, at the approach of
labour, is contracted, and, as it were, prepared for its separation
from the uterus.’’ Its changes before birth will be mentioned in
the 36th Chapter.

“‘What is usually urged respecting the utmost expansion of
the uterus, and other similar excitements to labour, is refuted
by many circumstances, and, among the rest, by the numerous


It is thought that the uterus is disposed to unburthen itself at what would be a
menstrual period, and that labour usually occurs at the 10th menstrual period after
impregnation ; so that it varies according to the interval between impregnation
and the last menstruation, provided impregnation do not happen just before a
menstrual period, in which case labour may occur at the eleventh rather than the
end of the tenth month. Kluge, who gives formula for calculating the duration
of pregnancy on these principles, remarks that the Jews considered the period of
labour to be the 270th day from conception, because they did not allow connec-
tion before the tenth day after the conclusion of the catamenia, nor just before
their commencement. (Medicinische Zeitung von dem Vereine Siir Heilkunde in
Preusse, 1839, p. 203. Burdach. )

Premature labour independent of external causes, also occurs most frequently
at what would be a menstrual period.

That there is great variety among brutes was known to the ancients, but M.
Teissier has made very extensive observations on this point : — Of 160 cows, 14
calved from the end of the 8th month to 8 months and 26 days; 3 on the 270th
day ; 50 from the 270th to the 280th; 68 from the 280th to the 290th ; 20 on
the 300th; 5 on the 380th. He obtained similar results with 2092 mares, 130
sows, and 139 rabbits. M. Darcet found that in the same hen’s nest 1 ege
hatched on the 13th day; 2 onthe 17th; 3 on the 18th; 6 onthe 19th. (Foderé,
ic.)


3H 3


816 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUEL.


examples of extra-uterine, whether tubal or ovarian, conceptions,
in which, at the expiration of ten months from impregnation, the
uterus, notwithstanding its vacuity, is seized with the customary,
though indeed fruitless, pains.¢

‘«‘ Besides this exciting cause, other very powerful efficzent
causes are requisite, as must be manifest from the relation of the
ovum to the uterus.4

«We are persuaded that the proximate and primary cause is
solely the vita propria of the uterus.

“ Among the remote, the most important appears to be the
respiratory effort excited principally by the great connection® of
the intercostal nerve with the rest of the nervous system.

“We formerly noticed that, in the latter periods of pregnancy,
the uterus somewhat subsided, by which circumstance the form
of the abdomen is a, little changed and the inconveniences in-
duced during advanced pregnancy in the function of respiration
are relieved. At the same time, the vaginal mucus is secreted
more abundantly, the vagina itself is relaxed, the columns of
ruge are almost obliterated, and the labia pudendi swell ; finally,
near the approach of labour, the os uteri gradually dilates into a
circular opening ;” and even in a case of double uterus the orifice
of the empty organ has dilated just as that of the other did while
expelling its foetus. f

“The phenomena of labour generally observe a regular order
of commencement and progress £, whence accoucheurs have di-
vided them into stages, of which the moderns enumerate four or
five, although they define them variously.

“In the first, the true pains occur, peculiar in their nature,
proceeding from the loins in the direction of the lower parts of
the uterus (recurring, at intervals, indeed, during the whole of
labour, with various degrees of violence and frequency), mild in
the beginning, at which time they are called warning and the os
uteri begins evidently to dilate. The abdomen now falls still more,


© « J have recorded a remarkable instance of this kind in the Comment. So>.
Scient. Gottingens. vol. viii.”

* « Consult J. De Gorter, De actione viventium particulari, p. 38.”
“vy. Camper, Demonst. anat. pathol. L. ii. p. 9.”
Froriep, Natizien, vi. p. 229.7


5 «», Smellie, Set of anatomical tables, tab. xi.—xv.’


e


f


LABOUR AND IT'S SEQUELAE. 817


the urine is urgent, and abundance of mucus flows from the soft
and tumid genitals.

“In the second, the pains, increasing, are called preparing,
and, by the compressing effect of the respiratory organs, a strong
inspiration, &c., a segment: of the lower part of the membranes
of the ovum is protruded through the uterine orifice into the
vagina.

“In the ¢hird, the pains, becoming more excruciating, are
called labour pains, and act with still more violence upon the
uterus, which is driven downwards and compressed against the
foetus, so that the protruded segment of membranes becomes
extremely tense, is burst asunder, and the greater part of the
liquor amnii escapes.” !

“Finally, in the fourth and last stage, the pains, becoming
dreadfully violent and agitatingi, are accompanied by great
exertions of the woman herself; almost always too by shivering,
shrieking, tremor of the knees, &c. The head of the child, now
on the verge of birth, penetrates, and the face first appears, the
vertex usually remaining under the arch of the pubes, and the
rest of the head in the mean time being farther propelled, and
revolving around the impacted vertex as around an axis. Thus
the child comes into the world, in the midst of a red discharge,
consisting of a second portion of the liquor amnii mixed with
blood.

“Soon after the expulsion of the child, the delivery of the
secundines in the fifth stage commences, attended by a painful


h Sometimes the child is born in the membranes. Wrisberg has observed this
to happen three times in 2000 instances. (Commentationes, p. $12.) Its cause may
be the smallness of the ovum, or the large size and softness of the os uteri, The
child is then said to be born with a cau/; and, as it came into the world under
water and yet lived, the caul is superstitiously believed by many to be a pre-
ventive against drowning if a person keeps it in his pocket. Cauls are con-
tinually advertised for sale, and fetch more if the purchaser can be made to
believe farther that the child was a male. ‘The price is a few pounds.

i « Although, even among my own countrywomen, the symptoms described
under these four stages vary greatly in violence and proportionate duration,
nevertheless, however naturally they take place, they universally (excepting some
extremely rare cases) so far surpass, even under the most favourable circumstances,
the pains experienced by domestic brutes in their labours, that I trust no one, who
has frequently witnessed labours in both, will seriously doubt the immense
difference between them in this respect.”


3H 4


818 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELA.


though much less violent exertion, and followed by another
hemorrhage from that part of the cavity of the womb * to which
the placenta had adhered by means of the decidua crassa.! .

«Immediately that both burthens are expelled, the uterus
begins gradually to contract, until” in about six weeks “ it acquires
its original form and very nearly its original dimensions.”

The ordinary duration of labour is from four to six hours. It
may be only one; it may exceed twelve. Madame Lachapelle
found that, of 2335 labours, 1476 occupied from 1 to 6 hours ;
719 from 7 to 12; 124 from 13 to 24; 15 from 25 to 36; 4. OC-
cupied 48, and’1 occupied 60." Mental emotion may suspend
the pains for a time, just as it may bring them on before their
time.

“For about a week after labour, the Jochia are discharged, for
the most part very similar to the catamenia, but rather more
copious, especially if the mother does not suckle her offspring.
About the sixth day their red colour becomes fainter, and after-
wards changes to white.

« At the same time the uterus is liberated from the remaining
shreds of the decidua, and, having thus completed the function of
pregnancy, is again ready for menstruation or conception.”

The vagina is not only fitted by its ruge for unfolding under
distending causes, but, possessing a fibrous coat under the mu-
cous, appears capable of contracting powerfully like the uterus in
labour. The arms or the head remaining in the vagina in breech
presentations, and the head when separated from the trunk and
lying in the vagina, may be expelled with great force. On abor-
tions also and coagula in the vagina the same observation is
made.

The uterus will of course expel the child while the mother is ina


k « B.S, Albinus, Tab. uteri gravidi, vil.

Wm. Hunter, Anat. of the Gravid Uterus, tab. x. fig. 3.”

1 « Nic. Massam and all since his time denominate this portion of the interior
of the womb, during or shortly after pregnancy, the cotyledons, from the analogous
appearance observable in the gravid uterus of sheep or goats, in which similar
cavities (acetabula) exist, receiving what are called the glandular corpuscles of
the chorion that correspond with the fetal portion of the human placenta.

Whatever was hollow, like an acetabulum, was called xortan by the ancients.
Vide J. Cammerarii Comm. utriusque lingue, p. 256. 384.”

m Pratique des Accouckemens. Paris, 1825.


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELAE. 819


state of coma or apparent death. It has contracted powerfully
for a quarter of an hour after death.

Women may die in parturition, but far more die after it. Fatality
is proportionate to the unhealthy circumstances of individuals ;
so that fewer die now in most European countries than formerly.

Labour is much more easy and sooner recovered from, the
greater the purity of the atmosphere and the food, and the more na-
tural the mode of life; more easy among the lower classes who
are in fair circumstances than the highest. The Indian women of
South America, if taken in labour on a journey, are said to retire
to a thicket, bring forth, wash themselves with water or melted
snow, take up their load again, weighing perhaps 80 lb., put their
child on the top of it, wrapped in skin, and rejoin their companions.
Only a short time ago a poor servant of all work in my neigh-
bourhood delivered herself of a child in the night at full time,
went down to her work as usual in the morning, would walk to
the police office, and on being taken to prison mixed with other
prisoners, allowing herself no indulgence"; and she did very
well.


* Barbarous and semibarbarous nations have very properly regarded a puer-
peral woman as impure for various lengths of time, and some have insisted upon
purification before allowing her to enter a temple, walk in public, or approach
her husband. Some Tatars purify her with prayers and baths. (Zimmer-
mann, Taschenbuch der Reisen, t. vill, p.122.): the Samoiedes with castor and
hairs of reindeer, and they compel her to pass into the fire. (Jb. p. 164.) At
Siam and Pegu, she remains by the fire above a week for purification. (Frank,
System der Medicinischen Polizei, t. i. p. 646.) The Hottentots, having no eau
de Cologne, purify her by sprinkling her with urine and rubbing her with cow-
dung. (Demeunier, Ueber Sitten und Gebreuche der Voelker, t.i. p. 44.) The
Jews regarded her impure for a week if she had produced a boy, and for a fort-
night if a girl; she was not allowed to enter the temple for 66 days after the birth
of a girl, though at the end of 33 days after the birth of a boy. This distinction was
no compliment to the female sex ; nor is the reason obvious, unless boys were more
prized and it was thought that impressions .on the mind assisted in determining
the sex. This inconvenience after delivery was, however, compensated for bya
great indulgence during it: for while pregnant they were allowed a luxury which
every good Christian must pity the Jews for being deprived of, —pork. Women
of the Church of England are chuwrched as soon as they go out, and without
reference to the sex of their production. I have known them, however, through
favour, be churched at home. A droll custom among many nations of Europe,
Asia, and South America, is to make the husband be confined, keeping his bed,
abstaining from work, and from his usual food and smoking, and covered up as if


820 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELAE.


Delivery stands on the same footing with defecation. Nature is
sufficient in the immense majority of instances, and scientific as-
sistance is no more required than in the visit to the water-closet.
Yet as sound knowledge and art may be required by the condition
of the bowels, so the obstetric art is of the highest importance ;
and, in spite of it, parturition, like disordered defecation, is some-
times fatal. The proportion of fatality in different European
cities is one in from 150 to 200 cases; but must vary according
to the healthiness of the mode of life and the freedom from ab-
surd practices with puerperal women. It is consequently Jess in
Europe now than formerly. The first labour more frequently re-
quires the assistance of art than any other. Riecke says that
one of seventeen cases requiring art is the first labour.°

If there is a second child, it is generally expelled immediately
after the first: but some hours may intervene; and even eleven
days have passed before the second birth, though at full time.
Sometimes the first is discharged at an early period of pregnancy:
and the other remains longer, perhaps the full time. Sometimes
the first is blighted, and either discharged early, or with the other
at the end of the forty weeks.

It is probable that uncivilised women would naturally bite or tear
with their fingers through the chord; a lacerated wound affording
the greatest impediment to hemorrhage. The Boshman? and
Brazilian? women are in fact said to bite it asunder. A woman is
not likely to do this till some minutes have elapsed and allowed
her to recover a little from her exhaustion, and by that time the


he were sick. It arises from a fancied connection between the life of the father
and child, so that if the child dies the father bears the blame. I have not known
a man persuaded he was with child, like Calandrino, in Boccaccio, but have more
than once known the husband of a pregnant woman believe he was breeding for
his wife: that is, ascribe various dyspeptic and nervous symptoms in himself,
while his wife was hearty, to the breeding symptoms having gone over from
her to him. The Brazilians, according to Spix and Martius (Reise in Bra-
xilien, p. $81.), have some such fancies of sympathy between man and wife, for
during pregnancy the man as well as the woman abstain from certain sorts of
meat, and live chiefly on fish and fruit. For references to travellers, see Burdach,
§ 574.

© Reitriige zur geburtshiiffliche Topographie, p. 32.

P Virey, Hist. du Genre Humain, t.i. p. 328.

4 Spix and Martius, ib.


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELA. 821


pulsation of the chord would have wholly ceased. Neither is she
likely to lacerate it so near the umbilicus as we for subsequent con-
venience divide it: but more nearly midway, so that the longer ex-
tent of shrinking of the vessels would offer still greater obstruction.
Brutes who bring forth lying tear through the chord with their
teeth; with those who stand during their delivery it snaps asunder,
and usually near the placenta, where its vital powers have begun
to decline; there being usually no hemorrhage, as their placenta
is somuch more reduced in vitality at full time than that of
women. The human chord may snap if the woman is stand-
ing, or if it is short, or dry and brittle, or when the child is
forced away too quickly. In civilised life the chord is cut a few
inches below the navel and tied. If the child is perfectly mature,
and the division made at a proper distance from the navel, there is
little chance of hemorrhage beyond half an ounce to an ounce, be-
cause the blood will cease to circulate in the placenta and umbilical
arteries, and flow freely into the lungs. But, as we are not always
certain of this, and hemorrhage may occursometimes, and especially
since we cut the chord clean and do not make a lacerated division
of it, it is safe and right to tie the chord: and, as it is possible
that there is a second child and but one placenta, it is a proper
rule to tie it in two places and divide between them. The portion
attached to the navel dries up by the third day, from the ab-
sorption of its fluids into the child : its vessels are indeed not per-
meable after the first day. The portion attached to the placenta
does not dry up, but putrefies. Four or five days after birth, the
shrivelled piece of chord drops off like a gangrenous part, the living
part immediately beyond it having liquefied and been absorbed.
In from a week to a fortnight the opening at the navel closes.
When the chord drops off, the opening which is left becomes closed
completely by the constriction of the tendinous fibres surrounding
it. A central depression is thus produced, on which skin forms,
adhering to the linea alba, and on which no fat is deposited, so that
a depression is permanently left.

During pain the placental sound is duller and less frequent, and
the action of the foetal heart isweaker and less frequent in propor-
tion to the violence of the pain.

Any part of the foetus may present itself at the os uteri. But


* This point will be spoken of again in Chap, XXXVI.


822 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUEL.


the presentation of the head is the ordinary and normal. This
fact has been shown by M. Dubois to be independent of gravity.
M. Virey has demonstrated the same thing in regard to animals
in general. The chord is frequently coiled round the neck ; some-
times the placenta is attached to the margin of the os uteri: yet
the head is the lowest part and at the os uteri, as regularly as if
the foetus had been suspended from the placenta by the chord.
M. Virey states that, if female quadrupeds are examined at dif-
ferent periods of gestation, the head of the embryos and foetuses
are found, with very rare exceptions, whether in the horns or body
of the uterus, directed towards the vagina; one following the other
like a pack of hounds, in one track. The head escapes the first
from the eggs of the bird, reptile, and insect ; the head of the
chick is directed to the large end of the egg, which is more fra-
gile, and more permeable to air; and the large end of the egg is di-
rected towards the oviduct even before impregnation. Fish, and
among vermes at any rate the leech, are known to be born head
foremost. The head of the fissiparous and gemmiparous animals is
the first part developed. This is a law, and analogous to that of
the ascent of the plumula and descent of the radicle in vegetables. s


The new being is frequently expelled before the proper time,
and some say that this happens in the case of girls more frequently
than of boys.t. When there are twins, labour generally begins
earlier; and the period of pregnancy is generally much shortened
by the presence of three or more foetuses. The term adortion is
given to its expulsion before the completion of the sixteenth week :
miscarriage to its expulsion between this period and the completion
of the twenty-eighth week; and premature labour to its expulsion be-
tween the twenty-eighth week and the full term. These accidents
occur more frequently in the early than the late periods of preg-
nancy, on acceunt of the smaller extent and greater delicacy of


° See M. Dubois, Mémoires de l Acad. de Médecine, 1833.

t Sémmerring, Icones embryonum, p. 2. Autenrieth, Supplementa ad historiam
embryonis, p.59. Some maintain that girls are born earlier than boys, when
born about the fulltime. Of the 16,617 births at the Dublin Lying-in Hospital,
mentioned supra, p.796., the premature were 498 ; and of these the males were
255, and the first births 172, The premature twins were 54,


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELAE. 823


attachment of the contents to the uterus and the greater suscep-
tibility of injury in every point of the ovum in proportion as the
period is earlier.

Premature expulsion may arise from mechanical violence,
emotion of mind, and whatever else can irritate the womb, injure
the connection between it and its contents, or impair their vital
powers. Whatever produces hemorrhage into the amnion or
among the membranes may act in all these ways. Original weak-
ness of the powers of developement, vitality becoming soon ex-
hausted, may have this effect. It is therefore not uncommon to
see monstrous embryos and fcetuses in abortions and miscarriages,
or even membranes with no embryo. When the ovum has lost
its powers, it is felt as a foreign body.

The uterus sometimes acquires a habit of premature discharge.

Occasionally a solid substance is discharged with no trace of

foetus, appearing to be only diseased membranes, and is termed a
mole or false conception.
. If the placenta is not expelled after the child, in very rare in-
stances it is absorbed, but in general it soon putrefies ; except in
the case of abortion, and after this it has remained weeks and
even months without putrefying.

M. Velpeau remarks that it is not a matter of indifference what
part of the ovum first enters the uterus. If the part of the cho-
rion on which the chord is inserted enters last and rests com-
pletely in the angle of the uterus and in the middle of the circle
of the decidua, the placenta will assume a more or less circular
form. If, on the other hand, it enters first, or is displaced so as
to be completely in apposition every where with the decidua re«
flexa, its vessels will not be developed, and the ovum dies and
is expelled, or a mole is produced and spurious pregnancy en-
sues; and if the same point is very near the circumference of the
circle of reflexion, the umbilical vessels will be developed towards
the part only where the uterus or rather the decidua crassa is
partially in contact with the ovum, and so the placenta will take
the shape of a racket, &c.

A child seldom lives if born before the seventh month is
completed: yet has been said to have occasionally lived when
born at the end of the fifth."


" Edinb. Med. and Surg. Journ, vol. xi. xii.


§24 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELE.


The ovum sometimes halts in the Fallopian tube; sometimes is
retained in the ovary; sometimes escapes into the peritoneal cavity;
and has been found in the walls of the uterus *: growing by means
of a placentay a longer or shorter time in these situations, the
frequency of which is in the order in which I have mentioned
them. Not only does the placenta derive nourishment from the
mother’s vessels in those situations, just as from the uterine vessels
in normal pregnancy, but the chorion before it forms the foetal
placenta imbibes nourishment from the fluids of the peritoneum,
as it does naturally in the generative organs. For example: Mayer
saw anovum with a perfectly developed embryo and feetal placenta
in the peritoneal cavity of a doe rabbit, without the slightest
connection with the blood-vessels of the mother,—a proof that the
peritoneal serous exhalation was sufficient for nutrition and deve-
lopement.?”

Such pregnancies are termed extra-uterine. The uterus slightly
enlarges: a decidua usually forms in it*: and the pains of labour
take place at the full time, as if the ovum had descended into the
womb. Death is the usual result. If the ovary is the seat, this
usually bursts before the sixth or seventh month begins; if the Fal-
lopian tube, this usually gives way within six weeks or two months>:
in the peritoneum the foetus may remain even beyond the full time,
and even another child be engendered and born. In the four
cases of pregnancy in the substance of the womb, the duration did
not exceed three months. Occasionaily a strong cyst forms around
the membranes in the case of ovarian and peritoneal pregnancy, as
well as when the feetus has escaped into the peritoneum after staying
some time in the ovary or tube, and the patient lives many, even
fifty ® years; suppuration at length most frequently takes place,
in some direction or other, bone and other portions of the


x Dr. Breschet, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xiii.

¥ Deutch, Archiv. t. iii, p. 145. If the egg of a bird falls into the peritoneum,
it acquires a white, just as if it was in the oviduct.

% Deutches Archiv. t.iii. p. 145. Burdach believes the case.

* A decidua sometimes forms in the unimpregnated cornu, when the other
is impregnated, in cases of double uterus. Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xvii.

b See a case described by myself in the Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xiii.

e Med, and Phys. Jowrnal, May, 1800,


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELA. 825


foetus being slowly discharged. I frequently saw an old woman
at Balham in Surry, who, for years, had been discharging very
feetid portions of a foetus conceived twenty years before. The
foetus may still live at a very low degree; for in such cases
the teeth have been developed, the ribs anchylosed with the ver-
tebree, &c. M. Schmidt relates a case, believed by Burdach, of
abdominal pregnancy, in which the child was cut out at the end of
two years, breathed and lived two hours.’ After remaining several
years, some teeth may acquire the adult size, and the hair great
length. Sometimes absorption takes place to a great extent: ©
just as a retained placenta is sometimes absorbed. Sometimes
the foetus dries up. I may mention that a foetus has been re-
tained 42 years in the uterus, when for some reason or other,
generally retroversion of the uterus, it could not be expelled. It
has become encased in various formations, even in bone, in these
cases, as well as in extra-uterine pregnancy, and itself has been
converted to bone.


Labour is the process of separation of the offspring from the parent, and occurs
at very different periods of embryonic existence. In some entozoa and molluscea,
and in most fish, and among the Batrachians, the germ is discharged before it is
fecundated. In most other oviparous animals, the separation occurs as a sowi ng
—a semination—the ovum after being fecundated is discharged for hatching or in-
cubation. In vegetables which produce grains, the separation occurs when deve-~
lopement has proceeded some way, and incubation is completed in the ground.
In mammalia * labour takes place still later— when the foetus is complete and
ceases to be such, entering upon independent existence. In the ovo-viparous,
labour is later, for, after the offspring has left the shell and fcetal existence, it re-
mains some time in the parent. In generation by splitting, buds, tubercles,
and bulbs, the new system does not leave the parent till it has the vital conditions
and in part the size of the parent. (Burdach, § 479.)

The first bulb, or sucker, of vegetables, separates only by an atrophy of the parts
connecting it with the parent ; in animal fissiparous and gemmiparous genera-
tion, a similar circumstance occurs, but movements of the new animal, or of the
new and old animal, at length complete the separation. In those vegetables
which produce the new plant in their interior, and in some of the lowest animals,


ad Beobachtung. der Akademie xu Wien. p. 84.
* I always employ the classical term mammalia, and not mammifera, which
has been coined by the French without any necessity,


826 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUEL.


the spore escapes by laceration or mortification, and in some the parent always
perishes in consequence. The Volvox globator and Amphistoma cornutum
perish after being lacerated by the exit of the young or eggs. Some conferve
must perish and dissolve before their spores can escape. In higher animals,
besides the reduced activity of life at the full time in the maternal and foetal
parts which are in connection, muscular power is given to the receptacles to
propel through natural openings, aided by voluntary muscles: though these are
not indispensable, since the uterus has expelled the child when the mother was in
syncope or asphyxia.

Some animals have a certain amount of voluntary power over labour. The
cuckoo and meat-fly lay their eggs, the former when it finds a nest left by a
hedgesparrow, the latter when it finds some dead flesh. Moral causes will arrest,
just as they will excite, labour. Some brutes require an accoucheur. The male green
jrog presses the fore part of the female body with his paws till he squeezes the
eggs out of the ovary and along the duct, but his assistance is no further required.
The male obstetrical toad draws the eggs out of the female in a train of mucus with
his paws, and is so attentive to his duty that he may be easily caught while at-
tending the case. In some animals, the young help to make their own way out
when an opening is afforded them.

Mammal brutes bring forth, like the human race, in /abour and sorrow: and
more so if they are deprived of free exercise and open air. The labour and
sorrow arise of course, like the pain of teething in innocent babies, from the ne-
cessary construction and properties of the system,—the anatomy and physiology
necessary to render each being what it is, — upon the original laws of the universe,
like the appearance of the rainbow. ‘The other classes, equal in innocence to the
mamunalia, suffer far less, or, like vegetables, not at all, and simply from their
anatomy and physiology being different.

The compression of the offspring from the difficulty of delivery is thought
to be highly beneficial. Jerg (Ueber das Leben des Kindes, p. 68.) asserts that
children easily born breathe but superficially, and frequently die within the first
eight days, exhibiting after death lungs incompletely distended: and Burdach
remarks that, though the Journals are filled with accounts of successful Czsarian
operations, it is difficult to find individuals who have been thus easily brought
into the world. (l.c. § 496.)

Some herbivorous animals frequently devour their placenta*, and sometimes
the mother morbidly devours her young, The latter circumstance has occurred re-
peatedly with the same individual, and then probably resulted from a morbid state
of feeling, a monomania. Sometimes the mother devours her young from
intense hunger after delivery, as in the case of the ferret and sow: and hungry


* The Brazilians and Jacuts are said to do the same. Among the Tonguses
the placenta is appropriated as a tit-bit to the worthy man who was at the trouble
of getting the lady in the family way. He roasts it, and either eats it all himself
or invites the most select among his friends to have a taste with him, (Zim-
mermann, Taschenbuch der Reisen, t. vii. p. 97.)


Pow
AP


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUEL. 827


insects will devour their larve. Wild animals in captivity, though well fed, often
devour their young; the same thing happens occasionally if these are too nu-
merous for her to feed, or if they are monstrous in form.

The ovum after its fecundation may be nourished by a fluid enclosed within
the same case, and is then hatched out of the body by the common temperature,
as in insects, or by that of the parent, as in birds, or hatched within the body of
the mother, as in serpents; or it may be nourished by a substance shed around
it in the womb, as in the kangaroo and other marsupials, for a short time, after
which the young one finds its way into the pouch and attaches its mouth to a
nipple, which it never finds again if once dislodged, or by means of an attachment
of some of its vessels to the maternal system, as in the mammalia in general ; —
some animals being thus oviparous, others ovo-viviparous, and others viviparous, or
more properly, as Burdach remarks, nudiparous and ovo-nudiparous. The plant
louse is ovo-viviparous in spring, and oviparous in winter, its young not being
hatched till the cold weather is passed. Wherever the growth of the ovum takes
place after it has quitted the ovarium, whether in an uterus or out of the body,
the period is equally that of incubation till the new being leaves the envelopes
of the ovum.

As a general rule, the higher the animal, the more share do other parts than the
ovarium take in its formation. Some animal ova hatch out of the body without
any farther attention of the parent than the instinctive act of depositing them ina
suitable situation, or in one from which they may be transported to a suitable situ-
ation. Some have no power of remaining long in possession of life, and they are
deposited at a period of the year when circumstances are proper for their develope-
ment. Others have a great retention of vitality, and are discharged at a season of
the year when nothing favours their developement. As vegetable ova,—seeds, are
more exposed to unfavourable accidents, they retain the power of developement far
longer than animal ova. No animal ovum retains it two years: but seeds have ger-
minated on being placed in the ground at the end of centuries. This retention of
life, and the immense number of seeds produced, compensate in some measure
for the uncertainty of many seeds ever being placed in favourable circumstances,
For the distribution of some is left to the wind; of others to currents of water ;
of others to the chance of adhering by crotchets on their surface to the bodies of
animals ; or of being swallowed and passed along the alimentary canal of animals
for transportation. The ova of some animals are transported in the same ways. *
But after all an infinity of eggs and seeds are constantly perishing, The parent


* While going my round at University College Hospital in the summer of
1838, a shower of frogs fell in the street—Gower Street: and many letters have
been addressed to the French Institute from indisputable witnesses of showers of
frogs and toads that fell on umbrellas, hats, or outspread handkerchiefs, They
are thought to be hatched in a cloud from spawn raised with the water of marshes
by solar evaporation, or by the whirlwind which precedes water-spouts in the
heat of summer. M. Arago favours this latter explanation. (Révue Méd,


Nov. 1831.)
Sr


828 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELZ.


of some species prepares a warm receptacle for the ova, of infinite variety, and
placed in the most favourable situation, according to the variety of necessity ; and
in many instances keeps them warm with her own body, on the abdomen of which
a higher temperature than usual may be observed. Sometimes both parents sit
on the nest in turn. Some lay their eggs in the nest of another bird. Some
build a nest in common for several families. The albatros divide a spot among
them into squares, in each of which one builds a nest, and which communicate
by paths, and are surrounded by a path covered with stone. The ova of some
animals are attached for a time to their surface, either bare and by mucus, or en-
closed in cells, which form in the skin, as is observed in the Surinam toad, or in
a pouch which adheres by mucus to the abdomen or back and may be made in-
stinctively by the animal.

Of course, if an animal ovum or a seed dies, it cannot be quickened or come
up; and it rots like a dead animal or plant. They hatch or spring up only
when they have not ceased to live. They are killed if thoroughly deprived of
moisture or of air by being smeared with grease or oil or kept several days in
vacuo: or of their proper temperature by being long exposed to a very low or
high temperature : or if exposed to a strong electric shock, or if much shaken, or
pierced with a needle. Actions, therefore, go on: and indeed an egg, not hatch-
ing, has been found by Dr. Prout to lose a grain daily, till at the end of a month
it had lost 35 grains. The eggs of a pheasant require to be carried in the hand
when removed, so delicate is the arrangement of their constituents.

An egg retains its vitality the longer, the less it can waste. Dr. Edwards,
I mentioned at p.'278. supra, ascribes the circumstance of frogs and toads living
so long enclosed in trunks of trees and blocks of wood to the admission of air being
just sufficient to support life, but insufficient to allow much respiration. The
seeds which have lived for ages have been found in sarcophagi : some enclosed frogs
and toads may have been hatched in the wood or stone, the ovum having retained its
life for the same reason and passed through its various stages of developement in
the slowest possible manner. Dwight says he saw an insect, the egg of which had
been enclosed in the trunk of a tree eighty years and hatched on being brought
into the air and light. I also mentioned at p. 232. that eggs are cooled and frozen
with more difficulty than equal masses of inanimate matter: and eggs killed in
any of the ways just mentioned are heated and cooled much more easily than
those which are fit for hatching.

In many quadrupeds circular or oval portions of the inner surface of the uterus
enlarge into spongy masses termed cotyledons, from which a milky fluid may be
squeezed. Corresponding vascular efflorescences of the chorion meet and unite
with these, and thus a connection is established between mother and child. At
birth they separate ; the foetal portion passes away with the membranes, of which
it is really a part, and the maternal shrinks and is absorbed as the uterus de-
creases,

When a bird’s egg enters the oviduct, it has neither white nor shell, and some-
times eggs are accidentally discharged from the body before they acquire a shell,
and vere then called wind-eggs. The yelk is covered by two membranes, one
within the other, and both well supplied with a network of blood-vessels, But


ee


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELZE. 829


the yelk does not adhere to the inner membrane with which it is in contact.
Below the internal is a third without blood-vessels, called vitellary membrane, which
gradually disappears during incubation. Under this transparent membrane, but,
according to Dutrochet, unconnected with it, opposite the side where the ovum
was attached to the ovary, and in a small aperture at the summit of a thick opake
spot (stratum proligerum — composed of discus proligerus and tuberculum
proligerum or cumulus) of the inner membrane, called cicatricula, lies the ger-
minal vesicle (vesicula proligera), which, or its contents, or both, or, as was said
before the appearance of Dr. M. Barry’s paper, both now united with the stratum
proligerum into the germinal membrane, becomes the embryo: the germs of
plants are equally unconnected with their capsules, and therefore with the seed
organs. The ovum escapes through the two outer membranes into the oviduct.
The inner membrane, however, is soon furnished with a coat secreted by the duct.
This is termed the yelk bag or chalaziferous membrane, and has a small knob at
each end called chalaza, which extends into and terminates in the white. The
egg advances along the tube and becomes, as in the mollusca, arachnides, crus-
tacea, reptiles, and many fish, imbedded in the white or albumen that is furnished
by the tube and fills it. Around the white another membrane forms, which be-
comes attached to the two chalazz., Another membrane next forms around this,
consisting of two layers ; and the egg, having now passed along half the duct, ac-
quires a shell during the rest of its course. Harvey discovered that the white is
double, one portion placed outside the other and thinner. Each portion remains
distinct, though not separated by a membrane, It is to the yelk as 604 to 288, and
consists of 0:155 albumen, 0:045 mucus, and 0°800 water. The chalaze are al-
ways very near the poles of the egg: the cicatricula at the equator, and always
uppermost, in the most favourable situation for receiving the mother’s warmth, on
account of the opposite part being the heaviest. The chalazz, being lighter, says
Derham, than the white in which they swim, and placed rather out of the axis of
the egg, cause one side of the yelk which they suspend to be heavier than the
other. The two layers of the lining membrane of the shell are separated at the large
end and leave a space, the walls of which are called folliculus aeris, from the
circumstance of its containing air. The germinal membrane is about § of an inch
in diameter, and at the central partis the thinnest and called colliquamentum. After
impregnation, a dark line is seen on the germinal membrane, called the primitive
trace, and the germinal membrane expands, grows thicker, separates into two
layers, between which a third, called vascular, appears. The external or serous

+yes rise to the osseous, nervous, muscular, and tegumentary systems; the in-
ternal, called mucous, uniting with the central, gives origin to the respiratory,
intestinal, and glandular systems. These layers gradually expand more and
more over the yelk. The yelk bag corresponds with the vesicula umbilicalis
of the mammal foetus, and the yelk is for the nutrition of the new being at
birth: but, while it is considerable in birds, as the new being possesses little
other nourishment, it is very small in mammals, and these are nourished through
the means of a placenta or marsupial teats, and therefore the yesicula umbili-
calis is smaller and disappears early. The yelk or primary embryotrophe con-
sists, according to Dr. Prout, of 0°29 of oil, O17 of albumen, and 0:54 of


1 ee


830 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELAE.


water: the oil contains phosphorus, and may be reduced to elaine, stearine, and
a crystalline, unsapifiable fat, like cholesterine. It is at first transparent, then
becomes turbid, then white and milky, and ultimately yellow and viscid. The
white or secondary embryotrophe contains, according to Dr. Bostock, 15-5 of al-
bumen, 4°5 of uncoagulable matter, and 80 of water. According to Dr. Prout it
contains the same inorganic principles as the yelk, but more sulphur and hydro-
chlorate of lime and magnesia, and less phosphorus and hydrochlorate of potass
and soda. It is consumed in most oviparous animals before the yelk. According
to Dr. Prout, the fresh egg of a fowl contains 0-288 of yelk, and 0°604 of white,
and at the end of incubation still 0-167 of yelk, whereas a mere membranous co-
agulum remains of the white: and the oil of the yelk is the part consumed the last.
(Phil. Trans. 1822.) The yelk differs from the white in the presence of fatty oil,
and a greater proportion of phosphorus and neutral salts, chiefly, and comes into use
when this is exhausted, and strong nourishment and stimulus are required. The im-
portance of the white is shown by its more immediately receiving air and external
heat; by the brain and spinal chord —the primordial organs containing a super-
abundance of albumen and being developed at that part turned towards the white ;
and it is conjectured that the reason of this organ being less developed in inver-
tebrate animals is that it arises at the inner surface of the serous layer, whereas
in the vertebrate it arises at the outside, separated from the white by the delicate
vitellary membrane only. (Burdach,§ 463.) The fresh egg of a fowl weighs
usually from 15 ounce to 2 ounces — from 720 to 790 grains ; and loses about }
of its weight in hatching, from the evaporation of its water, chiefly through the
heat of the mother and chemical changes, for it loses not so much by four fifths to

seven eighths if left merely in the air for the same time ; and, if not first impreg-
nated, loses but 125 grains though kept under the hen. When incubation begins,
the concentric layers of liquefied yelk are seen around the disk of the proligerous
membrane, and are called halos ; the yelk augmenits in quantity, and liquefies more
and more. Dr. Prout has shown that it obtains salts and water from the white,
and furnishes oil to this, which also becomes more liquid and lessens in quantity

Though no fibrin, mucus, gelatine, hamatosine, &c. are to be detected in either
yelk or white, these are all foundin the embryo. The sulphur, phosphorus,
and alcaline muriates of the egg and chick, at the end of incubation, are greater,
and the lime less, in quantity than in the newly laid egg. Where the former
have gone, and whence the latter is derived, is not known. Lassaigne found
ten times more lime in the chicken just hatched than in the new laid egg of the
same hen. (Journal de Chimie Médicale, t.x. p.195.) An egg, if laid before it
is impregnated, soon dies with the warmth of the nest which hatches those which
have been impregnated.

The eggs of fish have a hard and sometimes a horny covering, and some are
quadrangular. The eggs of serpents are nearly similar. In insects there is no
secondary embryotrophe, because the essential parts of the ovum are formed in
the ovarium.

The young of oviparous animals break an opening in their enclosure, and let
themselves out. Every one knows that the chicken chips the shell. The coverings
always grow thinner or more brittle beforehand. The eggs of many distomata


—_


LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELZ. 831


have a little lid, which the young one raises in order to escape. If the egg is
deposited deep, and there are many, the parent, as the Apis violacea for in-
stance, prepares a canal leading in the opposite direction, from the course of the
first egg, so that the first may at once escape, and the others follow in suc-
cession. If the last laid egg chance to hatch the first, its young makes its way
through the other cells to the canal of exit, killing the chrysalides as it goes.
The parent sometimes chips the shell for the young: working bees raise the lid
of wax when the young are fit to leave the cells; and the working ants tear with
their jaws the part of the chrysalis corresponding to the head of the young one,
knowing, by some means mysterious to us, when the new animal is fit to be set
at liberty. Humboldt says that crocodiles, which do not hatch their eggs, return
to them at the proper time and help the young ones out. (Burdach, § 498.)

The number of offspring produced at a birth, and the number produced during
life, is enormously various. Some produce but one or two, and remain pregnant
the greater part of a year, or even more; while others produce swarms, and are
pregnant but for a portion of a day. The female flesh-fly prod 20,000
larvee at a time: and there is not unfrequently a third generation in three days;
and therefore Linnzus computed that the carcase of a lion may be devoured
faster by them than by a lion. The queen bee lays 12,000,000 eggs in twenty
days of spring; the female ant lays 80,000 eggs a day ; the plant louse may be-
come the progenitor of nearly 6,000,000,000 in five generations. As to vegetables,
a plant of common red wheat tillered so much that in August it was divided into
eighteen plants, So many of them multiplied in September and October, that
sixty-seven plants were separately set out to stand the winter; in March and
April they were divided again into 500. These produced 21,109 ears; and the
grains were estimated at 576,840. (Phil. Trans. vol. lvii.) A single plant of hy-
oscyamus produces more than 50,000 seeds, so that in four years the whole earth
would be insufficient for its produce, if it met with no opposition.

In the wonderful world of insects, generation depends much, in some instances,
upon national circumstances. In a hive of bees, for example, but one female has
her sexual organs developed and breeds: the others of her sex labour only ; unless
she dies, when the hive feed up another with a richer sort of honey which brings
out the organs, and she becomes the new queen and breeds, A smaller number
of the hive are males, and do no work, but are destined solely to impregnate the
queen, and her successors in case of her death. And this indeed is a serious bu-
siness. The queen, a few days after her birth, takes an airing, in which she is
sure to meet with one of her swains, and he generally leaves his organs in her and
dies of his laceration in half an hour. Happily, however, this single embrace
impregnates all the eggs for two years or perhaps for life, though she lays about
1500 a month all the year round.

The vegetable embryotrophe is solid, not, like the animal, liquid or soft: but
hard and solid as are the contents of seed, its embryotrophe liquefies when the em-
bryo begins to grow: plants are altogether more solid as well as more fixed than
animals. The seeds of vegetables have within their membranous covering two
or more lobes called cotyledons; and between these at the margin is the cicatri-
culaorcorculum. This, during incubation, sends upwards a shoot called plumula,


o1r.3


832 LABOUR AND ITS SEQUELE.


and another downwards called radicle. Till the roots and leaves support it, the co-
tyledons give it nourishment in many instances, and, rising out of the earth under
the name of seed leaves, likewise perform the office of respiratory organs. The
substance of the cotyledons may be farinaceous, oily, or both farinaceous and oily.
Seeds are sometimes enveloped in a dry pericarpium, which bursts when they lie in
the earth. Some havea hard shell. Around the outer covering a quantity of soft
nourishment may exist, as seen in stone fruit and nuts; vessels passing through
the shell or stone from this to the kernel or lobes. This nutriment may be fa-
rinaceous and taste like gingerbread, as in the rhamnus lotus; succulent, as in
the apple and pear; creamy or medullary in appearance ; mucilaginous, as in the
gooseberry ; pulpy, as in the orange.

It is very singular, but the spores of some vegetables, and of zoophytes which
live fixed, exhibit very rapid movements.

The more delicate the plants, the more easily are the seeds killed from which
they would have sprung: hence old seed is preferred, since the weakest has ge-
nerally perished, After a time all seed dies, and will not come up if sown. It ap-
pears that changes of perfection are constantly going on fora time in some seeds,
for those of linseed and melon give more vigorous plants if sown late. The delay
of favourable circumstances beyond a certain time causes developement to be im-
paired: for the chick is developed much more quickly if an egg is placed under
the hen as soon asitislaid. ‘The animation of seeds may be suspended like that of
animals. Saussure dried grains which had begun to germinate, and found them
begin to germinate again on being moistened. The lowest plants, as the grasses,
supported this suspension the best. The less the germination had advanced, the
more easily was the exsiccation recovered from; just as the unimpregnated eggs of
a fowl keep better than those which have been impregnated, because the power of
life depends then upon a less complicated condition. The destruction of the life
of an egg before the commencement of developement enables it in the same way
to keep longer; but the destruction of its life after the commencement does not
enable it to keep. (Burdach, 1. c. § 330.)


833


*
CHAP. XXXIV.


OF THE MILK.


“ THe breasts, most sacred fountains, and, as Gellius Favorinus
the philosopher elegantly calls them, the rearers (educatores) of
the human race, are intimately connected with the uterus in
various ways. The functions of neither can properly be said to


* Women, it is said, have had three, four, and even five breasts; in triangular
arrangement; one under another on one side, or on both sides; all in a line;
the supernumerary ones on the back; or, in the case where there were five, one
under another on each side, and the fifth below all, and in the centre, five inches
above the navel. (Dictionnaire des Sciences Médic. art. Cas rares. Aninstance
of four in London has been just published by Dr. R. Lee -in the Med. Chir.
Trans, vol. xXive )

A woman at Marseilles had a third perfect breast, four inches below the
great trochanter of the left thigh. This gave milk like the other two; and,
though she never had but one child, she continued a wet-nurse for six years.
Her own child sucked this femoral breast for three and thirty months, putting his
little head under his mother’s petticoats and standing or kneeling during the
business. This woman’s mother had also a third breast, but it was placed on the
left side of the chest, and was sucked in common with the others by seven child-
ren. (Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, Janvier, 1827.)

Tiedemann (Zeitschrift fiir Physiologie, p. 110.) mentions that he saw a woman
with two nipples and areolz in her left breast ; and two other analogous instances
have beenseen in Dublin (Dublin Journal of Med. and Chem. Sc. July, 1834).
Milk was secreted from both nipples equally.

I am not acquainted with the dissection of any such cases, but, if it is not pro-
bable that in the case of the femoral breast a direct anastomosis exists between
the uterine vessels and those of this breast, the influence, presently alluded to, of
the arterial communication in ordinary cases may appear still further improbable.

The case reminds me of a monstrosity in the same situation as this,— the
thigh of a boy, aged fourteen; seen by Zacchias’s friend, Balthassar Bonannus,
‘vir humanitate et doctrina insignis.” (Quest. Med. Legales, p. 503.) But
instead of a breast, there was a female pudendum, — labia, hair, and rima: on
separating the labia, no opening appeared,


314


_


834 OF THE MILK.


exist during infancy ; at puberty, both begin to flourish, — when
the catamenia appear, the breasts assume some degree of plump-
ness ; from that period they undergo either simultaneous changes
—the breasts beginning to swell and secrete milk during the
pregnancy of the womb; or alternate changes, — the catamenia
ceasing while the child is 8uckled, or the lochia becoming copious
if the child is not suckled, and so on. Finally, when age creeps
on, the function of each absolutely ceases, — when the catamenia
disappear, both the uterus and the breasts become equally inert.
I omit pathological phenomena; v. c. those which occur in irregu-
lar menstruation, leucorrhoea, after extirpation of the ovaria, and
in other morbid affections.»

“If this intimate connection is kept in view, we shall not be
astonished that nearly every description of sympathy exists be-
tween these organs of the female thorax and abdomen.¢

“The influence of the anastomotic sympathy between the
internal mammary and epigastric artery“, although formerly over-
rated¢, is evinced by the change which the latter experiences in
its diameter during pregnancy and suckling.

“Both the uterus and mamma appear to have a kind of affinity
for the chyle, observable in many diseases, and nearly always in
new-born children.


ee ee See


> A case is related of a woman whose breasts always poured forth milk in the
midst of her connubial bliss. (Dict. des Sc. Médicales, t. i. p. 394.) <A very
disagreeable circumstance is recorded in the German Ephemerides, 1670, dec. 1.
an. 1.; for a woman always vomited a thin white fluid in her husband’s face at
the height of rapture, whatever was the hour of indulgence and whether her
stomach was full or empty, (“ quotiescunque sive nocte, sive mane, aut interdiu,
jejuno, aut pleno ventriculo, venerem exerceret,”) and she was so amorous that
the poor fellow feared she would wear him out, and consulted the writer —
Dr. Hertod. (‘ Honestam matronam,” “ ceterum salacem valde, et que consue-
tudinem mariti” ‘* plurimum appetebat, prout ipse mihi questus est, et ne in
maritali officio tandem succumberet, rogavit.’?) She was therefore clearly not
sick of her husband, though sick through him.

© J, Anemaet, De mirabili que mammas inter et uterum intercedit sympathia,
LB. 1784. 4to.”

‘ « Eustachius, tab. xxvii. fig. 12.

Haller, Zeon, anat. fasc. vie tab. i.”

© « As G.R. Boehmer properly remarks, De consensu uteri cum mammis caussa
actis dubia. Lips. 1750. 4to.”?


OF THE MILK. 835


“The dreast of woman, belonging to the most characteristic
marks of the human female both by its form during the flower of
age and by the longer continuance of this form after the period
of suckling than occurs in any other female animal, is composed
of a placentiform series of conglomerate glands, divided by nu-
merous furrows into larger lobes, and, as it were, buried in a
mass of fat; the anterior part swells out particularly with a
firmer description of fat over which the skin is exceedingly
thin.

“ach of these lobes is composed of still smaller lobes, and
these of acini, as they are termed, to which the extreme radicles¢
of the lactiferous ducts,” in the form of oblong vesicles, “adhere,
deriving a chylous fluid from the ultimate twigs of the internal
mammary arteries.

“‘These radicles, gradually uniting, form large trunks, cor-
responding in number with the lobes, — fifteen or more in each
breast. These are every where dilated into large sinuses, but
have no true anastomosis with each other. i

“‘ These trunks terminate in very delicate excretory canals, that
are collected, towards the centre, by means of cellular substance,
into the nxzpplek, which, supplied with extremely fine blood-vessels
and nerves, is capable of a peculiar erection on the approach of
certain external stimuli.

‘“‘ The nipple is surrounded by the areola!, which, as well as the
nipple, is remarkable for the colour™ of the reticulum under the
cuticle", and contains sebaceous follicles. °


f« A, B. Kolpin, De structura mammarum, Griphisw. 1765. 4to.

Athan. Joannidis, Physiologie mammarum muliebrium specimen. Hal. 1801,
4to.”

& “y, C. A. Covolo’s two plates at the end of Santorini’s posthumous tables.”

h «y, Mich, Girardi, tab. i. annexed to the same plates of Santorini.”

ie J, Gottl. Walter, Observ. Anat. p. 33. sq.”

k «¢ Santorini, tab. posth. viii.”

' « Ruysch, Thes. i. tab. iv. fig. 4.”

™ « In pregnant women, especially during the first pregnancy, the nipples are
usually yellow.

In the Samojede females, even when virgins, Klingstaedt asserts that they are
quite black. Mém. sur les Samojedes et les Lappons, p. 44.”

" « B.S, Albinus, Annotat. Acad. L. iii. tab. iv. fig. 3.”

° « Morgagni, Advers. Anat. i. tab. iv. fig. 2.”


836 OF THE MILK.


“ The secretion of the breast is the milk, well known in colour,
watery, somewhat fatty, rather sweet, bland, resembling in all
respects the milk of domestic animals, but subject to infinitely
greater varieties in the proportion of its constituent parts, far
more difficult of coagulation from the great quantity of essential
salt, to be spoken of presently, which it contains, and affording
no trace of volatile alkali. p

“‘When coagulated by means of alcohol, it presents the same
elements as the milk of other animals. Besides the aqueous halitus
which it gives off when fresh and warm, the serum, separating
from the caseous part, contains sugar of milk4 and acetic acid
mixed with phosphate of lime and of magnesia, and with oil and
mucus. The butyraceous cream is said to consist of globules of
various and inconstant size, their diameter ranging between ahs
and 1, of a line.”

The lower portion of cow’s milk which had stood some days
was found by Berzelius* to have a specific gravity of 1-033, and
to contain —


Water - : : F 929-75
Cheese with a trace of butter - - 28°00
Sugar of milk - . ; 35-00
Muriate of potash - . i 1°70
Phosphate of potash - : P 0:25

Lactic acid, acetate of potash, with a
trace of lactate of iron - “ i 6-00
Early phosphates - - ‘ 0°30
100000


p « FI, J. Voltelen (Pras. Hahn), De lacte humano observationes chemice.
LB. 1775. 4to.

Parmentier and Deyeux, Précis d’Expériences et Observations sur les différentes
Espéces du Lait. Strasburg, 1798. 8vo.

Thenard, Annales de Chimie, t. lix. p. 262.”

a Mare. L. Williamoz, De sale lactis essentiali. LB. 1756. 4to.”

"  Senac, Tr. du Ceur, vol. ii. p. 276. ed. 2.

Fr. v. P. Gruithuisen, Untersuch. iiber den Unterschied zwischen Biter und
Schleim durch das Microscop. Munich. 1809. 4to. p.16. fig. 15.”

* Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, vol. iii.


OF THE MILK. 837


The supernatant cream contained —


Butter a © - tle! Awd

Cheese - 7 - - - 3°5

Whey ~ - ~ - 92:0
1000+


ee


Woman’s milk is not quite so heavy, nor indeed so heavy as
milk usually obtained from other animals for domestic purposes, as
that of the goat, ass, mare, or even the sheep.

Milk is thus a compound of the three great nutrient principles,
the saccharine, oily, and albuminous. See supra, p. 65. sqq.

“The analogy between chyle and blood, and between both
these fluids and milk 4, renders it probable that the milk isa kind
of chyle reproduced, or rather again separated from the blood
before its complete assimilation. This idea is strengthened by
the frequent existence in the milk of the particular qualities of
food previously taken*, and by the chylous appearance of the


watery milk secreted during pregnancy and immediately after
labour.”


* We have seen the analogy between vegetables and animals in structure and
function, as well as in elementary and proximate principles. The secretions of
both may be innocuous or deleterious. The most remarkable analogy in secre-
tion respects milk. In South America, Humboldt saw a tree that, if wounded,
yields abundance of rich milk, which the negroes drink and grow fat upon, and
which affords a caseous coagulum, The tree grows on the barren rock; has
coriaceous dry leaves; for several months is not moistened by a shower, and its
branches appear dry and dead: yet, if an incision is made in its trunk, the milk
pours forth. This “* sweet vegetable fountain” is most copious at sunrise, and
the blacks and natives are then seen hastening from all quarters with bowls to
the cow-tree.

u « Consult J. Theod. Van de Kasteele, Diss. de analogia inter lac et sangui-
nem. LB. 1780. 4to.

And Alex. Wilson on the analogy between milk and chyle, Observations relative
to the Influence of the Climate, p. 97. sqq.”

x «y, Among a host of witnesses, Kolpin in Pallas’s Neuen nordischen Bey-
trdgen, vol. ii. p. 343.”

y «« Many circumstances induce me to believe that the lymph of the absorbents
is of much importance in the secretion of milk.

For instance, the swelling of the subaxillary glands almost always observable
during the first months of pregnancy.


838 OF THE MILK.


“The reason why this bland nourishment of the foetus becomes
more thick and rich by continued suckling, is probably the abun-
dance of lymphatics in the breasts. Those vessels continually
absorb more of the serous part of the milk, in proportion as its
secretion is more copious and of longer standing, and, by again
pouring this part into the mass of blood, promote the secretion :
after weaning they take up the remaining milk and mix it with the
blood.

“The milk” is often secreted towards the end of pregnancy,
and generally during labour, but “is secreted in greatest quantity
immediately after delivery ; and, if the infant sucks, amounts to
one or two pounds every twenty-four hours, until the menses,
which usually cease during suckling, return.”

It at first contains a great deal of water and oil, and is called
colostrum, and does not acquire its characteristic qualities before
the third or fourth day.? After the abundant secretion of the first
moment is passed, its quantity gradually increases up to 2]b. or
more daily till the eighth month, and then diminishes and con-
tains less butter, cheese, and sugar.

“‘ Occasionally virgins, and new-born infants of either sex, nay
even men, as well as the adult males of other mammalia», have
been known to furnish milk.


a aaa


But especially the remarkable fact—that, in advanced pregnancy, when, from
the womb compressing by its size the large and numerous lumbar plexuses of
lymphatics, the legs have swollen, this cedematous tumour so completely dis-
appears immediately after labour that the calves of the legs almost hang flaccid
from the lymph finding no impediment in the lumbar plexuses and rushing
upwards, and a copious secretion of milk instantly ensues upon the passage of
the lymph.

The momentary thirst experienced on applying the child td the breast, from
the absorption of fluid in the fauces, may be also mentioned.”

* The larger the animal, the longer generally is its period of suckling ; and
the greater its fecundity, the shorter. The first milk is as imperfect in the cow
as in woman.

® « This is asserted to be common in Russia. Comment. Acad. Se. Petropolit.
vol. ili. p. 278. sq.”

Mr. Wentzel met with an old Chipewyan, who, on losing his wife in child-


eee


> ««T have spoken of this at large in the Hannoverish. Magazin, 1787, Dp 758.
sqq:”’


OF THE MILK. 839


“The abundance of milk excites its excretion, and even causes
it to flow spontaneously: but pressure, or the suction of the


birth, had put the infant to his breast, and earnestly prayed that milk might flow,
and had actually been happy enough to see sufficient produced to enable him to
rear the child. The Indian was now old, but the left breast still retained the
unusual size acquired by nursing. (Captain Franklin’s Narrative of a Journey
to the Polar Sea, p. 157. sq.)

A parallel instance is recorded by a Bishop of Cork. His lordship had given
half-a-crown to a poor Frenchman above seventy years of age, who made the best
return he could by showing his lordship what he knew must be a curiosity, —
two very large breasts, with nipples larger than the bishop had ever seen in a
woman ; and related that, his wife dying when his child was two months old, he
endeavoured to pacify it at night by putting it to his breast, and at length milk
actually came, so that he suckled and brought it up. (Phil. Trans. vol. xli.
p- 813.)

A lamb, belonging to Sir William Lowther, having lost its mother, sucked a
wether ‘and brought him to milk and was maintained by him all the summer:
he had two considerable teats on his udder, each side whereof was about the big-
ness of a hen’s egg,” and the milk was made to spurt to a distance of two yards a
month after the lamb was weaned. (Phil. Trans. No. 214. p. 263.)

Blumenbach has described a he-goat which it was necessary to milk every
other day for a year (Hannoverisch. Magazin, 1787, p. 753. Comparat. Anat.
§ 364.) ; so that, to say with Virgil, mulgeat hircos, is not tantamount to calling
a man a fool.

A bull which had been put to cows successfully, but had also female organs,
though the vagina was apparently too small to have ever admitted the male organ,
gave milk, according to satisfactory testimony. (Phil. Trans. 1799, p.171. sq.
See supra, p. 712. n. 4.)

I myself saw two married women with milk in their breasts, one of whom had
neyer been pregnant, but always menstruated regularly and said this had been
the case for nine months; the other had not been pregnant for upwards of six
years, had weaned her child, and at the end of seven months miscarried, and said
she had immediately afterwards observed the milk, which had been secreted for
six months and was increasing at the time I saw her.

Talso attended a young single lady, whom I believe never to have been preg-
nant, but who was subject to amenorrhcea, and had then not menstruated for five
months, and laboured, apparently, under ovarian disease: milk oozed very
copiously from her breasts, and the medical attendant informed me that the left
had secreted it for many months.

In the Phil. Trans. abridged, vol. ix. p. 206. sq. is an instance seen by Dr.
Stack, in Tottenham Court Road, of an old woman of sixty-four, who had not
borne a child for sixteen years, secreting milk after repeatedly applying her
grandchild to her breasts for the purpose of quieting it, and continuing to furnish


840 OF THE MILK.


child, completes its discharge.” The erection of the nipple
causes the ducts to become straight and thus allow the free dis-
charge of the milk.

Women often find the secretion of milk suddenly augmented
after taking liquid nourishment. Even during the refreshment
they may experience a secretion of fluid rushing into their breasts,
and the breasts may swell, and even milk may ooze from them.
The circumstance of sucking not only augments at the time the
quantity secreted, but keeps up the disposition to secrete. Above
20 pints may be got from a cow at one milking,—a quantity far
beyond what the breast will contain: two children may suck and
find sufficient milk, and if the child is withdraw the secretion
ceases. When the child is put to the breast, the mother may
soon find the sensation of a rush of fluid to the organ.

It is asserted that the quantity of cream and quality of the milk
varies during the process of milking, in the case at least of cows,
asses,and goats. By milking cows into different cups, the excess
of cream in the last over that of the first was generally sixteen to
one, and the average ten or twelve toone. The cream of the milk
first drawn was thin and pale; that of the last thick and buttery,
and of a rich colour. The milk too of the first cup was blue and
like milk and water ; that of the last rich, and to the eye and taste
more like cream.¢ We know that the quantity and quality of
the fibrin of the blood received into different cups varies during
venesection.4

The secretion is greatly influenced by moral circumstances. A _
mother often finds a temporary decline of secretion if she substi-
tutes another child for her own or for one that she had previously
suckled for some time. A cow may give less milk when milked
by a stranger. Ifa mother sees her child, or even thinks of it,


milk in great abundance up to the time of the narration, — four years, to the
children of her daughter, who, finding her mother so useful, “* was emboldened
to bid fair for an increase of issue, which, till then, she knew not how to nourish
or provide for.” Many other such cases may be found. See Beck’s Elements of
Medical Jurisprudence, fifth ed. London, 1836, p. 121. sq.

One woman is said to have suckled from the age of 25 to her 72d, and now in
her 81st year still to have a regular secretion, The case is recorded by Dr. Ken-
nedy in Dr. J. Johnson’s Medico-Chirurgical Review, vol. xxi. p. 202.

© Blacker’s Essay on Small Farms.

* Scudamore, Essay on the Blood, p. 97. London, 1824.


OF THE MILK. 841


she may feel her breasts filling. After emotion of the mother,
the child, if it suck the milk first secreted subsequently, may suffer
seriously in its health.f

Like every other secretion it is greatly influenced not only in
quantity and quality by all emotions, but by the condition of the
system at large and of other individual organs. If the mother is
in health and well fed, it will be rich and abundant ; and vice versd.
If she is ill, it will be of bad quality and small in quantity. If
peculiar substances are swallowed it becomes impregnated with
them, as purgatives, mercury, &c.

Cerebral character and corporeal circumstances have appeared
sometimes communicated by the milk.

The milk of a particular female will sometimes not suit a parti-
cular child.


The mode of nourishment after birth is various, Some young are able, without
any peculiar arrangement, immediately to support themselves ; for the delivery of


a


* John Hunter satisfied himself experimentally of the truth of the common
assertion, — that the she-ass gives milk no longer than the impression of the foal
is upon her mind. Theskin of her foal thrown over the back of another, and fre-
quently brought near her, is sufficient. (Journal of the Royal Institution, No. 2.)

This opinion coincides with the custom in Languedoc and on Mount Caucasus,
of placing a calf near its mother while milking, from the conviction of its in-
creasing the quantity of milk. According to Le Vaillant, at the Cape of Good
Hope, if the calf dies, its skin is placed on another while the cow is milking,

f Mr. Wardrop had removed a small tumour from behind the ear 3 allwas doing
well, till the mother fell into a violent passion, and suckled her child soon after-
wards, when immediately it died in convulsions. He was sent for hastily to see
another child in convulsions, after taking the breast soon after its nurse had been
severely reprimanded: and Sir Richard Croft, the accoucheur who had charge of
the patient, informed Ir. Wardrop that he had seen very similar instances.
(Lancet, No. 516.)

Dr. Hayn declares that he was summoned to a child which had just died in
the act of sucking its mother, when she was suddenly alarmed at the entrance of
a policeman with bad news, soon after delivery. Dr. Berlyn mentions an infant,
three months old, seized with deadly paleness, hemiplegia of the left side and
convulsions of the right, on sucking immediately after its mother had met with
some distressing circumstance. A puppy has been seized with epilepsy on
sucking its mother after a fit of rage. (Burdach, § 522.)


842 OF THE MILK.


each species of brutes is ordained at that season of the year when every thing is
in the most favourable state for administering to the necessities of the offspring:
Most invertebrata and some fish deposit their eggs where food can be easily pro-
cured. Some, many insects for example, are born in the midst of food, the
parent having instinctively deposited the egg in nutrient matter either found in
mass or carefully collected by her.* The young of some devour their nest
immediately, just as some insects eat up their skin when they have cast it off.
Others have food collected daily by one or both parents, who, while they fatten
their young, perhaps grow thin themselves by neglect. The raw food given by
birds to their young is always animal, and therefore easy of assimilation. Some
give their young half digested food, thrown up from their own stomach. Some,
as all the dove kind, are fed by a substance secreted from the crops of both
parents ; (Hunter, On a secretion in the crops of breeding pigeons for the nourish-
ment of their young, in his Observations on certain parts, §c. p. 235.;) others by a
fluid secreted by peculiar glands belonging to the female only. The instinct
which leads the parent carefully to tend the offspring ceases at the period when
the system of the offspring is sufficiently advanced to supply its own exigencies ;
and the parent does not breed again till this is the case.
Such are the degrees of assistance afforded by the parent.


* Some insects,—ichneumons, lay their eggs in living caterpillars or other species
of their own genus, which are consequently destroyed, so that certain species appear
to naturalists created solely for the destruction of others. A most cruel example
is the female of a species of sphex; she digs a hole in sandy ground, drags a
large spider or caterpillar into the hole, bites off its legs to prevent its escape, and
deposits an egg in the hole, so that the young one may nourish itself with the
spinning fluid of the poor animal, (Blumenbach, Handbuch der naturgeschichte. )


843


CHAP? XX XV.


OF THE DIFFERENCES IN THE SYSTEM BEFORE AND AFTER
BIRTH.?*


* From what has been said relatively to the functions of the
foetus still contained within its mother, and immersed as it were in
a warm bath, there must evidently be a considerable difference
between its functions and those of the child that is born and ca-
pable of exerting its will. The chief points of difference we will
distinctly enumerate.

** To begin with the blood and its motion, this fluid is remark-
able both for being of a darker red, incapable of becoming florid
on the contact of atmospheric air, and for coagulating less readily
and perfectly than after birth.’ Its course, too, is very different
in the foetus whose circulation is connected with the placenta and
which has never breathed, from its course after the cessation of
this connection with the mother and after respiration has taken
place.¢


4 « On the subject of this chapter consult, among numerous others, Trew, De
differ. quibusdam inter hominem natum et nascendum intercedentibus. Norimb.
1736. Ato.

Andr. and Fr. Koesslein (brothers), De differentiis inter feetum et adultum.
Ibid. 1783. 4to.

Ferd. G. Danz, Zergliederungskunde des ungebohrnen Kindes mit Anmerk. yon
S. Th. Soemmerring. Frankfort, 1792. 2 vols. 8vo.

Also Theod. Hoogeveen, De fatus humani morbis. LB. 1784. 8vo. p. 28. sq:

Fr. Aug. Walter, Annotat. Academ. already quoted, p. 44. sq.

And J. Dan Herholdt, De vita imprimis fetus hwmani. WHayn. 1802. 8vo.
p. 61. sq.”

> «¢ Fourcroy, Annales de Chimie, t. vii. p. 162. sq.”

© « Consult Herm. Bernard, De eo quo differt circuitus sanguinis Seetus ab illo
hominis nati. Reprinted in Overkamp’s collection, t i.

Jos. Wenc. Czikanek, De actwosa hominis nascituri vita s. circulat, Setus ab
hominis nati diversitate. Reprinted in Wasserberg’s collection, t. iy.

Sabatier, at the end of his Jr. Complét d’ Anat. vol. iii. P- 386. sq. 1781.;
and in the Mémoires Mathemat. et Physiques de U Institut, t. iii, Pp. 337. sq.

3K


844 DIFFERENCES IN THE SYSTEM


** First, the umbilical vein, coming from the placenta and pene-
trating the ring called umbilical, runs to the liver, and pours its
blood into the sinus of the vena portz, the branches of which re-
markable vein distribute one portion through the liver, while the
ductus venosus ARANTII4 conveys the rest directly to the inferior
vena cava.

** Both canals, —the end of the umbilical vein contained. in
the abdomen of the foetus and the venous duct, become closed
after the division of the chord, and the former is converted into
the round ligament of the liver.

“ The blood, arriving at the right side of the heart from the in-
ferior cava, is in a great measure prevented from passing through
the lungs, and is divided into the left or posterior auricle of
the heart, by means of the Eustachian valve, and the foramen
ovale.

“ For, in the foetus, over the opening of the inferior cava,
there is extended a remarkable lunated valvee, termed, from its
discoverer ‘, Eustachian, which usually disappears as adolescence
proceeds, but, in the foetus, appears to direct § the stream of blood
coming from the abdomen towards an opening, immediately to be
mentioned, existing in the septum of the auricles.

“ This opening is denominated the foramen ovale, and is the
cause that certainly the greatest part of the blood which streams
from the inferior cava is poured into the left auricle during the
diastole of the auricles. A falciform valve, placed over the fora-
men, prevents its return, and appears likewise to preclude its


But especially J. Fr. Lobstein, Magazin Encyclopédique. 1803. t. iii. vol. li.
p. 28. sq.”

4 «y, Arantius, De humano fetu libellus, p. 97.

Compare B.S. Albinus, Explicatio tabular, Eustachii, p. 164. q.”"

* « Haller, De valuula Eustachii. Gotting. 1738. 4to.”

€ « Eustachius, De vena sine pari, p. 289. Opuscula, tab. viii. fig.6. tab. xvi.
fig. 3.”

& « J, F. Lobstein, De valvula Eustachii. Arg.1771. 4to.”

h « Haller, De foramine ovali et’ Eustachii valvula. Gotting. 1748. fol. c. f. ae,
and much more copiously in his Opera minora, t.i. p. 33. sqq.”

' For an account of the opinion of C. Fr. Wolff, who regards the foramen
ovale as another mouth of the inferior cava, opening into the left auricle in the
same manner as the mouth commonly known opens into the right, see Nov. .
Comment. Acad. Scient. Petropol. t. xx, 1775.”


BEFORE AND AFTER BIRTH. 845


course into the right auricle during the systole of the auricles.
By means of this valve, the foramen generally becomes closed
in the first years of infancy, in proportion as the corresponding
Eustachian valve decreases, and more or less completely dis-
appears. *

“‘ The blood which enters the right auricle and ventricle prin-
cipally proceeds from the superior cava, and flows but in a very
small quantity into the lungs, while, from the right ventricle,
which, in the foetus, is particularly thick and strong for this
purpose, it pursues its course directly to the arch of the aorta, by
means of the ductus arteriosus!, which is in a manner the chief
branch of the pulmonary artery. A few weeks after birth,
this duct becomes obstructed and converted into a kind of dense
ligament.

* The blood of the aorta, being destined to return, in a great
measure, to the mother, enters the umbilical arteries, which pass
out on each side of the urachus at the umbilical opening, and,
after birth, likewise become imperforate chords.™

“ As the function of the Jungs scarcely exists in the foetus, their
appearance is extremely different from what it is after the com-
mencement of respiration. They are proportionally much smaller,
their colour is darker, their substance denser, consequently their
specific gravity is greater, so that while recent and sound they
sink in water, whereas, after birth, they, ceteris paribus, swim
upon its surface.”

** From our remarks upon the nutrition of the foetus, it is clear
that its alimentary tube and chylo-poietic system must be pe-


k «A. Palm. Leveling, De valvula Eustachii et foramina ovali. Anglipol.
1780. 8vo. c. f. ae.”

1 « B.S. Albinus, Annot. Acad, 1. ii. tab. vii. fig. 7.”

m s¢y, Haller, cones Anat. fase. iv. tab. iii. vi.”

n « This is not the proper place for explaining the conditions under which this
occurs, and the cautions therefore requisite in giving an opinion, in a court of
justice, founded on the examination of the lungs. Among many other writings,
the very important posthumous paper of Wm. Hunter may be consulted in the
Medical Observ. and Enquiries, vol. vi. p. 284. sq.

Ph. Corn. Heineken’s dissertation, De docimasia pulmonwm incerto vite et
mortis recens natorum signo. Gott, 1811. 4to,

And Fr. B. Osiander, Comment. de respiratione, vagitu et vi vitali fetus humani
inter partum &c., on which compare the Gotting. Gel. Ang. 1820, p. 1955. sq.”


Skew


846 DIFFERENCES IN THE SYSTEM


culiar. Thus, v.c. in an embryo a few months old, the large
intestines very nearly resemble the small; but, during the latter
half of pregnancy, being turgid with meconium, they really de-
serve the epithet by which they are commonly distinguished.

“<The meconium is a saburra, of a brownish green colour, formed
evidently from the secreted fluids of the foetus, and chiefly from
its bile, because it is first observed at the period corresponding to
the first secretion of the bile, and, in monstrous cases, where the
the liver has been absent, no meconium, but merely a small quan-
tity of colourless albumen and mucus, has been found in the in-
testines,” which from the absence of bile have not been stimulated
to secrete abundantly. The meconium has the same taste and
colour and affords the same products as cystic bile.

“ The cecum is extremely different in the new-born child
from its future form, and continued ‘straight from the appendix
vermiformis, &c. °

‘“‘ Other differences we have already spoken of, and shall now
pass over. Such are the urachus, the membrana puptllaris, and
the descent of the testes in the male. Some will be treated of more
properly in the next section. Others, of little moment, we shall
entirely omit.”

One of the most striking peculiarities of the foetus is the very
great proportionate bulk of its liver. The prodigious size of this
organ arises from the distribution of four fifths of the blood of the
umbilical vein through it, and probably, in a certain degree, as
some think, from the great quantity of meconium in its biliary
ducts. After birth, no blood is conveyed by the umbilical vein,
and the expansion of the thorax readily expresses the abundance
of meconium; hence the liver must diminish.

This peculiarity, as well as the great size of the thyreoid, thy-
mus, and supra-renal glands — parts presently to be described, pro-
bably serves to produce certain necessary changes in the blood;
but an evident good effect results from it in relation to the organs
of the thorax. In the foetus the lungs are completely devoid of
air, and consequently there cannot be much, if any, circulation of
blood through the pulmonary artery and veins, and the liver, by
its magnitude, protruding the diaphragm upwards, renders the
capacity of the chest correspondently small, and at the same time


° « B.S. Albinus, dnnotat. Acad. 1. vi. tab. ii. fig. 7.”


BEFORE AND AFTER BIRTH. 847


it contains an immense proportion of blood. After birth, the di-
minished size of the liver allows a great increase to the capacity
of the chest; not only is full inspiration allowed, and consequently
afree passage to the blood of the pulmonary vessels during inspir-
ation, as Haller remarks P, but a certain degree of permanent di-
latation of the lungs is allowed (for much air remains in the lungs
after every expiration), and, since the liver contains, immediately
after birth, so much smaller a portion of the blood of the system
than before, the greatly increased supply required by the lungs is
thus afforded.4

_ ‘This is a favourable opportunity for briefly noticing some
remarkable parts which are out of all proportion larger in the
foetus, and appear to serve important purposes in its economy,
although their true and principal design deserves still further in-
vestigation.

“They are usually styled glands, but their parenchyma is
very different from true glandular structure, nor has any ves-
tige of an excretory duct been hitherto discovered in them.
They are the thyreoid, the thymus, and the supra-renal
glands."

“ The thyreoid gland® is fixed upon the cartilage of the same
name belonging to the larynx, has two lobes,” united by an
isthmus which lies across the third and fourth ring of the trachea,
is composed of lobules irregular in shape and size, and “is, as it
‘were, lunatedt, and full not only of blood, in which it abounds
in the foetus, but of lymphatic fluid, and becomes, as age advances,
gradually less juicy."

“The thymus is a white and very delicate structure,” sur-
rounded by cellular tissue that connects it with the adjoining


P Elementa Physiologie, t. viii.

“ See Mr. Bryce, Edinb. Med, and Surg. Journal. 1815. Jan. .

r « BR. Meckel, Abhandlungen aus der menschilchen und vergleichenden Anatomie.
Halle, 1806. 8vo. He makes it probable that these three organs contribute to
the chemical functions of the nervous and hepatic systems, and thus diminish the
quantity of hydrogen and carbon,”

8 « C, Uttini, De glandule thyroidee usu, in the Comment. Instituti Bononiens.
vol: vile ps U5.isq.”

t « FJaller, Zcones Anat. fase. ili. tab. 3.”

u « J, Ant. Schmidtmiiller, Ueber die Ausfuhrungsgange der Schilddriise. Land-
shut, 1804. 8vo.”

aK oO


848 DIFFERENCES IN THE SYSTEM


parts and binds together its own numerous conglomerated lobules,
which vary from the size of a pin’s head to that of a pea, is “like-
wise bilobular, sometimes completely divided into two parts,”
‘¢ contains a remarkable cavity x,” around which the lobules are dis-
posed spirally like knots, and is ‘‘ placed under the superior part of
the middle of the sternum, always ascending as far as the neck on
each sidey, of extremely great proportionate size in the foetus,
abounding in a milky fluid, becoming gradually absorbed in youth,
and frequently disappearing altogether in old age.2” Every lobule
contains several cells, all which open intoa small pouch at the base
of the lobule, and the pouches of all the lobules communicate with
the central cavity. Although there is no external opening, as in
true glands, Sir Astley Cooper finds absorbent vessels in the fetal
calf so large as to admit a common injecting pipe and coarse in-
jection, and opening into the veins at the lower part of the neck.

“The supra-renal glands, called also renes succenturiati and
capsule atrabiliariz, lie under the diaphragm on the upper margin
of the kidneys», from which, in the adult, they are rather more
distant, being proportionally smaller. They” have a triangular
close cavity in their centre, “full of a dark fluid of a more reddish
hue in the feetus than in the adult.” ‘In early feetal life, they are
granular, and absolutely larger than the kidneys; which, however,
towards the end of gestation, greatly surpass them. Their secre-
tion is probably conveyed to the blood by the absorbents like
that of the thymus.


* « Aug. Louis de Hugo, De glandulis in genere et speciatim de thymo. Gotting.
1746. 4to. fig. 2.
Morand the younger, Mémoires de I’ Acad. des Sc. de Paris, 1759, tab, 22—


24,
Vincent Malacarne, Memorie della Societa Italiana, t. viii. L799, Ps p.830.


sq.
Flor. Caldani, Congettura sopra V'uso della glandula timo, Venice, 1808. 4to,
Sam. Chr. Lucae, Anatomische Untersuchungen der Thymus, fase. i. ii.
Frankfort on the Maine. 1811. 4to.
C. Fr. Th. Krause, Opinionwm de thymi functione evamen. Gott. 1818. 8vo.”
y “ Ffaller, Icones Anat. 1. c.”?
* “ Hewson, Experimental Enquiries, P. iii. passim.”
* The Anatomy of the Thymus Gland, by Sir Astley Cooper, Bt. London, 1832.
> « See Eustachius their discoverer, tab. i. ii. iii., and tab. xii. fig. 1. 10, 12.
Haller, Zcones Anat. fase. iii. tab. vi. .
Malacarne, |. c.”


BEFORE AND AFTER BIRTH.


aT TR LO


L&S


ne” fl
s t f #
Lf"


ra 4
N— /


Tl
Mr! t y


Nua


C pe Tas ! ZI i.
ad C i= = j
SS =e


849


850


DESCRIPTION OF FOREGOING CUT. .


aaa, Placenta.

66666, Portion of the amnion covering it.
ccc, Portion of the chorion.
dddddddd, Veins of the placenta uniting into one trunk.
eeeeee, Umbilical vein,

JSff Its branches entering the liver.
£8, Vena porte.

hhh, Its hepatic branches,

i, Ductus venosus.

kkk, Inferior cava,

li, Renal veins.

m, Hepatic vein.

mn, Superior cava.

o, Heart turned to the right.

p, Right ventricle.

q, Pulmonary artery,

r, Canalis arteriosus.

s, Left pulmonary artery divided.
t, Left pulmonary veins.

u, Left auricle,

v, Left ventricle,

w, Aorta. *

x, Brachio-cephalic trunk.

yyy, Left carotid.

z, Left subclavian.


_


» Descending aorta.
2, Coeliac artery divided.
3, Superior mesenteric.
4, Inferior mesenteric,
5, Left renal,
' 66, Tliacs.
77, Hypogastrics,
8 8, Femorals.
9999, The umbilical arteries going towards the umbilical ring,
10 10, Their branches going to the bladder,
11, Urachus,
1212121212121212, Umbilical arteries, running in a serpentine course
towards the bladder,
13, The liver reversed,
14, Gall bladder,
15 15, Kidneys,
16 16, Renal capsules.


851


CHAT. <XxVE


THE ORIGIN, GROWTH, DECLINE, AND DEATH OF THE
HUMAN SYSTEM.


Tue origin of every living being is some matter of such a compo-
sition that it has the property of changing, under certain circum-
stances, in its composition and therefore its properties, and be-
coming organised ; and, when so changed, of again changing in
composition, organisation, and properties ; and this in unceasing
succession, till a being is completed of definite form and power, and
perhaps composed of numerous organs, each peculiar in its compo-
sition, organisation, and properties. Whether the first matter so
compounded by the coincidence of certain elementary particles
under certain circumtsances be inanimate or dead,—a possibility
admitted by the believers in heterogenesis, or furnished alive by a
living system from itself, it has not the composition nor parts,
and, therefore, not the properties, which subsequently exist. It
has the property merely of changing to some new composition —
of acquiring organisation, form, and new properties, under certain
favourable circumstances ; and, when so altered, the altered thing
has the property of changing in like manner, and thus, at last, an
organ, or a system of organs, is produced. When the changes
have arrived at a certain point, the characteristic properties of
the organ result, not full and perfect at first, but faint; and
gradually, as the composition and organisation improve, they be-
come more intense. Thus the liver does not secrete bile when its
rudiments are first discernible, but at length it does. Yet at first
the bile is poor, and only becomes perfect when the organ is
perfect. At first there can be no consciousness and personality in
the brain ; but, as its composition and organisation proceed, glim-
merings of these must appear, and at length both these and vo-
lition exist, and, as each part improves in composition and bulk,
faculty after faculty appears and grows stronger. The original
property results from a certain composition of certain elementary
substances placed under certain circumstances: other properties


852 ORIGIN, GROWTH, DECLINE, AND DEATH


result from changes in the composition and from the production
of organisation, — from another composition and from organis-
ation; and, as these change successively, each new composition
and organisation® is necessarily possessed of peculiar properties


@ Some object to the employment of the word organisation in the signification
of an organised system, alleging that it never means the thing organised, but al-
ways the process of organising, and they therefore employ the term organism
in that sense. Dr. Barclay, in his Inquiry into Opinions concerning Life and Or-
Zanisation, — a book worth reading as a compilation only of the curious opinions
of successive times, but full of dull error and prejudices, — says, “ Organisation
is a general expression for the process by which an organised structure is formed,
and, therefore, can never properly denote the possession of organs.” P. 340.

Now, the use of the word organisation to signify the thing organised, is not
only established, but supported by all analogy. Just as we employ the term in two
senses,— that of the thing organised and that of the process of organisation, other
words are used for acts and results. The chemist, the musician, and the rest of
the world, use the term composition in the two senses of compounding, composing,
and of the thing compounded or composed; the anatomist, pharmaceutist, and
the rest of the world, employ the term preparation to signify the act of preparing,
and the thing prepared; and the same twofold use is made of the words com-
bination, declaration, exhibition, generation, puncture, painting, reflection, and
endless others, with general sanction.


A similar habit prevails of restricting the word animal to the brute creation ;
so that some say man and animals, while others say man and other animals. The
Latin word animal is used in both ways correctly. But, to avoid confusion, it is
much better to have a rule, and, as we have a term always applied exclusively to
other animals, the term animal throughout this work includes man. |Whenever
I have wished to speak of other animals, I have employed the term brute, — and
written brute creation, brute animals, or brutes, in conformity with the established
use of this English word. I have already quoted Milton’s lines, —


** Smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied.”
Again, —
** What may this mean? Language of man pronounced
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed.”


Locke, in his Essay on the Human Understanding, says, “ Brutes may be consi-
dered as either aérial, terrestrial, aquatic, or amphibious.” Pope, in his Essay
on Man, has the celebrated lines, —


“* Heaven from all creatures hides the book of fate,
All but the page prescribed, their present state ;
From brutes what men, from men what spirits know,
Or who could suffer being here below.”


OF THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 853


while placed in certain circumstances. Thus a little fluid (for all
organised bodies are produced from fluids) in the ovaria becomes
a vesicle; this, a little organised something —though, perhaps
the vesicle must be considered an organisation ; this, by degrees,
the various parts of a human being successively, till a human
being can be recognised ; and all its parts grow and change till we
haveaman. Inall living organisations, the composition, structure,
size, and the number of organs differ at different times; noneis at
first what it is afterwards. All continue changing in volume, con-
sistence, form, texture, situation, mode of action ; and, while one
organ developes, another disappears.» These properties or powers
are the result of a certain composition, and often also organisation,
placed in certain circumstances: but this composition and
organisation are the result of previous composition, and perhaps
also organisation, and circumstances; and so we can go back,
step by step, till we arrive at the original composition and cir-
cumstances. The mind is a property or power resulting of
necessity from the composition and organisation of the brain
under certain circumstances: but this composition and organis-
ation of the brain result from a succession of changes, each re-
sulting from an immediately preceding state of composition, and,
except the commencement of organisation, of organisation also,
in which previous state there was, from its nature, necessarily
the property of changing to the subsequent.¢


> Burdach, § 477.

© See notes, p. 363. supra.

‘Some physiologists of reputation have contented themselves with roundly
asserting that true generation never occurs, but that the whole human race pre-
existed in the genitals of our first parents, in the shape of previously formed
germs which become evolved in succession.

Some of these imagined the germs to be the spermatic animalcules of the male
(see W. Fr. v. Gleichen, I. c.); others imagined them to exist in the ovaries of
the mother, *


* «y, c. The illustrious Haller, who plainly asserted, that all the viscera and
even the bones of the future fetus, nearly fluid indeed and therefore invisible, were
pre-formed, before conception, in the maternal germ.

In support of this hypothesis, he argued chiefly from the continuity of the
membranes and blood-vessels between the incubated chick and the yelk of the
egg. (Opera Minora, t. ii. p. 418. sq.)

But the more frequently I have demonstrated the phenomena of incubation in
my physiological class, the less strength have I found in this argument.


854 ORIGIN, GROWTH, DECLINE, AND DEATH


We saw, in Chapter XXVIIL., the various modes in which a new
being is produced from one already existing ; —that it may bea de-


This hypothesis of the successive evolution of germs pre-formed from the
creation, must, if carefully examined, be rejected. (“ See L. P. Zweifel gegen die
Entwickelungstheorie. — Aus der Franzisischen Handschrift von G. Forster. Got-
ting. 1788. 8vo.’’ Seealso C. F. Wolff, Theoria Generationis, Berlin, 1759, who
opposed it successfully. )

Not only is the superfluous and useless creation, which is supposed, of in-
numerable germs never arriving at evolution, repugnant to reason *, but so many
preternatural conditions and such a multiplication of natural powers} are as-
sumed, that it is perfectly irreconcileable with sound physiology.

Add to this, that, of the phenomena adduced in its favour, no one is sufficiently
consonant with truth to establish the hypothesis. §

On the other hand, we have indubitable observations which refute it directly
and completely.”

“ Such, in the history of hybrid animals, is the singular experiment of impreg-
nating those which are prolific, for many generations, with male semen of the
same species, by means of which the form of the young hybrids becomes so pro-
gressively different from the original maternal configuration, as to approach more
and more to that of the father, till, by a kind of arbitrary metamorphosis, it is.
absolutely converted into it. (Jos. G. Kolreuter, Dritte F orsetzung der vorliiuf.
Nachr. p. 51. sq.)

Such, in our knowledge of monsters (which, according to the hypothesis of
evolution, are nearly all maintained to have pre-existed in the germs from the


Nor can I sufficiently wonder how this great physiologist could so constantly
reject, as almost absurd, the inosculation, properly so called, of the vessels of the
chick with those of the yelk, while at the same time he admitted and defended a
perfectly similar inosculation in the connection of the human oyum with the
gravid uterus! ‘

See his Elem. Physiol. Lausanne, 1788, t. viii. P. i. p. 94, comparing p. 257.”

* Indeed, in this strange hypothesis there must have been an uncommon
store of germs prepared at the beginning, for the ovaria of a single sturgeon
have contained 1,467,500 ova. (Petit, Mém. del Acad. des Sciences, 1733.)

The fancy of the existence of all the human race, inclosed like pill-boxes —
emboitement, in our hapless general mother, is as unfounded in fact as it is pre-
posterous.

+ “wv. Kant’s remarks on these, Critik der Urtheilskraft, p. 372.”

t ‘* This defect I have shown at large, Handbuch der Jaturgeschichte, p. 14. sq.
10th edit.”

§ “ Those who desire a fuller demonstration of this and other assertions but


briefly noticed in the present section, I refer to the work, Ueber den Bildungstried,
3d edit. Gotting. 1791. 8vo.”


OF THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 855


tachment of a larger or smaller portion of the old, which afterwards
grows forth into another perfect system (fissiparous generation) ;


first creation), is the well-known fact — that among certain domestic species of
animals, and especially among sows, monstrosities are very common, whereas in
the original wild variety they are extremely uncommon,

While the phenomena of reproduction are all much more explicable by the
nisus formativus than by the pre-existence of germs for every part, some
particular instances (v. c. that of the nails, which, after the loss of the first
phalanx of the fingers, have been known to be reproduced on the neighbouring
middle phalanx *), admit evidently of no other solution,”

*‘ The less this hypothesis of evolution, as it is commonly termed, is found con-
sonant with fact and the rules of philosophising, the more strongly does the op-
posite opinion recommend itself to our notice by its simplicity and correspondence
with nature, supposing as it does, not an evolution of fictitious germina by con-
ception, but a true generation and gradual formation of a new conception from
the hitherto formless genital matter.

This true generation by successive formation has been variously described by
physiologists, but the following we consider as the true account.

1. The matter of which organised bodies, and therefore the human frame, are
composed, differs from all other matter in this, —that it only is subject to the
influence of the vital powers. (See Chr. Girtanner, Ueber das Kantische Prinzxip
fiir die Naturgeschichte. Gotting. 1796. 8vo. p. 14. sq. )

2. Among the orders of vital powers, one is eminently remarkable and the
least disputable of all, which, while it acts upon that matter, hitherto shapeless
but mature, imparts to it a form regular and definite, although varying according
to the particular nature of the matter,

To distinguish this vital power from the rest, permit us to designate it — nisus
FORMATIVUS.


* s¢ Recent instances of this remarkable phenomenon are related by Corvisart,
Journal de Méd. March, 1809.

N. Ansiaux, Clinique Chirurgicale. Lyons, 1816. 8vo. p. 217.

London Medical and Physical Journal, July, 1816.

Another example I owe to my friend F. Sig. Voigt, professor at Jena,

But the most remarkable case I myself saw in a young medical man, attend-
ing my lectures, who, when with the French army, lost the last joints of three
fingers of the left hand, and two joints of the little finger, by frost, in the famous
retreat to Beresina. ‘Lhe following year horny rudiments of nails were repro-
duced on the last phalanx but one of the fore, middle, and ring finger, but the
little finger remained as before.”

See other examples at p. 249. sq. supra.

The cut. part of half a potatoe has been seen covered with little tubercles,
similar to those on the convex surface, and from which fresh potatoes originate,
(See Keratry, Inductions Physiolog. et Morales, )


856 ORIGIN, GROWTH, DECLINE, AND DEATH


that it may be the detachment of a peculiar part, prepared for
the purpose, which first grows forth (gemmiparous and propagulat
generation) ; or that a peculiar substance is secreted and retained
as a something distinct from the parent, and that this may be of
the same common nature as the parent, or a vesiculiform mass
termed an ovum.

An ovum is produced in a peculiar organ; but is not capa-
ble of growing into a perfect new being, unless a substance is
supplied by another organ of either the same ora different being.
In mammals the other organ is always in another being‘, and one


3. The nisus formativus occurs to the genital matter, when this is mature and
committed to the uterus in a proper condition and under proper circumstances,
produces in it the rudiments of conception, and gradually forms organs fitted for
particular purposes ; preserves this structure during life, by nourishing the body ;
and reproduces, as far as it can, any part accidentally mutilated.” *

4 Anaccidental pregnancy was frequently attributed in former daysto the warmth
of imagination, the influence of demons, and many other circumstances supposed
equally powerful as the deed of kind. In Venette’s Tableau de l’ Amour conjugal,
and in Bartholin’s works, may be seen an Arrét Notable de la Cour du Parlement de
Grenoble, which, upon the attestation of many matrones and sages, femmes and
docteurs of the University of Montpellier, et autres personnes de qualité, that


* « Here allow me to” remark,

©]. [have used the expression — nisus formativus, merely to distinguish it from
the other orders of vital powers, and by no means to explain the cause of gene-
ration, which I consider equally involved in Cimmerian darkness as the cause of
gravitation or attraction, which are merely terms given to effects known, like the
nisus formativus, a posteriori.

2. The word nisus I have adopted chiefly to express an energy truly vital, and
therefore to distinguish it as clearly as possible from powers merely mechanical,
by which some physiologists formerly endeavoured to explain generation.””

Blumenbach has been charged with having introduced an imaginary agent,
which he created for the purpose of executing this particular office and de-
nominated the nisus formativus. (Dr. Bostock’s Elementary System. 1836.
p. 672.) Now he merely states a fact —that certain matter has the capability
of acquiring certain composition, organisation, and properties and forms; and he
calls this capability, nisus formativus, thus effectually excluding all hypothesis.
He designates the fact of the formation and nutrition taking place not simply but
for a final purpose, —to produce structures destined for certain ends, the union
of a physico-mechanical principle with the teleological; and this Dr. Bostock
considers a “ radical error.” It is merely a choice of words to express a fact,


OF THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 857


application of the male fluid is sufficient for only one conception :
but among poultry a hen will lay a long succession of fruitful
eggs after one intercourse with the cock; and the nine genera-
tions of the aphis will come forth after one impregnation, — eight
being entirely of females, and the ninth partly of males.

The fundamental materials of the germ supplied by the
female undergo a certain number of changes independently of
the male fluid. Besides the store of nourishment, the germinal
vesicle and the macula germinativa on its internal surface are
found in unimpregnated ova; and the vesicle is said to burst and
unite with its enveloping coat into a membrane formed of both,
and termed blastoderm or incipient germinal membrane in birds
and some other vertebrata which are not mammals. Further
approaches towards the existence of the embryo require the in-
fluence of the male fluid.


women often fall pregnant spontaneously, declares a lady who had brought forth
a son although her husband had been absent four years, to be a woman of worth
and honour, and the child to be the legitimate heir of Monsieur the husband.
When a demon bore the blame, he was called an incubus, and his semen always
struck so cold to the ladies “ wé displicentiam magis quam delectationem inde sint
consecute.”” (Zacchias, Questiones Medice Legales, lib. vii. tit. 1. Quest. vii. Me)
A demon that played the part of a female, was named a succubus. It was
asserted that a mischievous devil would often act as a succubus, and then, meta-
morphosing himself into an incubus, deposit in the vagina of some woman the
semen which he had received from a man.

As they believed that ladies could breed without gentlemen, so they believed
that some gentlemen might be hermaphrodite and breed without ladies. For
we hear of an unfortunate monk who was executed in France so lately as the
year 1478 for getting himself with child. (Dr. Fletcher’s Rudiments of Physiology,
(Paps 753)

The ancients believed that mares were sometimes impregnated by the wind, —
ebavenovabai,

Vere magis, quia vere calor redit ossibus, illz
Ore omnes verse in Zephyrum stant rupibus altis,
Exceptantque levis auras; et spe sine ullis
Conjugiis vento gravide (mirabile dictu)
Saxa par et scopulos et depressas convallis
Diffugiunt.
Virait, Georg. Lib. iii.


See also Varro, De Re Rust. ii. 1. Columella, vi. 27, and Pliny, Hist. Nat.
VINTe dys


858 ORIGIN, GROWTH, DECLINE, AND DEATH


Under vital and electro-magnetic laws, there take place attrac-
tions and repulsions, movements, and new arrangements of parti-
cles,and a germinal vesicle is produced, in which the same laws go
on operating movements and new arrangements of particles more
and more busily, or, at least, more and more visibly. By the union
of some particles, and the separation of others (synthesis and ana-
lysis), new fluids and solids are produced. Fluidity every where
precedes solidity ; and, as soon as solidification occurs, there is or-
ganisation. Whether further changes occur in some animals of the
same class than in others, is yet uncertain. But Dr. Martin Barry
has not discovered the incipient germinal membrane or blasto-
derm in mammals before coitus, though it exists previously in birds.
In whichever way this point is settled, the germinal membrane,
spherical and vesicular, is observed, after impregnation, to be the
first to change. It becomes more distinct from the yelk and vitellary
membrane, and gradually separates into thin layers, lying closely
one under another on the yelk, and called by Pander® the serous,
vascular, and mucous, layers of the blastoderm, which, by the
various folds they afterwards form, give rise, — the external to
the nervous, tegumentary, muscular, and osseous, systems, and
the parietes of the great cavities; — the next, or vascular, to the
vascular system ;—and the internal, or mucous, which is intimately
connected with the middle layer, gives rise, thus combined, to
the intestinal, respiratory, and perhaps the glandular, systems.

The cicatricula or germ spot of the common fowl], round, whitish,
about a quarter of an inch in diameter, and composed of variously
sized granules, lies under the proper membrane of the yelk. Its
centre, called the transparent area, or colliquamentum, is the
thinnest and most transparent part. Whether any trace of germ
exists in it before impregnation, is uncertain. But after incubation
has proceeded for seven or eight hours, a dark line, or primitive
trace, may be discovered in the cicatricula towards the centre of
the transparent area, lying in the transverse axis of the egg, and
swollen at the extremity which lies to the left when the small
end of the egg is turned from us. The large extremity indicates
the place where the head is afterwards formed, and occupies
nearly the centre of the transparent area; the linear portion


Beitrige, Zur Entwickelungs-geschichte des Hiinchens im Eie. Wurtzburg,
175


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 859


corresponds to the tail and body of the fcetus, and approaches
the margin of the area on the right side.

As incubation proceeds, the whole cicatricula expands : towards
the twelfth or fourteenth hour, the germinal membrane divides
into two layers of granules, —the serous and mucous; and the
rudimentary trace of embryo, which is now evident, is placed in
the outer or serous.

A part of the serous layer becomes thicker, and towards the
eighteenth hour displays a long furrow, at the bottom of which is
the primitive trace. About the twentieth hour, this furrow be-
comes a canal, by the junction of its margins, termed plice
primitive by Pander, and laminz dorsales by Baer. The canal
soon becomes closed at the cephalic or swollen end of the
primitive trace, at which part it is the widest.

A semifluid matter is now deposited in this canal, which, on
acquiring more consistence, becomes the rudiment of the spinal
chord. The pyriform extremity or head is partially divided into
three vesicles, which, also being filled with semifluid matter, give
rise to the rudimentary state of the encephalon, according to
Baer. MM. Serres and Allen Thomson confirm his observation.

The serous layer around the spinal canal, especially towards the
head, becomes thicker and denser, and, before the twenty-fourth
hour, four or five small opaque round bodies appear, indicating the
first formation of the dorsal vertebra. In a few hours several
more appear, and the first of them are quadrilateral. From the
twentieth to the twenty-fourth hour, the inner layer of the
germinal membrane divides, and is converted into the vascular
and mucous layers. Towards the twenty-fourth hour, when the
layers of the germinal membrane cover near one third of the cir-
cumference of the yelk, they begin to exhibit various folds,
which afterwards serve for the formation of the cavities of the
body. ‘That part of the germinal membrane which lies imme-
diately before the cephalic extremity of the embryo is bent down
into a fold, so as to make a depression in the surface of the yelk;
and sometime afterwards, a similar fold is formed behind the
caudal extremity. As these folds of the germinal membrane in
crease, they gradually turn in below the foetus at its head and
tail, and their margins approach one another under the abdomen,
which at this period always lies next the substance of the yelk.
As the layers of the germinal membrane are bent down in a


31


860 GROWTH OF


similar manner towards the sides also of the spinal canal, there is
formed, under each end of the embryo, a short sac or cavity;
which communicates with the yelk by an opening, common to
both, left in its middle. The two short sacs thus formed indicate
the rudimentary state of the intestinal tube; the anterior cor-
responds to the cesophageal portion of the intestine, the posterior
to the lower part of the large intestine.

The first rudiments of the heart appear towards the twenty-ninth
hour, on the lower side of the cesophageal canal, at the place where
the layers of the germinal membrane are reflected from the edge
of the anterior short sac which they form in the embryo. In form-
ing this fold, the mucous layer is reflected further inwards, the
serous layer advances least, and the space between them, occu-
pied by the vascular layer, is filled up by a dilated part of this
layer, —the rudiment of the heart. “ About the same time that
the developement of these rudimentary parts of the embryo takes
place, the surrounding disc of the cicatricula is also considerably
changed. The whole cicatricula continues to expand, and to
cover more of the surface of the yelk. That part of the mucous
and vascular layers which surrounds the transparent area becomes
thicker and more spongy than the adjacent parts, and is soon
studded with numerous irregular points and marks, of a dark
yellow colour: as incubation proceeds, these points become more
apparent, and are gradually elongated into small lines, which are
united together, first in small groups, and then into one network,
so as to form what is termed the vascular area.

‘¢ The space occupied by this network is cordiform, and is sur-
rounded by a vessel, gradually developed in the same manner as
those of the rest of the area. The newly formed vessels of the
space become more and more distinct as ncubation advances,
and the orange-coloured fluid they contain assumes a darker hue:
the small branches of the network arrange themselves like the
fibrils of aleaf, on each side of the embryo, and terminate, towards
the embryo, in two vessels issuing from its sides, which are the
omphalo-mesenteric arteries. Towards the circumference of the
area, the smaller ramifications of these vessels open into the sinus,
or vena terminalis, which bounds the space.” The leading changes
are the same in the germinal membrane of other birds. f


* Dr. Allen Thomson’s paper On the Developement of the Vascular System
in the Fetus of Vertebrated Animals ; Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, July


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 861

In regard to mammalia, the ovum of the dog is only 51,
of an inch in the Graafian vesicle. On entering the oviduct,
it enlarges, and more so as it proceeds ; and, having arrived
in the uterus, its increase is proportionally more rapid. “ Ac-
cording to Baer, and to Prevost and Dumas,” “ the first trace
of the embryo appears like a dark line near the middle of the
transparent part, exactly in the same manner as the primitive
trace shows itself in the transparent area of birds.” —

The mucous layer, conformably to its character, absorbs the
embryotrophe or yelk, from the first, and converts this to a primi-
tive organic mass on its external surface. Between the serous
and mucous layers, the indirect or secondary formations appear :
the vascular, arising from the mucous layer, but pushing towards
the serous, and developing into the whole vascular system spread
throughout the organisation ;—and the uro-genital, pushing from
within outwards, where, becoming connected with the mucous
membranes, and representing, as a partial system, only the eli-
minating character of them, though of a high kind since it ex-
cretes not only disorganised matter, but matter capable of or-
ganisation and independent vitality.)

In the different ranks of the animal kingdom, the germinal
membrane may be entirely changed to an embryo, and thus be
all persistent, as in Invertebrata and Batrachians ; or partly perish,
as in fish, in which a portion of the mucous layer, — the umbilical
vesicle, disappears during the embryo state; or aportion of all
its layers may be in excess, as in the superior reptiles, birds,
and mammals, in all which the peripheral portion of the serous
layer constitutes the amnion—a covering to the new being’ while
in utero only; the peripheral portion of the mucous layer, —the
umbilical vesicle, the residue of the alimentary canal, partially
covering the abdomen of the embryo, and, in some animals, en-
velope it like the amnion; and the most external of the cover-
ings is the peripheral portion of the uro-genital system, —the
allantoid.

The umbilical opening is the point left open in the parietes of


— October, 1830; from which I have taken the preceding account,
follows I am indebted to Burdach.
Ealite,


For what


" Burdach, §417.


862 GROWTH OF


the embryo, by which the outer and inner parts of the proligerous
membrane are continued, or the point at which the hollow parietes
of the embryo are not closed, but reflected upon themselves,
to form one substance within these coverings. At first it is
nearly as large as the embryo itself, since the inner layer of the
proligerous membrane turns and closes all around upon itself, to
become insulated and hatched as the embryo, while the peri-
pheral portion expands in the opposite direction — from within
outwards: from the first appearance of the embryo, a fold marks
the limit of these two portions of the membrane. In proportion
as the embryo becomes more insulated, the umbilical opening
becomes smaller, and the passage between the embryonic and
enveloping portions more cylindrical. Now, as the proligerous
membrane divides into an internal and external layer, two umbilical
openings are produced, — an external, which is the orifice of the
cavity of the body, the parietes of which are continuous with the
amnion ;—the other internal, which is the cavity of the intestine,
and continuous with the umbilical vesicle. There is likewise a
third internal umbilical opening, — the cavity of the cloaca or
bladder, continuous with the allantoid. There are, consequently,
the tubes intermediate between the embryo and its enveloping
expansions, — namely, the umbilical sheath, belonging to the
amnion; the canal of the umbilical vesicle, with its vessels, be-~
longing to the umbilical vesicle; and the allantoid canal, with its
vascular layer, belonging to the allantoid and endochorion. In
the superior reptiles, and in birds, these tubular communications
are short, so that the embryo and its membranes are in con-
tact: in mammalia they are long, and form the chord termed um-
bilical, connecting the embryo and membranes, but still separating
them. This is longer, absolutely and relatively, in man, — from
18 to 20 inches; while even in horses and horned cattle it
never exceeds 12 or 18. In man, too, the tube of the umbilical
vesicle and of the allantoid disappear early, so that there remains
the umbilical sheath only, and the vessels of the allantoid tube
constitute the cylindrical spiral of the chord.

Every animali and vegetable‘, if not every organ, springs,


' Carus, Recherches d’ Anatomie Philosophique et Transcendentale, in his Traité
@ Anatomie Comparée, vol. iii. Paris, 1835.
* On the origin of the vegetable cell, see Dr. Schleiden’s paper on Phytoge-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. $63


probably, from a distinct vesicle or closed membranous cell, con-
taining some fluid substance, and both cell and contents undergo
various changes; and the higher the new individual is to rank, the
greater is the number of changes. The various structures of the
higher pass through all the changes of the lower. Each structure
of each vegetable and animal stops at its own point in the series
of changes, and a species is high or low according to the point at
which its chief changes stop. The higher the production, the
greater, as Harvey first remarked, is the rapidity with which it
passes through the series of changes.

THE SEROUS LAYER. —In man and other vertebrate animals,
the brain and spinal chord are the first parts formed. They are
produced upon the central part, or first zone of the external sur-
Jace of the serous layer, in the form of a liquid enclosed in a
covering ; a solid matter is precipitated from the surface towards
the centre, consisting of opake granulations, united by a transparent
viscid fluid: at this time there are neither blood nor blood-vessels.
After the third month, the substance, which has become more and
more solid, separates into the fibrous and pulpy portions!; and,
still later, a slight difference of colour is observed. These changes
occur earlier in the chord than in the brain: and, though the
brain may be to the spinal chord regarded as about 40 to 1 in the
adult, 107 at ten months from conception, 63 at five months, it is
but as 18 at three months. ‘The covering of the brain and chord
gradually divides into pia mater and arachnoid; and the latter is
soon thicker and more opake than in the adult. The brain and
chord are both produced in their whole length at once. The


nesis, in Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs, No. vi. Aug. 1839, from Miuller’s Archiv
fiir Anat. und Physiol. P. ii. 1838.

1 Tiedemann contends that the fibrous portion of the spinal chord is formed
before the pulpy. Yet he allows that all the nervous matter is first “ a liquid and
transparent fluid” during the first month, and “a soft and pultaceous mass towards
the end of the second ;” that no fibres can be discerned even with the microscope
at the beginning of the third; and that the constant result of his examination of
fresh foetal brains is that the cortical and medullary parts are indistinguishable,
being homogenous and reddish white, though the external may be softer and
perhaps a little more supplied with vessels, Gall tells him that “if he would
allow the veil of prejudice to drop from his eyes, he would see, as he states most
explicitly, that the pia mater with its numerous vessels, and a substance, liquid,
successively glairy, pulpy, gelatinous, reddish, exists before any trace of fibrous
substance.” (Fonctions du Cerveau, t. vi. p. 67. sqq. See supra, p. 341. sqq.)

oS Oa


864 GROWTH OF


chord is at first 14 line in length, and has one extremity
dilated to a hollow nodule, which is the rudiment of the head.
The brain is at first semicircular, and the spinal chord tubular;
the lateral parts are thicker, and their union presents a fine plate
only. The lateral parts, and especially the lower portions of these
in the brain, and the anterior in the chord, grow the most, and
begin to exhibit fibres the soonest ; and the union of these portions
at the median line is from the first the strongest, and it is per-
sistent. The upper portion of these in the brain and the posterior
in the chord grow slowly, and so much in breadth outwards, that
a groove is left at the upper part of the brain during the sixth
week, and in the posterior part of the chord from the end of
the second to the fifth month. As the sides of the chord grow
at its posterior parts, towards their middle, they at length touch
each other and unite, so that the groove becomes a canal, observ-
able till the sixth month, or even later. The same happens in the
brain; but the union is never complete in every point, so that the
ventricles are left.

The original cavity of the brain and chord diminishes and in
some points is completely filled up by internal deposition, which
is more abundant than deposition without, so that their bulk pro-
portionally to the whole body diminishes.

In the chord, the pulpy substance preponderates in the four
chords and circumference of the canal during the whole of fcetal
life.

The canal of the chord remains open in other mammalia, and
does not close completely at the neck in the human embryo,
The chord is as long as the spine during the first three months
only ; from this time it grows so much less than the spine that at
the seventh month it reaches to the last lumbar vertebra only,
and at the ninth only to the first.

The brain originally consists, as in all mammalia, of three vesicles,
which are the rudiments of the chorda oblongata, the corpora
quadrigemina, and the cerebrum. They lie in a series, and are
filled with a clear fluid, not divided at the median line, distinct,
and in some measure independent of each other; and the cerebral
trunk forms various curves, downwards where it is to produce the
chorda oblongata, upwards where it supports the corpora quadri-
gemina, and downwards at an acute angle, to support the thalami
optici. It afterwards takes a more uniform direction, and the in-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 865


dividual parts become more concentrated and united. The brain
grows more in breadth at the fourth month only, but afterwards
more in length proportionally, till at nine or ten months the pro-
portions of the two are nearly the same as in the adult. The
brain is proportionally larger than in the adult. Its igo is
about } of that of the body at the fifth month, and about +1, at
the enh, whereas it is about ,/, in the adult.

The chorda oblongata, or posterior of the three vesicles, at first
forms an angle with the spinal chord, and is much more developed
proportionally than the rest of the brain; and this proportion
does not afterwards diminish considerably. Tiedemann states that
its component breadth is as 1 to 1°25 in the second month, and
as 1 to 6 or 7 in the adult ; and nearly half as broad at ten months
as in the adult.

The decussation of the anterior pyramids is visible after the fifth
week, and the corpora olivaria soon afterwards appear, as little
branching cavities, which are filled up at the sixth month. ‘The
chorda oblongata is of a uniform redness throughout the feetal state.

The cerebellum is not an original part; it arises between
the chorda oblongata and the tubercula quadrigemina. Bands
from the posterior and lateral parts of the chorda oblongata give
origin to the posterior crura of the cerebellum, produce an arch,
and touch in the median line. But these crura appear formed in
the whole length from the first, in the sixth or seventh week, as
two fine plates extending to the median line, and at the beginning
of the third month coalesce and enclose a space,—part of the
rhomboidal sinus, which afterwards becomes the fourth ventricle.
In the fourth month the ciliary ganglia or corpora fimbriata
appear as closed vesicles, supplied freely with blood-vessels. In
the fifth month, the hemispheres of the cerebellum begin and
grow chiefly forwards. Between the layers of the cerebellum,
produced by fibres radiating from the spinal chord, fresh layers
are deposited in different directions, and the mass divides into five
stems. The four furrows between them begin most conspicuously
at the vermiform process. In the sixth month, the stems divide
into branches, the lobes into lobules, and the cavity of the cere-
bellum narrows. In the seventh, the furrows are deeper and more
numerous, the tufts and posterior valve appear. In the eighth
month, the hemispheres are more developed below and behind,
the ultimate divisions of the branches take place, and ental

3L 4


866 GROWTH OF


like lobules are produced: the fibrous and pulpy substances be-
come distinguishable from each other by their colour.

The pons varolii appears about the beginning of the fourth
month. ‘The posterior part is first formed, so that the fifth pair
arises from its anterior edge. Its diameter from before backwards
is 1 line in the fourth month; 2 in the fifth; 4in the ninth ; 15 or
18 inthe adult. The ascending prolongations, with the valve, are
developed as the vermiform process grows thicker, are a fine plate,
and advance towards the tubercula quadrigemina.

The cerebellum of the foetus does not increase in volume so
much as the rest of the brain. Its weight in the foetus, compared
with that of the cerebrum, is | to 23 at the full time, whereas in
the adult this is as 1 to 7. The greater simplicity of its organis-
ation occasions, however, its texture to be perfected sooner than
that of the cerebrum.

The tubercula quadrigemina are original formations; and are
seen at the first in the median line as a single bladder filled
with clear fluid, behind the cerebrum, and before the chorda
oblongata, which is higher than either. The fluid coagulates and
becomes a fibrous plate on each side. These are separate at
the median line from about the sixth to the ninth week, and
are two hollow hemispheres at their lower part, and parted by a
longitudinal fissure. The space which they enclose is a continu-
ation of the rhomboidal sinus, and, like this, is a gutter only,
opening by aslit. At the end of the third month, the two plates
meet, and are joined by the ascending peduncles of the cerebel-
Jum. In the fourth month, they coalesce and inclose a vast
cavity. The predominance of lateral developement soon occasions
a longitudinal median furrow; a transverse furrow also takes
place: and thus the four quadrigemina are produced. In the
sixth month, the tubercles are covered by the cerebrum; a layer
of pulpy substance is deposited on their surface, and fibres also
are visible. At the seventh month, they are so thick that their
cavity is reduced to a canal — the aqueduct; analogous to that of
the spinal chord. They are always of nearly the breadth of the
chorda oblongata, and, like it, larger proportionally to the cere-
brum, the younger the foetus ; and in the uterus they acquire more
than half the size which they attain in the adult.

The third primitive part is the cerebrum. The crura cere-
bri,—prolongations of the anterior bands of the spinal chord,


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 867


are developed very early, and are therefore larger proportionally
at first than afterwards, and become firmer towards the end of
foetal life while the other parts of the cerebrum are soft. About
the fourth month, the layer which lies upon them is still more de-
veloped by the increase of the posterior bands of the spinal chord,
and the constantly increasing prolongation of the fibres proceeding
from the corpora quadrigemina. ‘The crura cerebri are very early
divided by a slit, so that a gutter, open above, remains till they
are covered by the hemispheres. In the region of the tubercula
quadrigemina, they bend at an acute angle towards the base of the
cranium. This flexure, whichis gradually effaced, seems to indi-
cate the formation of the infundibulum, which is, a prolongation of
the grey chords that lie on the anterior bands of the spinal chord,
whose canal they enclose, and is a primitive part, according to
Baer, constituting the cephalic extremity of the cerebrum. The
tube of the infundibulum is continued to the pituitary gland, which,
till the sixth month, has a cavity that is really the extremity of
the canal of the spinal chord, and is ultimately obliterated, as well
as the lower part of the hollow of the infundibulum. The gland
is at first proportionally larger than the brain; being, at four
months, as 1 to 9°50; in the adult, as 1 to 18.

The ganglions of the brain (thalami optici and corpora striata)
sprout from the crura cerebri simultaneously in the eighth week,
and undergo no remarkable changes.

The thalami, towards the end of the second month, are hollow.
They become proportionally more voluminous than in the adult.
They turn fibrous, but remain red. The commissura mollis forms
in the fourth month; the posterior at the end of the third, and
seems to result from a fold of the portion still remaining of the
vault of the vesicles of the crura cerebri. The elevation of this
vault produces the pineal gland, which becomes thicker, but re-
mains destitute of grit.

The corpora striata grow much faster than the thalami.

The crown which radiates from these ganglia forms the hemz-
spheres. Its increase arises from fibres more and more parallel
being applied to the lower edge of its anterior and posterior ex-
tremities. The hemispheres are originally an undivided vesicle,
which afterwards has a longitudinal depression. Up to the third
month, they consist of fine plates, ascending from the external
and anterior part of the corpora striata. They become larger


868 GROWTH OF


from the rays of the crown multiplying and lengthening ; and
thicken both by the augmentation of its fibres that lie side by side,
and by the addition of the uniting parts. They soon preponde-
rate over the chorda spinalis and oblongata, the cerebellum and
and corpora quadrigemina; and even more in the embryo than
inthe adult. For the breadth of the cerebellum at two months is
to that of the cerebrum as 1 to 0°75; at six months, as 1 to 1°87;
at nine, as 1 to 2; at ten, as 1 to 1°93; and in the adult, as 1 to
125:

Towards the end of the third month, the uniting parts com-
mence; whether produced from the primordial parts, or pre-
cipitated upon these from some new fluid effused. The fore
part of the corpus callosum first appears, and under the form of
a plate lying perpendicularly before the corpora striata, which
it covers at the fifth month. The corpus callosum covers the
thalami at six months; and at the eighth month extends beyond
them, forming the ventricles. The anterior parts of the fornix are
formed at the same time with the corpus callosum. At the end
of the third month, the fornix is composed of the mamillary emi-
nences, which are at present a single mass of the ascending pillars
in the thalami, and of the anterior pillars which ascend behind
the fore part of the fornix, without touching, bend backwards,
but do not reach above the thalami, and are lost in the hemi-
spheres. At the fourth month, these pillars touch each other
behind the fore part of the corpus callosum, and extend backward
to the inferior cornua.

The anterior commissure is seen in the third month.

The peduncles of the septum lycidum spring up probably after
the end of the third month: but their plates, or the septum itself,
do not appear till the fifth month, between the corpus callosum and
fornix. They as yet are not in contact; but leave an open space
till the latter months, when they unite below and behind, pro-
ducing the fifth ventricle, which gradually diminishes.

The fibres of the rays of the hemispheres separate towards the
surface, and in the spaces uniting fibres are deposited, which
have their extremities in the surface, and pass from one plate to
another, folding upon themselves at the bottom of the spaces.
Thus the convolutions are produced — first, in the fifth month,
at the inner surface, and inner part of the upper surface ; and,
in the seventh month, at the upper and outer surface. They


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 869


gradually augment in number and depth, but never become very
marked during feetal life.

The ventricles of the cerebrum are originally close and undivided.
When the anterior encephalic vesicle opens, the third ventricle
appears as a gutter between the thalami, continuous with that of
the spinal chord by means of the rhomboidal sinus and the fourth
ventricle. When the hemispheres grow, the lateral ventricles ap-
pear, open by a central fissure. The formation of the corpus cal-
losum closes them above at the end of the fourth month, and
their closure is complete at the end of the eighth. At the fifth,
they begin to be separated longitudinally from each other by the
septum lucidum ; an opening, however, being still left below the
pillars of the fornix. The cavity is at first continuous, before
and above, with that of the septum; before and below with those
of the olfactory bands or nerves; and directly below with that
of the infundibulum and pituitary gland. Towards the eighth
month, the cavities of the two latter are obliterated, and the
opening of that of the septum closes. The plexus choroides are
formed at the end of the third month, and soon become so volu-
minous as to almost fill the ventricles. The capacity of the lateral
ventricles increases with the bulk of the hemispheres ; and dimi-
nishes again after the seventh month, as these grow thicker.™

The second zone or excentric part of the serous layer, according
to Burdach, gives rise to the nerves, muscles, bones, and skin,


™ The Commissioners of the French Institute, who drew up the Report upon
Gall’s discoveries that was thought to have annihilated them, declared that there
was no successive developement of the nervous system. ‘ Dans le systéme
nerveux, tout est formé a la fois.” This Gall knew to be erroneous, and re-
futed at length before Carus, Tiedemann, or others published upon deyvelope-
ment. ‘ Dans un fetus humain d’environ six mois, les nerfs de la colonne
vertébrale, des muscles de l’ceil, et les nerfs tri-jumeaux sont plus tét formés que
le nerf olfactif, et celui-ci Vest plus tot que le nerf auditif, le nerf optique, les
pyramides et la protubérance annulaire, dans laquelle l’on découvre A peine des
traces de filamens nerveux. Les pédoncules du cerveau, sur la surface desquels
les faisceaux de filamens sont si visibles par la suite, paraissent ne consister
alors que danS un amas de substance grise, les couches optiques, les corps striés,
et les hémisphéres ne contiennent encore aucun filament distinct (sans pré-
paration et a l’ceil nu); on les découvre plutét dans les lobes postéricurs et moyens
que dans les antérieurs,” &e. (Anatomie et Physiologie du Cerveau, t. i. p. 240.
4to. 1810; also, Fonctions du Cerveau, t. vi. p. 48. sq. ; and his Recherches sur
le Systéme Nerveur, p. 149. sq. 1808.)


870 GROWTH OF


the animal periphery, as he calls the assemblage of these parts,
surrounding the encephalo-spinal organ, which we may regard as
the being itself, and protecting it, subservient to its connections
and operations with the surrounding world, and likewise protect-
ing and forming parietes for the other organs. These peripheral
parts are not produced by the encephalo-spinal organ, and may
be formed when it is not, —when there is neither brain nor
spinal chord, but are in harmony with it. At first, this portion of
the serous layer is the transparent envelope of the embryo, and
unites in the median line. Then it becomes granular and opake
by the addition of primordial matter, and first at the sides of the
encephalo-spinal organ, from which parts they spread to the me-
dian line. It afterwards separates into the true animal periphery,
skin, —bone, muscles, and nerves. These changes take place
from within outwards, and thus at different times in different parts :
so that all these states may co-exist in different points.

The serous wall may be regarded as the primitive skin, before the
skin itself exists. This, when first distinguishable from subjacent
muscles, is soft, and does not acquire more solidity till the middle of
foetal existence. Sebaceous follicles appear at the third month :
after the fifth, these secrete the vernix caseosa. The epidermis is
distinguishable after the second month, resulting apparently from
an albuminous matter poured out upon the skin. The nails are
distinguishable at the third month. The hairs are formed as brown
or black spots under the epidermis about the beginning of the
fourth month; at the beginning of the sixth, a soft down covers
the body, and falls off again by the end of the tenth month: the
hair of the head, the eyebrows, and eyelashes, sprouts forth at
the sixth month.

The dones are at first a mere jelly,— granulations lying in a
more translucid mass: this jelly, in the fifth week, begins ex-
ternally to become cartilage, perfectly transparent, homogenous,
without cells or blood-vessels, and no granular matter is at length
left. Cartilaginification is first observed around the heart, in
the vertebra, ribs, and sternum: it occurs in patches, thus indi-
cating the future articulations; and the granular mass which
remains undivided at these is gradually converted into articular
ligaments. This detached conversion to cartilage for each dis-
tinct future bone does not occur when several bones are to be
fixed immoveably together, as in the case of the head and pelvis,


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 871


Each cartilage has a very delicate fibrous sheath; and the ver-
tebral column evidently has one while it is still jelly. At length
blood-vessels enter the cartilage through the fibrous investment
it becomes opake; inflexible; uneven on its surface : fibres, pa-
rallel, at right angles to each other, or united by others which
are transverse, appear, and an areolar tissue is thus produced.
The earthy matter of the blood is deposited in the cartilage, but so
combined that the new bony portion is easily separated from the
rest, and, if we remove the earth, a jelly is left rather different
from that of mere cartilage. Valentin has recently stated that the
cartilaginous granulations become long bony corpuscles, pointed
at their two extremities; and that spherical cavities take place
in the cartilages, and lengthen, communicate, and represent the
canals of the bones. Ossification begins in the seventh week: we
observe it at one point only in some bones; at two, and even
more, in others. The os humeri has seven points of ossifica-
tion, the occipital twelve, the sphenoid fourteen, and the sacrum
twenty-one. Each point enlarges; and, if there are more than
one, they at length touch and unite. Many of the apertures and
canals for vessels and nerves form between two bony nuclei,
originally separate; some are formed by the deposition of bone
around the vessel.

The first point of ossification is in the clavicle, near the end of
the second month: the next in the upper and lower jaw, and
the os femoris. In the first half of the third month, ossification
commences in the frontal and occipital, the humerus, radius, ulna,
tibia, fibula, scapula, and ribs; in the second half, it begins in the
temporal, sphenoid, and malar ; then in the parietal, palatine, and
nasal ; and, ultimately, in the vertebra, metacarpus, metatarsus,
and last phalanges: in the fourth month, in the vomer, the two
other phalanges, and the ilia; at the fifth, in the ethmoid, lachry-
mal, and turbinated; at the sixth, in the sternum, carpus, and
tarsus ; at the seventh, in the hyoides and coccyx. The order of
ossification differs trom that of cartilage, and depends upon the
distribution of the blood-vessels. It almost universally begins at
the same time in very distant points, and generally proceeds from
the sides towards the median line, where the blood-vessels first
penetrate and are the largest: thus the first formed bones are
either pairs for life, viz. the clavicles, upper jaw and femur; or
at first, as the lower jaw and frontal. In odd bones, the lateral


$72 GROWTH OF


parts are equally formed the first : for instance, the arches before
the bodies of the vertebre ; the lateral parts before the cuneiform
of the os occipitis ; the wings before the body of the sphenoid ;
and the lateral masses before the perpendicular plate of the
ethmoid. The sacrum, however, is an exception, as its body is
ossified before its arches. Certain odd bones are, therefore, pairs
at first. Ossification always commences within, and spreads gra-
dually outwards, except in the last phalanges, which first ossify at
their summits. !

The bony substance continues to be of a greyish red and
flexible in the foetus; and the blood-vessels diminish as it ap-
proaches its full term. The periosteum is thicker, more vas-
cular, and more easily detached than in the adult. No bone,
at first, has its future permanent form. The cavities of the long
bones, and that of the tympanum, increase with the substance;
proving that there is a continual absorption and formation.

The epiphyses, while cartilaginous, are continuous with the
body of the future bone; and only separate from it, when both,
having ossified, come in contact and the periosteum adheres
strongly to the surface of each. The concave surface of the
epiphysis rests upon the convex surface of the shaft, from which
it receives large blood-vessels ; and, ultimately, the two parts
become one.

When there is an articulation, ossification does not extend to
the extremity; but the last layer of cartilage remains unchanged,
to become the articular cartilage. A medullary cavity is seen
early in the long bones, and is soon closed at its ends by bone, after
which cells are at length produced full of reddish and gelatinous
substance. There is no cancellated structure or marrow in the
flat bones during feetal life. At the full time, the superior cornua
of the os hyoides, the patella, the lower portion of the coccyx, the
four upper carpal bones, and the great and little quadratum, are still
cartilaginous. In other bones, certain points only of ossification
have not yet appeared: for instance, at the perpendicular plate of
the ethmoid; the processes of the scapula; the upper end of the hu-
merus and phalanges ; the lower end of the tibia, metacarpal, and
metatarsal bones; the upper end and trochanters of the femur ;
the posterior end of the ribs; both ends of the radius, ulna, and
fibula; the body of the atlas. Some bones are still ununited:
the frontal, ethmoid, lower jaw, humerus, and femur, are in 2


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 873


pieces ; the sphenoid, ilia, and vertebra, in 3 ; the sacrum, in 21].
The bones of the ear only are perfect.

The basis of the skeleton is the bodies of the vertebrae and the
analogous portions of the cranial bones. The spine begins to ossify
at its middle; so that, about the tenth week, the 8 lowest dorsal and
4 upper lumbar vertebrze exist; in the eleventh week, the 3 lower
cervical, 4 upper dorsal, and 5th lumbar are added; in the fourth
month, the 3d and 4th cervical, and 4 superior sacral; at six
months, the 5th sacral; at the seventh, the 2d cervical ; at ten
months, the atlas and Ist coccygeal bone. The cranial vertebre
begin to ossify about the same time ; but from before backwards.
The first bony points appear at the third month, in the cuneiform
process of the occipital bone; at the fourth, in the posterior
sphenoid (middle cranial vertebra); at the seventh, in the anterior
sphenoid (anterior cranial vertebra). The spine is at first very
flat in front, and does not project forward till the end of the
second month. The bodies grow more slowly than the arches;
so that the vertebra are at first more annular than subsequently.
The spinal and cranial vertebre at first constitute the whole
length of the body, and do this less and less only as the legs
push forth. The base of the cranium is long gelatinous; at the
end of the second month it becomes cartilaginous, and contracts
upon itself as the cerebral parts become more concentrated. The
lower part of the spine, or the tail, precedes the limbs, and is
greatly developed at two months; but, as it is not destined for
any function in man, it diminishes at this time during cartila-
ginification, and becomes lost in the parts of the pelvis which
now develope themselves.

The muscles are visible at the end of the second month, gela-
tinous, pale, yellowish, and transparent. Granulations of the
primordial mass are disposed in lines, which afterwards lie closer
together, and form filaments that gradually become smooth
transparent cylinders, with traces of transverse strix after the
sixth month, at which time they begin to be thicker and reddish.
The fibres subsequently divide into fibrils. Between the muscles
and their fibres, globules are seen, which become cellular mem-
brane. Tendons are produced in the same manner as muscles, but
earlier, and are seen as viscid transparent cylinders while the
muscular substance is still granular. In monsters with neither en-
cephalo-spinal organ nor nerves, there are no muscles, but merely


874 GROWTH OF


a sort of gelatinous spongy cellular substance; and, if a portion
only of the encephalo-spinal organ is developed, the muscles are
developed at certain points only. The muscles appear at different
periods in different regions of the body; but each appears at first
of its whole length.

The nerves have been said by some to shoot inwards from the
circumference to the encephalo-spinal organ; and, by others, from
this to the circumference. The optic, auditory, and olfactory
nerves, or rather the organ of sense of which they form a part,
arise from portions of the brain. These three nerves are original
tubular projections from the ventricles of the brain. The rest of
the brain may be absent, and yet the fundamental portion which
gives rise to these be present, as well as the respective organs of
sense with their nerves. The particular fundamental portion may
be present, and yet not develope itself into the apparatus of sense.
It would appear, also, that the apparatus of these three senses may
be more or less developed without apparent connection with the
brain. Morgagni once found perfect eyes with their optic nerve
terminating in the orbits, and only two small masses existing
instead of brain. Here the points of communication with the
brain had atrophied long before, and yet the developement of the
nerve, &c. had still gone on. A solid membrane full of fluid, in
place of an eye, has been found without any nerve. From all these
facts,some consider that the portion of the organ of sense nearer
the brain and that which is distant are more or less independent,
but still have a relation to each other so as to form together
a perfect organ, though without farther influence from the brain.
Foetuses, destitute of brain and spinal chord, with rudiments of
feet and toes, nay, single limbs, have existed, and yet no nerves
have been discernible. Now, when nerves exist, we cannot sup-
pose that they have sprouted into the limbs from the chord, or
the converse. Again, in proportion as organs grow, do their
nerves grow thicker by the multiplication of their fibres. Thus
the fifth pair has 18 chords at eight months; and 28 or 30 at birth.
In acephalic foetuses, the spinal nerves sometimes cease at a short
distance : sometimes the nerves of the limbs cease at the mem-
brane of the chord: sometimes a nerve is absent for a consider-
able part of its course. All this makes it probable that all the
points of the nerves form more or less independently, and unite
harmoniously into a whole.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 875 .


The encephalic nerves are larger proportionally to the brain
in the fcetus than in the adult. At the fourth and fifth month, the
great sympathetic is more developed than the other nerves,
and its ganglia are so large as almost to touch and form an unin-
terrupted series: after the sixth month, it diminishes and acquires
nearly its permanent proportions.

From these elements, with blood-vessels and lymphatics,
the peripheral portion of the animal is formed. ‘This comprises
two parts; the common, or parietal, and the special, which is
divided into two classes of organs.

The posterior part of the parietal, or that which encloses the
encephalo-spinal organ, appears the first, beginning at the sides
and extending to the median line till junction is effected. The
anterior is that which encloses the viscera destined for the main-
tenance of the encephalo-spinal organ. This cavity communicates
with the fcetal coverings, is formed late, and continues in relation
with them by means of the umbilicus. The anterior part of the
parietal is a portion of the serous layer originally applied to the
vascular and mucous: and when these, by contracting more
powerfully than it, separate from it, a cavity is left. It also begins
at the sides, and extends to the centre till junction is effected.
Like the posterior part of the parietal, it forms osseous arches at
the chest (ribs), but less after a fixed type, for they are absent in
the neck and abdomen and are united into a mass below (pelvis).

At some points the anterior parietal detaches itself inwards,
and forms a septum (diaphragm); or, with the developements of the
mucous layer, becomes a muscular layer (the tongue and velum
palati); or developes itself in the form of a cartilaginous apparatus
provided with muscles (the larynx and trachea). The posterior
parietal here and there, also, emits prolongations, as the lower
spinous processes and septum of the nose.

The anterior cavity assumes a particular form in the different
regions. 1. The neck, being at first as broad as the tr unk, ap-
pears not to exist. The eit is enclosed in it, as we find to
be permanently the case with fish When the heart descends .
and tubular parts only exist between the head and trunk, the
anterior parietal shrinks at this point, a sort of strangling takes
place, and we see a cylindrical neck. At the fourth month,
when the larynx, thyreoid, and thymus are chiefly developed, the
transverse processes grow more at the cervical than at the other

3M


876 GROWTH OF


vertebrae. The ribs appear as white streaks in the walls of the
chest during the sixth week. In the eighth, they divide into two
cartilaginous portions, only one of which ossifies. This it does
rapidly, but not beyond the head and tuberosity during feetal life.
The sternum is very short in the eighth week, and consists of two
cartilages, one of which is persistent, —the ensiform. The dia-
phragm does not exist before the third month, and has few muscular
fibres till the fourth. The tendinous part for some time constitutes
a great proportion of it, and is closely united with the pericardium.
Jn the seventh week only do the abdominal parietes become opake.
The navel, at the beginning of the second month, is almost at
the lower extremity of the trunk, and is situated proportionally
higher up when the hypogastric region becomes developed at
the end of the month. It constantly diminishes in proportion to
the body, although absolutely larger from the increasing diameter
of the umbilical vessels. A cartilage appears on each side in the
eighth week, as the rudiment of the pelvis, which is developed in
direct proportion to the contained organs.

The organs of the peripheral portion of the second zone
of the serous layer are those of sensibility and of irritability. They
are disposed to be in pairs; and in the monocular pulex, which has
but one eye, there are two originally. They are closely related
to each other, for the limbs are organs of sense ; and in the lower
animals the organs of sense are formed like limbs. The organs
of sense and the limbs are, as it were, radiating organs ; those of
the brain, these of the spinal chord; produced by a harmony be-
tween the encephalo-spinal organ and the peripheral portion of
the second zone of the serous layer. The organs of sense spring
from an encephalo-spinal nucleus and a peripheral deposition
from this second zone of the serous layer, and the limbs from this
peripheral zone and are subsequently brought into relation with
the spinal chord by nerves,

The eyes are the first organs of sense. They soon grow very
large proportionally, and do not diminish till near the full time.
- The optic nerve is a fine gelatinous band in the sixth week; a
hollow cylinder in the third and fourth month, communicating
with the ventricles of the brain; and is not solid till to-
wards the seventh month. The retina is originally thick, floc-
culent, and folded. The interior of the eye, circumscribed
by the retina, and continuous at first with the encephalic


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 877


cavity, is lined by the hyoloid membrane. The lens is at first
spherical, and so bulky in the embryo of six weeks as to fill the
eye and touch the cornea, which is flat. It is at first a liquid in
a very vascular capsule. The vitreous body is formed after-
wards; and then the chorioid, as a continuation of the vascular
layer, between the central and peripheral productions of the serous
layer in the eye. Black and yellow spots of pigment are de-
posited in it from before backwards at six weeks; at three or
four months, its anterior edge folds, and forms the ciliary body ;
at five months, the ciliary processes appear. Soon after this the
iris comes from the anterior edge of the chorioid, which till now
formed the pupil. The anterior chamber is gradually produced ;
and in its interior a close serous vesicle, the front of which lines
the cornea, and the posterior covers the iris and blocks up the
pupil, and unites with a membranous layer bound to the back of
the iris. At the eighth month, the part of it in the pupil,—mem-
brana pupillaris, not being able to follow the growth of the iris,
becomes tense and lacerates. Before this event, the posterior
chamber scarcely exists. Miiller has discovered a close sac, ex-
tending from the anterior chamber of the eye, passing through
the pupil to the edge and back of the crystalline, and named
capsulo-pupillary membrane, which has only a transitory exist-
ence, and such a double follicle is supposed to give origin to the
crystalline. The secretion into the serous membrane becomes so
abundant in the fourth month, as to render the cornea more pro-
minent. ‘The sclerotic is at first transparent, and gradually be-
comes firm and fibrous. At the third month, its anterior segment
begins to become prominent and pellucid, as a cornea. The eyes
are at first very prominent, and at the sides of the head, as in
brutes. ‘They begin to retire into the head at the third month,
as the orbits form ; and they become situated in front as the head
grows broader. The muscles of the eye appear at the third month,
as gelatinous chords. At the second month, the skin passes over
the eye. At the beginning of the third month, a fold forms at
the front ef the eye, like a ring; and, before the end, is con-
verted into perfect eyelids, glued together. The conjunctiva is
then a vesicle. The eyelids separate in the seventh or eighth
month, at the time the membrana pupillaris disappears. The eye-
lashes appear towards the ninth month.

According to Baer, the central part of the auditory apparatus —

3M 2


878 GROWTH OF


—


begins, soon after the eye, as a hollow cylinder, from the side of
the chorda oblongata. This cylinder solidifies nearest the chord,
and becomes the acoustic nerve, and its posterior portion remains
hollow. The labyrinth is first formed ; and the vestibule is, pro-
bably, the primitive part, dividing into cochlea and semicircular
canals, which are perfectly formed at the beginning of the third
month, lined by a membrane which disappears in the seventh
month. Around the labyrinth a jelly is deposited, which at the
commencement of the third month becomes cartilage, distinct
from the petrous portion, beginning to ossify before it, entirely os-
sified in the eighth month, and afterwards united with the petrous
portion. Ossification begins at the end of the third month, in
the three parts of the labyrinth at once: in the cochlea at the
fenestra rotunda, proceeding forwards, reaching the spiral lamina
the last; in the vestibule at the fenestra ovalis; and of the
semicircular canals the superior ossifies first, then the posterior,
and at the fifth month the external. The Eustachian tube
is at first very large, and is invested with cartilage at the
third month. The cavity of the tympanum is proportionally
small, and filled with a reddish thick fluid. A wart at its back
part is said to produce the anvil and hammer; a second wart
produces the stirrup. The cartilaginification of these begins
early in the third month, in the hammer and anvil, and then in
the stirrup. Ossification soon follows in the two former, and
first in the hammer ; and is finished in the seventh month. At the
tenth month, these bones have attained their permanent size.
The frame of the tympanum appears in the second month ; its
ossification begins at the end of the third. It is long open at its
upper and front part, grows till the eighth month, is round, after-
wards broader and more elliptical, and at last unites at its ex-
tremities with the malar portion of the temporal bone. The
membrana tympani is proportionally greater, more rounded,
and oblique downwards and inwards, than in the adult; as well as
nearer the surface, since the meatus auditorius does not yet
exist. The external orifice of the ear is discernible in the sixth
week, near the corner of the mouth, as a mere point or oblong
depression which becomes the meatus. In the eleventh week,
this is closed by a sort of membranous plug in contact with the
membrana tympani. The outer ear begins in the eighth week as
a fold of integument, which is flat during the ninth week and


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 879


begins to become cartilage at the end of the third month. The
middle of the helix and antitragus appear first, then the tragus
and antihelix ; at the fifth month, the concha; at the sixth, the
upper part of the helix and the lobule. After this, it begins to
stand more from the head: at the tenth month, it is rather firm;
but cartilage does not yet completely fill the fold of skin.

The limbs, at six weeks, are round tubercles, which are deeply
attached at one point and free at the other. The gelatinous
germs of the tubercles come from the sides of the vertebral
column. They are at first thick, and grow slender as they
lengthen; but are not rounded till the latter months. The
tubercular portions of the thigh and arm continue for a long
time applied to the trunk under the skin, as is permanently
the case in most mammalia, without a cylindrical covering
from this. After the fingers and toes are separated from each
other, they are still covered with, as it were, a mitten of skin,
which gradually disappears between the fingers, so that its edge
at first seems notched ; and, when it begins to detach itself, the
fingers are united by fine cutaneous expansions.

When the gelatinous nucleus has attained a certain length, it
divides into many segments produced by condensation and con-
striction ; but this division is not complete, on account of the syno-
vial capsules, ligaments, and skin, which bind together and insulate
the individual portions. The division is, at first, into a cylindrical
and flat portion. The flat (hand, foot) is terminated by a rounded
point. At length the cylindrical divides into trunk and branch ;
and the latter (forearm, leg) continues for some time short in
comparison with the flat part. Some one or more of these
divisions may not take place, so that the carpus may not exist
between the forearm and metacarpus; the forearm may join
the scapula; or the hand be seen without fore or upper arm: for
one part does not shoot from another. When the limbs begin
thus to divide, the clavicles, and scapula, and pelvic bones appear
at their roots. Ossification begins earlier in the clavicles than
in the scapule and pelvis; in the femur and humerus, than in the
bones of the leg and forearm; and earlier in these than in the
metacarpus, metatarsus, fingers, and toes; and in these, than in
the carpus and tarsus. The limbs at first differ in situation only.
The upper extremities appear at a much more early period
before the lower than in brute mammalia; and the enlargements of

oi NGS


$89 GROWTH OF


the spinal chord for their nerves are greater than those for the
nerves of the lower. The clavicle is ossified in the seventh week,
and is for some time the largest bone, four times larger than the
femur. The scapula ossifies soon afterwards. The ilia not till the
fourth month, at which time the pelvis is very narrow, and the
shoulders pretty well developed. At the end of the tenth month,
the breadth of the great trochanters is 34 or 34 inches; while that of
the shoulders is 44 or 44 inches. Jn the eighth week, the femur is
still under the skin, while the humerus is free. The metatarsus
ossifies after the metacarpus: the toes ossify and divide after the
fingers. Nevertheless the femoral and tarsal bones, being re-
quired for support, ossify before the humeral and carpal. At
the fourth month, the lower extremities are as strong as the
upper; and at the fifth, more muscular, for the nates are
sketched, the thighs are more fleshy, and the calves project. The
limbs are at first perfectly extended, like the shoots of plants.
But, when the muscles are developed, they become bent: the arm
lies against the chest, the forearm is directed upwards and in-
wards; the thigh lies against the abdomen, the leg against the thigh,
the foot against the leg; the fingers close in the twelfth week ;
the hands are applied to the chest and lower part of the face;
the feet cross, with the sole turned inwards towards the genitals.
There remains another peripheral portion of the serous layer,
seen in the fowl to be reflected from the sides of the yet un-
closed anterior parietes, and to proceed towards the posterior
surface of the embryo, there to be constricted towards the centre,
and then be reflected outwards again, and apply itself to the
membrane of the yelk: an opening is thus left in it at the back
of the embryo, which is at length closed by the approximation of
its edges. The amnion isthus produced. The outer layer, which
comes from the edges of the opening in the amnion (and is called
by Pander the false amnion), covers the amnion, extends to the
outer edge of the membrana proligera, and ultimately unites
with the allantoid. The same process, more or less modified,
probably goes on in the human ovum at a proportionally early
period. The amnion, like all other serous membranes, is a
bladder consisting of two parts. The external — properly the
amnion—is turned towards the chorion, and reflected along the
chord, as a sheath, till it reaches the surface of the child, which
it envelopes just as the pericardium does the heart, being con-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 881


tinuous with the skin. The chord is at first short and thick, en-
closing the vesicula umbilicalis, the middle part of the alimentary
canal, the allantoid, and the omphalo-iliac vessels. It afterwards
lengthens, loses its thickness, and contains these vessels only, with
the remains of the umbilical vesicle and allantoid. Its continu-
ation with the skin is easily shown, since the latter for some time
preserves its serous character.

Tue Mucous LAyvER.— This grows immediately around the yelk
in birds, as the vitellary membrane did before its absorption, be-
comes the vitellary sac, and is gradually converted into the ali-
mentary canal. The umbilical vesicle of mammals corresponds
perfectly with the vitellary sac; and the mucous layer has always
been seen in mammalia in the form of a vesicle, and therefore pro-
bably from the first enclosed the original embryotrophe as a vesicle,
since the original embryotrophe in them, corresponding with the
yelk of birds, is so inconsiderable that a small vesicle may contain
it, on account of the body of the mother supplying the nourish-
ment, whereas in birds the yelk becomes very large, in order to
afford nourishment during the whole time of incubation. Burdach
gives the name zntestinal vesicle to the umbilical vesicle and that
elongation of it which becomes the alimentary canal. In birds, the
yelk, soon after its production, becomes covered with the vitellary
membrane through which additions to its substance pass ; for
yelk globules have been seen outside the membrane in progress
to the yelk within. The white also penetrates to it through the
vitellary membrane or the mucous layer which supplies its place.
The umbilical vesicle and its contents in mammalia grow con-
siderably before the appearance of the embryo or its vascular
system; and this must therefore be by absorption through it;
and its contents cannot therefore be secreted by the omphalo-
mesenteric vessels. In vertebrate animals, the vesicle becomes
divided by a circular lateral fold into two parts,—the one internal,
below the spine and cranium, elongating itself more and more, and
persistent ; the other nearer the front, continuing to havea more or
less globular form, and wasting away in time. The folding takes
place sooner at the upper and lower parts than at the sides, so
that first an oral and anal portion of the alimentary canal are
produced: then the folding proceeds at the centre, and the
middle or small intestine is produced ; and of course at its centre
is a communication with the portion which remains globular,

3M 4


882 GROWTH OF


The opening of communication gradually narrows, and the part
of the intestinal vesicle next it lengthens, so that a vitello-intes-
tinal canal forms. All the process is presumed to be nearly the
same in man; in whom the opening of communication has been
seen by Velpeau and Miiller, and Tiedemann has seen in the
human umbilical chord of a feetus, though of low developement
at many points, at full time, a pyriform vesicle above 14 lines
long, and 7 broad, opening into the intestine by a pretty broad
canal, 35 lines in length. In man, the vesicle always remains
just outside the abdominal cavity in the chord, and becomes
more distant as the chord grows. In oviparous animals, as
soon as the vesicle around the yelk is completed, it ceases to
grow; but in mammalia it continues to grow, and acquires a
dimension of 6 lines in man. After the intestine is formed,
the vitello-intestinal opening is closed and the tube obliterated,
and the contents of the vesicle can be only absorbed by the
omphalo-mesenteric veins, which continue to the third month,
and be carried to the vena porte and cava inferior. In birds,
these changes do not occur till after hatching ;_ because, pre-
viously to this, the yelk is not consumed and a way into
the intestine must be left for it. In mammalia, the canal is
obliterated about the fifth week, according to Velpeau. The
canal narrows and closes at first nearest the intestine; and at
length the tube becomes a mere filament, and then disappears
altogether. The umbilical vesicle loses its fluid and disappears
in man after the second or third month.

The two extremities of the alimentary canal are formed the
first, and are originally closed. But the walls grow thin and are
absorbed at the ends, and thus the mouth and anus are produced.
Meckel saw a mouth open at three points only, the rest of the
membrane being entire. The mouth forms in the sixth week,—a
week earlier than the anus. The anus is at first immediately be-
hind the genitals; and, towards the twelfth week, it is a slit sepa-
rate from these by the perineum. The integuments of the body
harmonise by opening at the same time. The margins of the
openings are, for some time, distant from each other.

The intestine grows so much in length, that it is, for a
time, longer, proportionally, than in the adult. As the ab-
domen is too short for it, convolutions are produced; and, as
it is the middle portion which outstrips the growth of the


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 883


spine, this does not, like the pharynx, cesophagus, and end of the
rectum, retain its original situation, but leaves the spine, and, till
the abdomen has grown large enough for it, is partly contained in
the chord. At first the walls are homogeneous ; but gradually,
though at avery early period, divide into a mucous and muscular
coat, between which a layer of cellular membrane is developed.
Valentin asserts that, in brute mammalia, the first inner coat is a
sort of epithelium, softens, and is rejected, leaving the villi now in
sight ; and that these are nearly as large at first as they are sub-
sequently, though set more closely together, and seen every
where. After the third month he adds that in the large intestine
they become less elevated; in the fourth, less conical and nume-
rous ; till, at the eighth month, there exist slightly elevated and
serrated longitudinal folds only. Traces of the valvule conniventes
are not discernible till towards the seventh month.

Like all other serous membranes, the peritoneum lies as a
gelatinous plaster on the organs and parietes; is at first thick and
soft, and gradually becomes thin and firm. It appears to grow
from the spine forwards, on each side, till it reaches the median
line, where it closes, as all serous membranes do.

Contractions take place in certain parts, — the seat of the
pylorus and ilio-cecal valve, dividing the canal into an oral, a
middle, and an anal portion,—stomach, small and large intestines:
dilatations take place in others, so that we have the pharynx,
stomach, and cecum. The small intestine is produced the last, and,
from its situation, is the longest united with the umbilical vesicle ;
and it is united nearly at its middle in vertebrate animals, though
in mammalia rather nearer to the large intestine. The small intes-
tine is at first as broad as the large; it afterwards has even greater
dimensions ; and ultimately grows narrower. It is at first shorter,
proportionally to the large intestine. The large intestine is at first
proportionally longer and broader than the small. Its develope-
ment proceeds from the lower to the higher portions : except that
the caecum begins as a tubercle at the junction of the colon and
ilium in the seventh week, while the beginning of the large in-
testine is still in the chord; that the ilio-cecal valve appears in the
third month also, while, at the fourth month, the rectum is dis-
tinguishable from the colon by its greater capacity only, and at the
fitth by the sigmoid flexure of the colon, and in the seventh month
by only the constriction which separates the caecum from the colon.


884 GROWTH OF


The appendix vermiformis appears about the tenth week, nearly as
large as the small intestine, and proportionally longer than in the
adult. In the fourth week, it grows narrow and convoluted, and
afterwards shortens. About the end of the third month, a large
quantity of mucous fluid, clear, acid, and destitute of albumen, is
found in the stomach. In the upper portion of the small intestine,
and in the choledochus, a chymous-looking pap, consisting of al-
bumen ; and meconium of a greenish brown is afterwards found
in the small intestines, but not till after the fifth month. The
meconium becomes darker, and at Jast accumulates in the rectum.
Thus, in the foetus, its own secretions are digested, and partly de-
composed and absorbed.

The large blind extremity of the stomach, the cecum, and
appendix vermiformis are so many great local growths of the
alimentary canal. The salivary glands, pancreas, and liver
are produced in the same ovary; but the elongation, in these
cases, divides into a large number of branches, supplied with
blood-vessels and nerves, and all united into a mass by cel-
lular membrane. The pyloric appendages of fish, and the salivary
and biliary vessels of insects, are, in truth, simple bare tubes thus
produced, and not divided into branches. The salivary glands
and pancreas spring from a little mass at the outer side of the
alimentary canal, in which one or two tubes communicating
together, small, and somewhat dilated at their extremity, are
seen. These canals divide laterally into branches, each of which
has also a somewhat dilated extremity; and this ultimately grows
into a vesicle, and becomes milk-white, while the rest of the tube
remains translucent like opal. In the mean time, the branch
elongates, sends forth others, and these, again, others, till we have
a tree, with vesicular dilatations of the extremities of its branches.
The quantity of primordial substance which is converted into
these continues to increase; and saliva is found in the vesicular
extremities. Valentin has observed that the formation of the
gland is accelerated by the production of firm bands at some dis-
tance from the principal tube, which grow towards it, unite with
it, become hollow, and subdivide like the others.

The formation of the liver is too early and rapid for us to have
hitherto observed it in mammalia; but in other animals it has
been seen as two separate prolongations of the intestine, which
in certain kinds unite perfectly, so that the two orifices become


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 885


one. On this account, the left lobe of the human liver is long, nearly
as large as the right, and the fissure in the median line. As the
ramifications multiply and are enveloped in primordial matter,
many lobules are observed at first, which afterwards mingle.
The blood-vessels multiply. The substance at the third month
is a greyish pap; afterwards firmer, granular, and of a dark red,
more charged with blood than after birth, from receiving till
then a Jarge quantity of the blood of the umbilical vein. The
organ soon becomes proportionally enormous, and gradually
lessens again. Its weight is to that of the rest of the body, at
the end of the first month, as 1 to 3; at the full time, as 1 to
18 ; whereas in the adult it is as 1 to 36. In the first month, it
occupies the lower half of the trunk, as the heart does the upper:
at the second month, it extends to the ilia; at the third month,
the left lobe does not extend so low; and in the fourth, not so
much to the left side. These changes arise from the diminished
growth of the organ, first in the left lobe, and afterwards in the
right, especially after the fifth month; the alteration of its
position from the perpendicular to the horizontal; and the en-
largement of the capacity of the abdomen.

The gall-bladder is a mere dilated extremity of a branch of the
bile-duct, is formed the last, and is sometimes absent when the liver
is perfectly developed. Its late formation causes it to remain
outside the liver, and to dilate very slowly ; and the biliary duct, not
being surrounded by primitive matter, does not subdivide. It is
an empty canal in the second and third month, and is almost
cylindrical during the whole of fcetal life; after the fourth month
it contains mucus, and in the seventh only does it admit bile,
though this had begun to flow into the intestine after the fourth
month. The orifices of the ducts of the pancreas and liver are
originally distinct.

The lungs are projections from the esophagus. In brute
mammalia, a short but broad canal, ending in a proportionally
very small vesicle, is seen. This vesicle has a slight sinuosity at
its back part, and is thus divided into two chambers, which do
not communicate. These become lungs, and the canal which
united them to the cesophagus is transformed into larynx and
trachea. The bronchie are produced by the two chambers not
growing so much where the trachea is continuous with them as in
other parts. This small part afterwards elongates, a few puffy


886 GROWTH OF


plaits are seen in the walls of the vesicle, which grow into
hollow warts, and render the surface uneven. As these elongate,
others spring from their sides, which at length acquire bulbous
extremities. A quantity of primordial substance envelopes the
whole of these subdivisions, unites them, furnishes a matrix for
the innumerable blood-vessels, and at length becomes the cellular
tissue of the lungs. For some time, this so unites all together that
the two lungs appear to be one mass. The lungs are originally
situated above the heart, at the lower part of the cesophagus : they
then move backwards. For a long while, the pleurz are not
filled by them, and contain a good deal of seram, which lessens
just before birth. The weight cf the lungs to that of the rest of
the body, during the ninth and tenth week, is as 1 to 25 or 27;
during the tweifth, as 1 to 43; at the tenth month, as 1 to 75.
They are at first proportionally heavier, and subsequently lighter,
than in the adult, because they grow more spongy, and they
receive less blood than after birth.

The trachea is at first firmly attached to the cesophagus. Its
branches become absolutely and relatively longer; its cavity
augments ; its walls grow firmer and thinner. It divides into two
layers, the internal of which becomes the mucous coat, and car-
tilaginous rings are developed in the external. These, at first,
cannot be separated. The external condenses into a series of
small transverse strie, which lengthen laterally till they touch at
the back. The gelatine condenses more and more, till the strice
become cartilage, and the intervening portion is converted to
fibrous membrane. The internal coat becomes less connected
with the external, and for some time forms a cylinder which may
be drawn out of the external: it then acquires the character of
mucous membrane, and is again intimately united with the ex-
ternal coat. The branches of the trachea are at first very short
proportionally to their trunk: cartilage forms in them much later
than in the trachea. The larynx is originally much broader and
thicker than the trachea; but soon lessens in both respects. It
is at first nearly spherical, and fora long time a homogeneous jelly.
The rudiments of the thyreoid appear in the seventh week: and
then those of the cricoid, from two lateral germs. They are
two irregularly rounded plates in the case of the thyreoid, which
gradually approach each other at their lower edges till they
unite in the fourth month: the angles of the cartilage elongate


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 887


at the same time into horns. They are short narrow plates in the
case of the cricoid, and unite later than those of the thyreoid.
The arytenoid cartilages do not appear till the two others have
acquired a considerable developement. Two long swellings next
appear on the sides of the larynx, in which the upper halves of
the arytenoids and the ligaments of the glottis form. Before it
becomes cartilaginous, the walls of the larynx are thick, and its
cavity augments slowly. The epiglottis does not exist at first,
and the glottis is perfectly open.

The upper part of the mucous layer, having become
tubular, represents a single blind cavity, below the front of the
cranium, and afterwards divides, by the formation of the palate,
into a nasal and buccal cavity. The mucous membrane splits, and
the anterior parietes open, so that these cavities open externally.

The vestiges of the xostrils appear as rounded depressions, at
some distance from each other, in the fifth week: they open in
the latter part of the second month ; at the same time the nose
rises above them, and the nasal begins to separate from the buccal
cavity. In the third month, the nostrils are closed with a mem-
branous plug, which disappears about the fifth month. The
mouth appears in the sixth week, as a slit almost from ear to
ear, without lips, which begin to be distinguishable in the third
month, and afterwards enlarge, the lower later than the upper,
close the mouth, whose slit is now proportionally smaller, and
open again in the sixth month.

In the seventh week, the tongue proceeds from the mucous
membrane at the base of the mouth, and is a merely granular
substance : at the beginning of the third month, it is very volumi-
nous and flat, and projects from the mouth: at four months, it
enters the mouth again, becomes thicker, and acquires papilla,
which are then proportionally larger than afterwards. At the
upper part of the buccal canal, two projections of the membrane
take place, which unite in the median line and lengthen backwards
to form the velum of the palate.

The formation of the teeth begins with the third month, in the
loose tissue of the jaws, by a series of whitish vesicles, placed side
by side, and separated by a spongy structure. At the middle
period of foetal existence, fibrous partitions are seen between them,
which ossify into alveole. These vesicles are covered by the car-
tilage of the gums at the alveolar border of the jaw, and at their


888 GROWTH OF


other extremity receive vessels and nerves. Purkinje declares
them not to be fibrous, nor to be converted into the periosteum of
the alveola, but to consist of soft fibres and a granular parenchyma,
with a vascular network and abundant nerves, and to be only
united with the periosteum : their internal surface is smooth, like
serous membrane. Within them, towards the end of the third
month, at their lower part, a soft greyish substance, which is at
first purely granular and covered by a simple transparent mem-
brane, but afterwards receives vessels and nerves, and is the dental
pulp, grows up; and between this germ and the vesicle lies the
organ of the enamel, — an almost globular nucleus, of granular
substance, which subsequently is mingled with angular corpuscles
united by cellular tissue. A limpid fluid is observed between the
germ and the organ of the enamel and between this and the ve-
sicle, containing mucus, albumen, phosphate of lime, hydro-chlo-
rates, and sulphates, and a free acid, which is ultimately replaced
by an alcali. The quantity of phosphate of lime continually in-
creases, whereas the fluid diminishes and at length ceases altoge-
ther. As the germ increases, it penetrates the organ of the enamel,
which at length becomes merely a fine envelope, and produces,
on its internal surface, the membrane of the enamel, consisting of
a layer of perpendicular fibres. Ossification begins in the fourth
or fifth month by layers deposited on the dental germ, from
without inwards, and at the summit first, and extending to the
roots. At this time, the germ shrinks. According to Purkinje,
the dental substance consists of canals bent repeatedly on them-
selves, hollow as long as they do not lengthen by fresh deposits,
and at last filled with a peculiar yellowish substance. He states,
likewise, that, when ossification begins, enamel becomes deposited
in perpendicular fibres, from within outwards, neither brilliant
nor so hard as itis afterwards. Each tooth is formed at the same
time with its fellow on the other side. As the lower jaw has a little
the start of the upper, its partitions and teeth are the first deve-
loped. At first, the teeth appear in the order of their proximity
to the median line ; afterwards, in the order of their size. For
the first, or milk teeth, there are 16 vesicles in the third month ;
8 for the incisors, and 8 for the anterior molars; and, at the
beginning of the fourth month, 4 for the canine. Ossification
begins at the fifth month, first in the internal incisor, then in the
external; next in the anterior molar, the canine, and second


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 889


molar. The nerves and vessels enter them by a particular canal,
situated below the permanent canal. Other branches, connected
with the preceding, determine the production of the second set
of teeth, the rudiments of which form while the first set is deve-
loping. Their vesicles grow at the back of the first fibrous
vesicles ; and, when they are as large as a pin’s head, they rest
immediately upon the latter, without their cavities communi-
cating. As they grow, they become distant from them, though
still connected by a filament, and plunge more deeply into the
jaw. Gradually, osseous matter is deposited between the two
sets, and converted into a canal above that of the first set. Par-
titions also are developed between them. At the tenth month,
the crowns of the incisors are complete, and the roots of the inner
incisors begin; a third only of the crown of the canine is seen ;
the upper part of that of the first molar, with its points, is formed;
the four points of the crown of the second molar are not yet
united ; ossification has in general begun in the crown of the third
molar of the second set, but the others are still vesicles, nor all
of them, perhaps, supplied with germ.

THE VASCULAR LAyER.— The vascular layer, which adheres
more strongly to the serous than to the mucous layer, perhaps
because formed from the latter and attracted to the other, is dis-
tinguished by its large and perfectly transparent granulations, so
compacted as to be flattened at many points. The basis of the
vascular system begins at two separate points; at the extreme
surface, — the coverings of the ovum, which are the most transi-
tory part (the sanguineous circle); and at the most internal,—the
commencement of the cavity of the body formed by the case of
the heart, which is the most permanent part. In the chick the
sanguineous circle begins at the sixteenth or twentieth hour —
a few hours before the heart, though without containing any liquid
blood, —and the heart about the twenty-seventh hour ;—both
being still a merely primordial mass. A harmony exists between
the two parts; for the heart has, from the very first, crura, to re-
ceive the veins of the umbilical vesicle, and these veins, from the
first, run inwards to unite with the heart. Neither the heart nor
arteries are at even the very first found empty. They and con-
tents appear to originate simultaneously.

Between the twentieth and thirty-sixth hour, the sanguineous
circle is formed ; then the heart ; and immediately blood appears,


’


890 GROWTH OF


but motionless. The heart is whitish, transparent, and still. After
the heart has divided into walls and fluid contents, it begins, in the
middle of the second day, in ten hours from its origin, to undu-
late, but neither receives nor expels blood, simply agitating its
colourless fluid, while a little red blood is already formed in the
sanguineous circle. After the middle of the second day, the
heart receives and expels, but there is no circulation." The
heart, by the dilatation of its crura, seems to attract the fluid
formed in the sanguineous circle: for a colourless current begins
in the central part of the membrana proligera, and not till after
this a red current in the peripheral part, —the sanguineous circle.
Omphalo-mesenteric veins form without arteries, and aorte without
vene cave. At the end of the second day, or the beginning
of the third, there is a simple circulation, —the blood flows
from the veins of the umbilical vesicle to the heart, and thence
into the aorta; and from the aorta through the arteries of the
umbilical vesicle into the sanguineous circle. Between the third
and sixth day, the aorta and vene cave ramify, so that a cir-
culation is established in the embryo itself, in addition to that
between it and the sanguineous circle: the aorta ramifies on the
branchial arches, and the vena porte in the liver.

The branchial vessels then disappear, the circulation of the
umbilical vesicle declines, and a second external circulation is
established with the allantoid. At length the blood streams less
to the allantoid and more proportionally towards the lungs, for
the commencement of a second internal circulation.

The heart is an oblong body, which becomes a sac by the
liquefaction of its axis. The upper part becomes arterial; the
lower, venous. ‘The walls of the arterial portion soon acquire
thickness and the rudiments of muscular structure ; but those of
the venous remain thin. The arterial portion divides into arterial
ventricle and aortic bulb; the venous into two segments merely,
—the one dilated, the other, which is the vencus trunk, rather
narrower. The organ elongates, and divides by two constrictions ;
one between the venous sac and the arterial ventricle, and the nar-


" “ About the fourth week, the motion of the heart has, under favourable cir-
cumstances, been observable in the human embryo, and even commonly been
denominated the punctum saliens, from the days of Aristotle, who observed it in
the incubated egg.” « Aristotle, Hist. Animal. 1. vi. c. 3. Opera, vol, ii. p. 326.”


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 891


rowed. portion is called auricular canal; the other, between the
arterial ventricle and the aortic bulb. The former afterwards,
probably, retires into the ventricle, and becomes the auriculo-
ventricular valve: the aortic bulb enters the substance of the
heart and becomes a portion of the two future ventricles, exactly
as the venous trunk becomes two auricles. The heart is next
divided longitudinally by constriction, from below upwards ; and,
till the fifth month, a depression is visible externally. The ven-
tricle is therefore the first divided; but a large Opening exists
up to the seventh week, which is obliterated after the second
month. The heart, at six weeks, has the same breadth as length ;
but, when the ventricular septum begins, it becomes more pointed
and conical. It is at first proportionally larger than in the adult,
and situated vertically. The right ventricle is at first smaller in
every direction than the left: but equals it in length at the sixth
month. The division of the auricles does not begin till about the
end of the second month, and at first leaves an opening, called
foramen ovale. The left auricle is at first smaller than the right,
but grows in the third month. The lining membrane of the inferior
cava is continuous with that of the auricles, and forms two folds,
— the valve of the foramen ovale, and the valve of Eustachius.
The right side of the heart is at first much larger than the left,
and does not begin to diminish before the middle of embryonic
life. The pericardium appears in the ninth week.

In the chick, the first vessels are the veins of the umbilical
vesicle; they spring from the primordial part of the vascular
system,—the sanguineous circle, which is an annular portion of
blood on the umbilical vesicle, without walls; and it is soon
converted into a vein (terminal sinus, or vein, or venous circle),
and then disappears. ‘The first blood is said to be a limpid se-
rosity, which grows yellow, acquires a few spherical red globules
that afterwards, by their multiplication, give the whole fluid ared
colour, and become ultimately flat and oblong in+the three lower
classes of vertebrated animals, in which, also, they are larger
during the fcetal than the adult state. The blood originates from
a primordial organic granular mass placed between the serous
and mucous layer, and derived probably from the yelk, since it
strongly resembles this, though a change must have been un-
dergone, because it is colourless and contains no oil. Its pas-
sage through the mucous layer gives a probability that the

3 N


892 GROWTH OF


mucous layer has both drawn it through and changed it.: San-
guification is thus preceded by another process, just as it is
after birth by chilification. Blood has also appeared in the midst
of the solids, where it could not have reached them from another
part. Doellinger saw a portion of the primordial mass of a fish
liquefy, and divide itself into a venous and an arterial current.
Haller saw first veins, then arteries, appear in the cerebral ves-
sels; and, in the limbs, first red points, then continuous red lines,
and at length coherent blood-vessels. Baer thought he perceived
in the villosities of the foetal placenta blood not contained in
walls, and therefore formed at the spot. The granular mass thus
liquefies, and changes into dlood, and vessels form about the
blood.

~ Thus blood is first formed in the umbilical vesicle, and is taken
up by the omphalo-mesenteric vessels; then it is formed in the
embryo, out of materials absorbed by the flocculi of the chorion
from the amniotic fluid, which has penetrated from the uterus,
and by the umbilical veins from the fluids of the maternal part of
the placenta. The venous circle either does not exist, or va-
nishes very early, in nearly all mammalia. The omphalo-mesen-
teric veins are soon joined by the corresponding arteries, which,
being the first branches of the aorta, arise from the embryo, and
become continuous with the veins. In mammal brutes, there are
but one artery and vein: the latter is larger than the artery. The
vein receives the mesenteric vein, and then opens into the trunk
of two veins called Cuvier’s ducts, which run to the jugulars. It,
at an early period, gives to the liver a posterior branch, which is
a branch of the vena porte, and receives an anterior branch,—the
hepatic veins. Afterwards, the vessels of the umbilical vesicle
perish, and the mesenteric only remain, which gradually lessen
till they are but a subordinate part of the digestive system. To
the simple circulation of the umbilical vesicle is soon added the
first internal cftculation, the aorta ramifying into the different
organs of the embryo, whence arise the roots of the vena cava;
but the formation of the arteries is determined by the cervical
branchie in a perfectly uniform manner in all vertebrata, per-
manent in fish, transitory in the higher kinds. The branchial ar-
teries are five in number, and form so many pairs of arches. In the
second month, two arterial trunks are seen. The superior (a) arises
from the left ventricle, and ramifies to the head, arms, and upper


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 893


part of the body: it is the ascending aorta, and probably the trunk
of the third vascular arch, and of the branches of all the three
highest arches. The lower trunk (6) arises from the right ventricle,
and goes in an arched form to the lower part of the body: it is
the descending aorta, and the remaining portion of the fourth
and fifth lower arches. The two trunks are united by a slender
anastomosing branch, — the remains of the root of the aorta that
formerly extended from the anterior vascular arches to the pos-
terior. In the eighth week, the lower arterial trunk, towards the
middle of its course between the heart and the insertion of the
anastomotic branch, begins to furnish branches (cc) to the lungs,


View of the vessels of a bird in the last third of embryonic
evistence,


The remaining vessels are represented fully figured :
the transitory are merely shaded. The shaded pyri-
form bag is the single aortic bulb that afterwards di-
vides into the two arterial trunks of aorta and pulmo-
nary artery. — (Baer. )


which are then developed, and the rest of its extent, from the
pulmonary branches to the anastomosing branch, has the name of
canalis arteriosus (d). Gradually, the pulmonary branches in-
crease, and receive a larger quantity of blood laterally, the cur-
rent diminishes in the canalis arteriosus, and this canal itself
diminishes ; but the anastomosing branch increases in the same
proportion, the descending aorta receiving more blood from the
Superior trunk. Thus the lower arterial trunk becomes the
pulmonary artery, its transition into descending aorta becomes
an anastomosing branch — the canalis arteriosus, which is oblite-
rated after birth, but the primordial anastomosing branch be-
comes the arch of the aorta, that is, the intermediate portion
between the ascending and descending aorta.

In the third period, while the internal circulation becomes
more or less obliterated, an external takes place. The two iliac
arteries, produced by the division of the descending aorta at its
lower end, leave the abdomen of the embryo under the name of
umbilical arteries, and spread on the surface of the ovum, form-

3N 2


894 GROWTH OF


ing the vascular membrane, termed endochorion. The blood
streams from the right ventricle into the descending aorta, con-
sequently into the lower half of the body and the endochorion,
whence it returns by the inferior cava into the left auricle; from
this it flows into the ascending aorta and the upper half of the
body, and is brought back by the superior cava into the right
ventricle. In fact, the blood of the inferior cava is driven
principally into the left auricle; first, because this vessel ex-
tends more to the left than to the right in the venous sac which
as yet is not divided, and consequently is directed still more
to the left auricle when the septum is formed; then because
the valve of Eustachius prevents the blood from running from
the inferior cava into the right ventricle, and directs it to-
wards the foramen ovale, and consequently towards the left
auricle; lastly, because when the apex of the heart turns to
the left in the fourth month, the foramen ovale is directed
more forwards, so that it is placed opposite the inferior cava.
Besides, the valve of the foramen ovale is pushed into the left
auricle by the blood of the right, so that the foramen opens wider,
while a pressure from the left auricle applies the valve to the sides
of the foramen and closes it. The blood of the superior cava
runs straight from the right auricle, along the valve of Eustachius,
into the right ventricle. If two differently coloured injections,
even, are passed simultaneously through the cave towards the
heart of a foetus not of full time, that which is transmitted through
the inferior is found in the left half of the heart and the ascend-
ing aorta; that from the superior goes entirely to the right ven-
tricle, pulmonary artery, and descending aorta. Towards the
end of foetal life, the foramen ovale grows smaller, and the orifice
of the inferior cava more distant from it; consequently, the blood
flows into the left auricle only when the right is filled up to the
two sides of the Eustachian valve. The pulmonary vessels be-
come more developed, so that less blood passes from the pul-
monary artery to the aorta; the canalis arteriosus becomes
proportionally narrower; the left auricle receives more blood
from the pulmonary veins; and all these changes gradually pre-
pare for the metamorphosis which the circulation undergoes at
birth.

The respiratory organs are productions of the mucous layer, or
external protrusions of the intestinal canal, united with corre-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 895


sponding productions of the vascular layer. For some time they
are near the surface of the body, but become deep-seated by de-
grees. Parallel slits exist in the neck of man and all other mam-
malia, as well as of fish and batrachians, leading into the cavity
of the throat: they begin soon after the formation of the heart,
about the fifth or sixth week, before the lungs, allantoid, or pla-
centa: at first there are mere grooves, and these grooves deepen
till they become slits and penetrate into the guttural cavity. At
each branchial arch, that is, at each band of granular substance
between two slits, there arrives a branch of the aorta, running
from before to the posterior end of the band; and afterwards
uniting with the analogous branches of the other branchial arches
of the same side, to produce a root of the aorta. From being per-
fectly bare, the branchie gradually become more or less covered
by a crop of granular matter, which proceeds from the head to-
wards the trunk, or by a trace of copercle consisting of skin itself.
In fish and batrachians, this formation proceeds further ; in higher
animals it stops here, the branchiz disappear and the slits close
after an existence of a few days.

. There are likewise abdominal branchie situated at the anal ex-
tremity of the alimentary canal. In some invertebrate animals they
are the only organs of respiration, and continue throughout life ;
in some insects they are temporary, and exist during the larval state
only. In fish and batrachians, as the cervical branchie are such
predominant parts, they do not exist. In superior reptiles, birds,
and mammalia, they appear as soon as the cervical branchiz dis-
appear. Their basis is a prolongation of the anal extremity of the
digestive canal, in the form of a vesicle, or the allantoid, on the
outer surface of which the terminal branches of the descending
aorta, or the iliacs, spread and form a special vascular layer,—the
endochorion, which surrounds the fcetus, performs the office of
lungs that are not yet in operation, and is got rid of by the foetus
as soon as birth takes place. The allantoid begins sooner than
the chord, properly so called, —the product of the omphalo-
iliac vessels, but later than the beginning of the intestines,
than the heart, liver, and Wolffian bodies. It appears in the
third and fourth week, and lasts till about the end of the second
month ; but in brute mammalia it is found at birth, though its full
growth is attained early. It grows rapidly, but remains always
very inconsiderable. It lies between the chorion and amnion,

3N 3


896 GROWTH OF


or rather within the vascular vesicle called endochorion, which
covers the one and lines the other. The tubular portion of
the allantoid extends at an angle towards the abdomen, and
becomes the cloaca, and at length the urinary bladder. Like
the tubular portion of the umbilical vesicle, it is at first very
short, so that the allantoid is applied immediately to the abdo-
men; and it grows in proportion as the allantoid becomes more
distant from the embryo by the elongation of the umbilical ves-
sels. The urinary bladder and urachus are the remains of the
allantoid. The former is originally the portion which opens
directly into the cloaca. When the cloaca becomes inverted and
is an external surface, the rectum and bladder acquire each a
separate orifice, and so become distinct organs. In lizards, the
tubular portion of the allantoid, about the middle of its length,
below the rectum, has been seen to dilate into a vesicle, and
afterwards grow narrow to end in the cloaca, and thus was
seen in course of separation from the alimentary canal and con-
version into urinary bladder, which, in man, begins as a canal,
and the narrow and elongated shape of which, in the subsequent
months, appears to show its origin from the allantoid tube. ‘The
urachus is the portion of the tube nearest to the allantoid, and
its obliteration proceeds from the allantoid towards the urinary
bladder. The younger the embryo, the larger the urachus.
After the fourth month, it is pervious to the distance of only a
few lines from the bladder, is solid near the umbilicus, becomes
a slender filament in the chord, and ends in mere cellular mem-
brane. ,

The bifurcated extremity of the aorta extends upon the
allantoid, and gives off the umbilical, or omphalo-iliac, arteries,
which cease to be trunks after birth and become mere secondary
branches of the hypogastric artery. They run outside the allan-
toid and its developements, consequently on each side of the
bladder and urachus ; reach the umbilicus, pass into the umbilical
sheath, united by cellular tissue into a membrane, which is the
endochorion, and ramify towards the surface of the ovum. The
outside of the endochorion is in contact with the other membrane,
termed exochorion.

These ultimate ramifications here become continuous with the
umbilical vein, which accompanies the arteries in the umbilical
sheath, but quits them at the umbilicus, ascends between the


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 897


abdominal muscles and peritoneum, runs along the fold of the
latter, called suspensory ligament of the liver, and, after sending
off several twigs, especially to the left lobe, ultimately divides
into two branches,— one of which joins the left root of the vena
porte, while the other, under the name of ductus venosus, or
venous canal of Botallus, Arantius, or Glisson, ends in the vena
cava inferior, near the origin of the hepatic veins.

After the third month, as the umbilical vesicle now has dis-
appeared, and the allantoid disappeared at the end of the second,
the umbilical vessels only remain in the chord.° This at first
does not exist, and is very short even at the sixth week, and ina
straight line with the body, as long as the umbilical arteries extend
in the same direction. The chord is developed about the period
of the developement of the placenta, becomes opake in about
the ninth week through the deposit of a granular substance,
grows thin, elongates, and in the tenth week is longer than the
embryo. The vessels give off no branches in it. The vein is
thinner, more capacious, and shorter than the arteries; and it
occupies the centre. In the tenth week, the vessels begin to be
twisted spirally, and the spiral turns gradually increase, are more
numerous in the arteries than in the veins, and, in most, run from
left-to right, if the chord is viewed as hanging from the abdomen.
Within its covering from the amnion, the chord has another
tubular membrane from the endochorion or internal and vascular
portion of the chorion. .

In birds and the superior reptiles, the vessels of the endo-
chorion stop at the allantoid under the testaceous covering, be-
cause they exhale and absorb a gaseous fluid only that easily
traverses the membranes. In mammalia, they reach the exter.
nal surface of the testaceous membrane, or exochorion, because
liquids are absorbed, and they form projections, surrounded by


° Mr. John Miller, quoted suprd, p. '798., stated that he dissected 127 human
abortions and foetuses, and made a preparation showing the omphalo-mesenteric
vessels and umbilical vesicle at nine months; as well as one showing the germinal
disc, and another the first formation of the amnion and allantoid: and that he
made a brute preparation demonstrating these two membranes to be one, so
that the fluid of both is the same. (Lancet, Nov. 18. 1837, where he gives an
engraving of the early ovum, the original membrane becoming twisted into an
hour-glass form and thus converted into two—the allantoid and amnion, and
the twist in the centre becoming the urachus. )


3N 4


898 GROWTH OF


prolongations of the exochorion and constituting special organs.
The lowest form is a network on the whole surface of the chorion,
as in solipeds and swine: the next is seen in ruminants, in which
the vessels, arranged in a network with large meshes, produce
from 50 to 100 round or reniform disks, called cotyledons. In
the highest degree, these cotyledons are all united in one at
the end of the chord, and this one is the fcetal placenta. In ro-
dentia, it has several lobes; in carnivora, it is flat and annular ;
but in man, has the highest form. The placenta originates in all
animals from the omphalo-iliac vessels. All the surface of the exo-
chorion has villosities at the end of the first and during the se-
cond month: towards the end of the second, the umbilical vessels
penetrate into those villosities which are situated where the deci-
dua is reflected: at the third month these villosities are vascular
sheaths, and become united by means of cellular membrane.

The uterus produces a vascular congeries, or maternal pla-
centa, which meets and unites with the feetal placenta, having
elevations and depressions corresponding with others in the foetal
placenta, so that they become set in each other, except at the
centre. This takes place opposite the reflexion of the decidua,
usually where the uterus is most soft and vascular, and therefore
most endowed with vital energy, — at the opening of one of: the
Fallopian tubes, or between them, — where only the ovum, by its
chorion, is in contact with the decidua crassa, having plunged from
the Fallopian tube into the decidua, and pushed this before it to
form the reflexa, Towards the end of the second month, a fibrinous
secretion is poured forth, as Wrisberg and Lobstein especially
have demonstrated, in cases at least in which the openings of the
Fallopian tubes were blocked up with fibrin; and this secretion,
(see supra, pp. 786. sq. 799.) coagulating in the form of a disc, forms
a cover to the little pit of the decidua in which the ovum lies, and
is the rudiment of the maternal placenta. This last-formed portion
of the decidua has been termed the secondary decidua. In the third
month, large uterine vessels extend into it, ending in cells, or great
dilatations, from which veins spring.? In the fourth or fifth month,


P Mr. Miller threw injection of one colour into the maternal hypogastric
artery and vein, and of another into the child’s umbilical arteries, and found
an artery as large as a crow quill to pass from the uterus into the placenta, and
the decidual vein to run around the margin of the placenta. In this vein he
always saw at least three, and sometimes four, openings, as large as goose quills,


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 899


the uterine placenta becomes cellular and unequal, plunges into
the fcetal placenta, and receives the lobules of the foetal placenta
into itself, from which it may be readily separated by maceration ;
but the union becomes subsequently firm. It obtains a thick-
ness of 4 lines; and before the completion of utero-gestation is
reduced to an insignificant, thin, and perhaps gelatinous, plaster.
After the ninth month, receiving less blood, the foetal portion
becomes smaller in proportion to the feetus ; and some of its vessels
turn to fibres, easily mistaken for nerves or lymphatics. It be-
comes lacerable and flabby, and its connections with the womb
loose. The maternal portion of the placenta is not only formed
later, but is much less considerable than the feetal.

Certain vascular organs do not, like those already mentioned,
belong to the surface and form fluid by the operation of the ex-
terior, but are internal conglomerations of vessels, unconnected
with the surface, and blood forms in them by the operation of
the substance of the body itself.

The supra-renal capsules are first a single mass, which lies on
the spine, and at length divides into two. They are much larger
than in after life; larger than the kidneys after the fourth week ;
equal to them in the fourth month ; smaller than they in the
sixth month, at which time their weight, compared with that of
the kidneys, is as 1 to 2°5,’ and in the fourth month, as 1 to 3;
whereas in the adult, it is as 1 to 2°8.

The spleen forms in the tenth week, as a very small body
pointed at its two extremities, and divided into many lobules
between the two layers of a fold of mesentery. It gradually
becomes reddish, and lies more forward than after birth; but
remains much smaller, relatively, than in the adult.

The thymus is in two distinct masses in the tenth week, on each
side of the trachea; and these afterwards unite from below up-
wards, increasing so rapidly that they equal the lungs in size for
some time and become proportionally larger than after birth.

The thyreoid appears at the same time with the rings of the
trachea. It consists, originally, of two separate lateral halves,


leading into the uterine veins, and through which all the blood of the maternal
placenta returns to the uterus, He observed also another set of vessels called
decidual arteries and veins, and by Dr. W. Hunter curling vessels, running on
farther than the uterine layer of the decidua. (Lancet, ib.)


900 GROWTH OF


which unite in the fourth month. It is proportionally larger and
richer in blood than in the adult.


The wro-genital system arises from the organic mass originally
deposited between the serous and mucous layers. It becomes con-
nected both with these productions (the intestinal mucous mem-
brane, mediately or immediately, and the surface), and with the
vascular layer. The first formed are the Wolffian bodies, or false
kidneys, secreting organs, with transverse secretory canals, and a
longitudinal excretory duct which ends in the cloaca or uro-genital
canal. They are covered with peritoneum, and, in higher animals,
the kidneys form behind them, the plastic organs of generation
before them, and the ducts of the latter to their outside. They
are unconnected with any of them, precede them, and appear to
be substitutes for them, especially for the urinary organs, in the
early period of foetal existence. The higher the species, the
quicker their growth in proportion to the whole duration of the
developement of the animal. In mammalia, they acquire their
greatest dimensions long before the middle of fcetal life. After
a time, as the whole body grows, they grow as much as before
absolutely, but less relatively. Still later, they absolutely di-
minish, and at last disappear entirely ; so that, in mammalia, they
are not found at birth. They have abundant blood-vessels, and,
after their full growth, receive more blood than any other organ
except the liver. They are true kidneys in structure and func-
tion; and, in the mammalia, secrete a thin limpid fluid. Their
excretory ducts begin to diminish from before backwards, before
the organs themselves are absolutely smaller, and disappear alto-
gether before them.

The kidneys appear nearly at the same time with the internal
sexual organs, on each side of the aorta, between the Wolffian
bodies and the back, as two rounded bodies, composed of oblong
sacs, converging to one side, and there continuous with the ureter.
They become longer, and acquire the shape of a French bean.
The sacs augment in length and number, become uriniferous
tubes, and ramify. At length, cortical and tubular parts become
distinct, on account of some tubes becoming tortuous and having a
larger number than before of vessels ramifying among them, while
the rest remain straight and have no additional supply of blood-
vessels. Their surface is at first smooth; but afterwards irregular,


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 901


as if several pieces were united, on account of several uriniferous
tubes becoming grouped together and raised upon the surface
without a proportionate developement of cellular tissue to fill up
the intervals ; but this appearance ceases from the spaces be-
coming filled up, at length, with cellular membrane and a farther
developement of uriniferous tubes, as well as from a general
condensation of the cellular membrane of the organ. Their
blood-vessels are subordinate branches of those which originally
belonged to the Wolffian bodies; and such subordinate branches
are left for the kidneys only. At an early period, the Malpighian
bodies, which are terminal branches of the arteries collected into
little masses, are seen in the kidneys, both at their surface, as in the
Wolffian bodies, and in their body, and increase greatly in number.

The ureter arises from one part only of the organ, soon grows
capacious at its point of connection with the kidney; thus forming
the pelvis: and, while extending gradually towards the bladder
in one direction, it branches out in the other, and thus forms the
calices. According to Valentin, the shape of the ureters and
uriniferous tubes is visible in the primordial mass, and their in-
terior liquefies independently, while their walls acquire more
density : but they form independently the one of the other. The
urinary bladder arises from the lowest part of the alimentary canal,
— the anterior part of the parietes of which. hollows itself out,
and this more and more. It thus opens, originally, into the
intestine. But at length the intestine divides into two halves:
the one posterior is the external opening of the intestine only ;
the other anterior is for the discharge of the urinary or genital
products only. The urethra is therefore open originally, and for
some time immediately before the anus: it is very long, because
the bladder is above the pelvis. The bladder is the portion of
the allantoid between the urethra and urachus, and becomes per-
manent from its vascular and mucous layers retaining their vital
energy. It is, therefore, originally a product of intestine and
independent of the secreting urinary apparatus.

The genital organs are developed later in living systems in
proportion as these are lower in the scale. In general, the genital
organs do not appear in plants till full growth has arrived: in
invertebrate animals, they do not appear while the embryo is in
the shell: in birds and mammalia, they are found early in the
ovum: in man, they appear earlier than in any other animal.


902 GROWTH OF


The testis, or ovarium, is situated to the inner side of the Wolffian
body, held to it by peritoneum and vessels. At the seventh week
it is avery long body. The testis is at first soft, greyish, and
homogeneous; and seminiferous tubes gradually form in it. The
ovarium is at first smooth; and acquires the appearance of a
grape in the twelfth week, and loses it again in the fourth month.
Both testes and ovaria are proportionally larger at first than
subsequently. Both are situated before the kidneys, behind the
peritoneum, which invests them, except at the posterior part
where the blood-vessels penetrate. The peritoneum, particularly
in the male, plunges into the inguinal canal, and the testes
and ovaria descend and become more distant from each other.
The descent of the testes has already been fully described in
Chapter XXIX. The median organs of generation, —the Fal-
lopian tubes and uterus, and the vasa deferentia, form independ-
ently of the ovaria and testes, though in invertebrate animals and
fish they are prolongations of them. They are at first straight
filaments, of uniform diameter, which soon become hollow, and
change to canals, extending at one extremity to the testes or
ovaria and at the other to the organs of copulation. They are
developed all along the external edge of the Wolffian bodies ;
are longer than the testes or ovaria; descend at their outer side ;
and unite above the pelvis into a common duct. ‘The anterior
extremity of the Fallopian tube elongates to a point, and, when
the whole grows hollow, expands into a trumpet in the fourth
month ; and, at the eighth month, is more convoluted than in
adult life.

Near the testes and ovaria, winding canals are developed
towards the vas deferens or Fallopian tube, representing the
epididymis and accessory ovaries. The latter are analogous to
the epididymis, conical and flat bodies, with very fine canals, which
never become continuous with the Fallopian tubes,—so soon do
the bodies altogether disappear.

The dilatation of the vasa deferentia and Fallopian tubes into
vesicule seminales and uterus takes place gradually. These
conduits unite into one tube, which ends in the uro-genital canal.
In the male, this tube shortens and enters the latter canal, so that
the conduits have two orifices, and send forth each a process or
hernia, which is the vesicula seminalis. In the female, they unite
at an acute angle and form the uterus: and in the third month,


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 903


their lower ends dilate a little, and produce the cornua of the
uterus, which grow shorter and wider, unite at a less acute angle,
and disappear at the end of the fourth month, so that a single
cavity exists. The upper part of the uterus is consequently
at first concave; but in the fifth month is straight; and in the
sixth, convex. The neck is the first single part of the uterus
which is formed,and developement advances upwards; and thus the
neck is the thickest part at the fifth month. The womb is at first
continuous with the vagina, and has no projection: afterwards,
the external opening forms in it; and the vaginal portion grows
so rapidly, thatit is proportionally larger in every dimension than
subsequently.

The external genitals are developed independently, but in
harmony with the internal. In mammalia, the vas deferens and
Fallopian tubes terminate, at first, each separately, in the cloaca,
a little behind or on each side of the orifice of the allantoid. The
cloaca, as was mentioned at page 901., afterwards divides between
these two terminations which are then in the anterior of the two
halves produced by the division, and to which the name uro-genital
is given by Valentin. The vasa deferentia and Fallopian tubes open
into the beginning of this canal, immediately below the original
orifice of the allantoid. In the male, this state continues through
life, and the uro-genital canal developes itself into the portion of
the urethra situated between the orifices of the vasa deferentia and
the symphysis pubis. In the female, a little process forms in the
uro-genital canal, where the openings of the oviducts are originally
placed, and which are now on the convexity of the process very
near each other. Soon the excavation increases, and after some
time represents an irregular conical cavity, which developes into
vagina and neck of the womb. At the same time, the uro-genital
canal grows much broader, and at last produces the vestibule.
The urinary bladder becomes situated farther and farther from
the uro-genital canal, with which it was before continuous; and
between it and this canal a small tube is produced, generally
termed the female urethra. The hymen appears in the fifth
montl?, as a narrow fold.

The external projections appear later than the internal organs,
The external genital organ is, in the sixth week, a small wart, fixed
to the rudiments of the pubes, before the cloaca; and, in the seventh
week, has a groove along all its lower part, leading above to an ob-


904: GROWTH OF


long aperture, which is the common orifice of the alimentary canal,
urinary and genital organs, all united into acloaca. The root of
the penis is covered above and at its sides by a fold of skin from
the abdomen, which fold is continuous below with the lips of the
opening of the cloaca. These lips unite and form the perineum
at the end of the third month, while the anterior edge of the
orifice of the allantoid grows at their union in the form of a fold,
so that the cloaca is divided by a septum into rectum and uri-
nary passage: the septum at length unites with the perineum.
When the perineum is formed, the edge of the anus rises till it
resembles a round perforated wart, which afterwards gradually
sinks. Three different parts are early distinguishable in the
penis, — viz. two symmetrical chords united at their inner side
and placed on the convex portion of the organ; and a smaller
part on the concave portion, representing a gutter with thick
walls, and separated from the other chords by two shallow lateral
grooves, but a little thicker at its extremity, where it forms two
lateral lobes. While the perineum is forming, at the end of
the third month, the genital organ acquires characteristic sexual
differences. In its developement as a clitoris, the growth of its
essential parts is arrested; but the cutaneous fold at its root,
continuous with the perinzeum, augments in thickness and length,
especially at its sides, outstrips the clitoris, covers it and be-
comes the labia. Inits developement as a penis, the edges of the
gutter and the sides of the cutaneous fold unite, from the root
to the extremity, and thus a canal is formed. The cutaneous
fold grows till it envelopes the whole organ. The lobes of the
corpus spongiosum urethre unite and form the glans. The penis
grows at first faster than the clitoris, and afterwards becomes
rather smaller than it.

As the cloacal slit is a cutaneous prolongation running to meet
the digestive, urinary, and genital organs, and as the sebaceous
glands are descents of the skin, and the glands of Meibomius pro-
longed sebaceous glands, so the mammary glands, originating from
the skin, like the salivary from the mucous layer, are cutaneous
descents, which ramify internally, as though attempting to make
towards the genitals. As the skin rises into a conical body,—the
genital organ, at the cloacal fissure, the nipples arise at the
mammary glands, which, during the third month, are small ele-
vations in the midst of large orifices.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 905


It may be useful to see the course of all growth according to
periods, as drawn up by Burdach.

He divides the period of fetal life into seven stages.

1. The first comprehends the period at the end of the first fort-
night, when the central organ of sensibility and its coverings are
discernible, as the first parts having an appreciable form; and the
amnion, which did not before exist, presently forms. This period is
short, perhaps not longer than a day.

2. The second includes the third, fourth, and fifth weeks. The
embryo acquires parietes, bounding it from the ovum; several
single organs appear,— the intestine, umbilical vesicle, allantoid,
and liver, the heart, the vascular trunks, and the branches which
they send to the branchiz and umbilical vessels ; the sanguineous
system, which is just produced, is very limited, and does not pene-
trate the whole mass; the branchial apertures, the allantoid, and
the canal of the umbilical vesicle appear, but only to disappear
presently.

The chorion, and therefore the entire ovum, becomes 10 or 15
lines in length: arborescent flocculi grow from it, and penetrate
the decidua reflexa, adhering to it or the decidua crassa, so that
the ovum becomes fixed.

The amnion, filled with clear fluid, is much smaller than the
chorion, covers the back and extends to the sides only of the
embryo, which thus lies as if in a pit, with its ventral surface bare;
the amnion extends more and more forwards, till, at the point
where it is continuous with the ovum, it produces a canal,— the
umbilical sheath, which is at first short and broad.

The embryo becomes from | to 3 lines in length, and from 1 to
3 grains in weight ; is semitransparent, gelatinous, and under the
microscope granulated ; and it soon is bent forwards.

The head is a round mass without apertures; though at first
scarcely distinguishable from the trunk, it increases so rapidly,
that in the fourth week it is as large as the trunk, from which it
is divided in front by a slight transverse furrow only, — the rudi-
ment of the neck, and behind by the angular projection occa-
sioned by the sudden turn of the chorda oblongata. During the
fourth week, the eyes appear as black points.

The trunk has no limbs, and ends in a point like a tail. The
parietes, formed of granulated substance and transparent mem-
brane, grow from the sides both backwards and forwards; in front


906 GROWTH OF


they soon unite at the median line, producing the chest, and
leaving a space at the abdomen only, whence the cavity of this
remains continuous with that of the umbilical sheath. The ver-
tebra appear as cartilages, with rudiments of ribs like streaks,
and but 2 of a line long. On the ventral surface two vesicles are
seen, continuous, by means of canals, with the mucous membrane
of the abdominal cavity, horizontal at first, and ultimately vertical
and encased in the umbilical sheath.

The first is the umbilical vesicle, globular, rather larger than
the embryo, filled with limpid fluid, and having a very fine canal
extending into it from the cephalic extremity ofthe embryo. The
canal becomes continuous with the intestine where this makes a
turn; but in the fifth week becomes obliterated at this point, and
thus reduced to a filament. The intestine is short, uniformly
cylindrical, and straight; passes from the stomach obliquely for-
wards into the umbilical sheath, turns upon itself at the insertion
of the canal of the umbilical vesicle, re-enters the abdomen, and
terminates in the anus.

The second vesicle is the allantoid, which disappears in man
after the fourth or fifth week, but continues till birth in mammal
brutes.

The urinary organs are not yet visible.

The heart lies horizontally, pointed forwards. ‘The omphalo-
mesenteric vessels — a branch of the aorta and a root of the cava,
are full of red blood, and extend upon the umbilical vesicle.
The omphalo-iliac vessels are of later formation,

The liver receives the greater part of the omphalo-mesenteric
vein. It is of a reddish grey, very large, nearly half as heavy as
the whole body, and divided into many lobes.

The branchial apertures, seen in transverse parallel folds at the
sides of the neck, have branches of the aorta and vena cava at
their edges, and are less distinct than in brutes; and they dis-
appear at the end of the fifth week.

3. The third period extends to the end of the eighth week,
and is marked by the lateral growth of the embryo, as well as by
the greater projection of all its external parts, and its more com-
plete distinction from the ovum. The brain and spinal chord,
head, and spine grow broader ; the peripheral parts, as the car-
tilages, bones, muscles, nerves, the external organs of sense, and
the four extremities, are formed ; openings take place in the intes-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 907


tinal canal and organs of sense; the double organs of excretion
appear, — the lungs, kidneys, and genital organs; as well as the
cutaneous excrescences, eyelids, lips, ears, nose, penis, and clitoris.

The ovum is nearly elliptic. Its long diameter about 16 lines
in the fifth week, and above 2 inches in the eighth; its transverse
from 12 to 21 lines ; its weight nearly 2 ounces. The flocculi of
the chorion become larger and stronger at its upper and free part,
as well as more subdivided and compacted together, than where it
is in contact with the decidua reflexa; and their freer extremities
float in the fluid secreted by the uterus. The amnion grows more
rapidly than the chorion, its fluid increases, and the vesicula um-
bilicalis is full of fluid.

The embryo grows from 9 to 5 lines long in the fifth week ; 7 in
the sixth; 9 in the seventh; 12 in the eighth; and its weight
exceeds a drachm. From having lain horizontally, with its abdo-
men upwards, it lies vertically, suspended by the umbilical chord,
which is attached near the lower end of its trunk, and has now
lengthened ; the head, from its weight, being the lowest part.

The head is almost half as long as the body. At the end of this
period, it becomes equal to scarcely one third. The spinal chord
resembles a transparent canal full of whitish fluid ; and the brain
has a series of analogous vesicles. The substance, which condenses
about the end of this period, forms, at first, the lateral anterior
bands of the chord ; so that this presents a groove posteriorly in its
whole length, to nearly the tubercle of the os coccygis, which is
covered by its membranes. The close vesicles of the brain are also
developed the most laterally, and thus compelled to approach each
other longitudinally : they open above by a longitudinal slit, and
grow from below upwards and without inwards, or from the base
towards the vault and from the sides towards the centre. The
spinal chord grows longitudinally forwards from its flexure at the
nucha, and another flexure carries it upwards. The cerebellum
forms in the sixth or seventh week, and consists of fine narrow
lateral laminze, which grow towards the median line. The body
of the cerebrum ascends before the cerebellum, and above the ten-
torium ; and its corpora quadrigemina — two hollow hemispheres,
raised at their sides, or not yet in contact at the median line, are
the summit of the encephalon. The cerebrum bends downwards
before the optic thalami, and there exhibits the corpora striata,

30


908 GROWTH OF


covered by the hemispheres only, which proceed from their sides
and have very thin walls.

The face begins to form, but is very small compared with the
cranium. The eyes grow rapidly to a very great proportionate
size, and, as the head grows in breadth, advance more forward :
they are only a little above the mouth. At first, only a faint
upper and lower line distinguish them from the rest of the sur-
face ; but towards the eighth week these lines become continuous
folds — the rudiments of the eyelids, and the caruncle and open-
ing of the nasal canal appear in the internal angle. The iris is a
blackish ring, which forms in the seventh week, and is at first
open within and above, and continues afterwards more narrow at
this part.

The buccal cavity is a close vesicle below the brain, and com-
prises the nasal cavity. In the sixth week, it opens externally by
a small slit, which is the mouth. This rapidly widens, so that at
seven months it extends all across the face; and in the eighth
week it is limited by cutaneous folds, which are the commencements
of the lips. Gradually the nasal and buccal cavities separate ; the
palatine processes of the superior maxillary bone growing from
before backwards and from without inwards, whilst between them
the uvula grows downwards, divided at first into 2 lateral halves,
which soon unite. The tongue appears in the seventh week, and
is soon complete. ‘The lower jaw consists of 2 lateral halves ; is
low, and has no branches.

The nostrils appear about the seventh week, as little depres-
sions separated ,by a delicate septum, which opens gradually:
towards the eighth week, the nose appears as a little swelling.
In the sixth or seventh week the trunks of the meatus auditorii
appear as little points: then the internal ear grows, at first like
a flat projection, merely cutaneous, broad above, narrow below, in
the midst of which the commencement of the auditory canal is
seen as a longitudinal slit. The anterior edge bends and acquires
a transverse slope, so that it separates into helix and antitragus.
The frame of the tympanum forms, like cartilage, in the eighth
week. )

The heart and liver are seen through the walls of the trunk in
front, the sides only being opake and one granular mass: but in
the seventh week, the whole parietes become granular. Cartilagini-
fication, beginning in the vertebral column, extends rapidly : the


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 909


first points of ossification appear in the seventh week, at the
clavicle and lower jaw; in the eighth, at the upper jaw and femur ;
and partly, also, at the squamous portion of the occipital and frontal.
The fibrous membrane destined to become periosteum is suffi-
ciently developed to be capable of detachment from the carti-
lages: the muscular structure is not very distinct. In the seventh
week, the vertebra are thick and broad, but still transparent;
their bodies yellowish, and separated by transverse bands; the
arches not yet complete. During the eighth week, the sternum
appears, short and cartilaginous, in the walls of the chest: a car-
tilaginous mass at the sides of the lower part of the spine is the
commencement of the pelvis. The extremity of the spine is a
protuberance, slightly curved, which is the rudiment of the os
coccygis.

The extremities, and first the upper, appear as globular tuber-
cles, which at first grow from the trunk, and afterwards towards it.
Soon the hand separates from the arm; then the division into upper
and fore-arm takes place; then the hand divides into fingers, which
are at first indentations, and then only tubercles at its edge : when
the arm divides, the lower extremity divides into thigh and foot;
and, when the fingers appear, it divides into thigh and leg. In the
eighth week, the upper extremities are already 23 lines long ; the
clavicle cartilaginous at its extremities only ; the scapula scarcely
discernible ; the arm thick; the fore-arm very short; the hand
longer, with 5 cartilages ; each finger free, and the thumb dis-
cernible; the fore-arm begins to bend, and the hand to approach
the chin. The lower extremities are about 2 lines long ; without
thighs, and projecting beyond the coccygeal tubercle only: they
soon incline towards the abdomen, while the flexion of the knee
is scarcely perceptible. The edge of the foot becomes indented ;
the toes gradually appear as coherent tubercles, and at last se-
parate through their whole length.

The liver extends to the ilia; the gall-bladder is only a canal.
The umbilical sheath narrows, and is 6 lines in length: the in-
testines begin to leave it in order to enter the abdomen; the small
intestines form a few convolutions ; the large intestines do not ex-
ceed them in thickness, and are behind them and straight, running
downwards from the navel; the cacum appears in the seventh
week, as a small tubercle. The stomach is still perpendicular:
its future upper side, constituting the right edge, is straight and

0


910 GROWTH OF


continuous with the right edge of the cesophagus, and forms @
straight line with the intestine; while the future lower side is to the
left, and already convex. The great omentum begins. ‘The anus
is at first a mere depression, which opens in the seventh week.

The lungs and liver occupy the greater part of the trunk, and
the diaphragm forms as a membranous expansion between them.
In the sixth week, the breadth and length of the heart are equal :
it is perpendicular, and divided into a venous sac and a ventricle.
In the seventh week there are 2 ventricles, but communicating
by a narrow oblong opening at the upper part of the septum,
separated externally by a groove, and terminating in two points
distant from each other. In the eighth week, the separation is
complete, and the septum of the auricles begins. The heart at
this time becomes horizontal. The vena cava is much larger than
the aorta. At seven weeks, the aorta proceeds from both ven-
tricles. The pulmonary artery sends branches to the lungs in
the eighth week only.

At about the sixth week, the rudiment of larynx appears, soft
and homogeneous. At seven weeks, it presents a cartilage with
separate lateral parts. Below it is the rudiment of the thyreoid
gland, with 2 small and separate lateral lobes. In the sixth
week, the trachea is a slender filament; acquires cartilage in the
eighth: the left bronchia is then larger, thicker, and denser than
the right. The lungs are vesicular masses, which appear in the
sixth week.

The Wolffian bodies reach from the heart to the end of the ab-
dominal cavity, where their excretory duct opens externally. In
the seventh week, the renal capsules appear in the epigastrium,
the kidneys along the spine, and the formative organs of genera-
tion behind the peritoneum. The renal capsules are the largest.
The testes and ovaria are perfectly similar, narrow, oblong, ex-
tending obliquely downwards and inwards. ‘Their prolongations,
—the vasa deferentia and Fallopian tubes have the same direc-
tion, and unite at an acute angle in a common canal of about
the same diameter. The ureters unite similarly, to produce the
urethra; and the bladder appears in the eighth week only,
empty and shaped like an intestine. The anal opening receives
the orifice of the genital and urinary organs. Before and above
it, near the umbilicus, in the sixth week, the penis and clitoris
appear as a conical body, at the lower surface of which a longi-
tudinal groove forms in the seventh week.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 911


4, In the fourth period, which is the third lunar month, the
umbilical vesicle disappears; the placenta forms, by the pro-
duction and union of the maternal and fcetal portions ; the foetus
is completely enveloped, and acquires its permanent uterine
figure. The chief organs exist, and accessory ones are pro-
duced. The solids have nearly acquired their shape ; secretion is
more abundant, as seen in the contents of the gall-bladder and
intestines, in the fat and general fluid of the body. The thymus
appears. The divisions of the alimentary canal are more distinct,
and at its dilatation and extremities different plastic organs begin,
—the salivary glands, spleen, pancreas, and cecal appendix. The
organs of sense close, by the union of their coverings or the
formation of special tegumentary parts.

i. The ovum is about 34 inches in diameter, and some ounces in
weight. The chorion contracts an adhesion to the 2 deciduz, and
then loses its flocculi at these points: it unites by loose cellular
tissue with the amnion; which, by growing rapidly, approaches it at
every point. As the intestines are now all in the abdomen, and the
umbilical vesicle has wasted away, the umbilical sheath becomes
the slender chord, and contains the omphalo-iliac vessels only.
At the end of this month, the chord is nearly 3 inches long, its
vessels contain more red blood, and it begins to take spiral turns.

The embryo is about 15 lines long in the ninth week ; 2 inches in
the tenth; 2} in the eleventh; and 24 in the twelfth. Its weight
is from some drams to an ounce. Its granular homogeneousness
is replaced by distinct tissues : muscular substance is visible, and
the largest muscles are distinct : the nerves are discernible every-
where: theskin becomes distinct. The embryo becomes straighter.

The head is globular, and the nuchal tubercle disappears. The
base of the cranium is cartilaginous: the sella turcica and clinoid
processes are distinguishable. The vault of the cranium is still
membranous in the ninth week: the forehead projects: ossification
extends in the os frontis, from the superciliary arch, and the first
points of ossification appear in the os occipitis before the foramen
magnum, in the great and small ala and pterygoid processes
of the sphenoid, the squamous processes of the temporal, and in
the parietal.

The spinal chord, from being a gutter, becomes a cylinder,
with a canal a little larger at the central extremity of the nerves
of the limbs than elsewhere, and showing no other trace of its

30 3


912 GROWTH OF


former opening than a small fissure behind. The lateral parts
of the cerebellum are united in the median line by a narrow
lamina, and form the excavated roof of the fourth ventricle.
The corpora quadrigemina are two hollow hemispheres, lying
against each other, not united, and, except a slit in the median line,
covering the aqueduct, which is a vast cavity. The pituitary gland
is very small. The hemispheres of the cerebrum are still delicate
vesicles, but, as they grow backwards and inwards, they cover the
optic thalami. The anterior lobes are formed; the middle but im-
perfectly ; and the posterior are indicated only. The fore part, or
knee, only of the corpus callosum is formed; and behind that
the anterior pillars of the fornix arise from medullary eminences,
and are bent backwards, but do not unite, nor extend above the
optic thalami. The anterior and posterior commissures are visible.
The ventricles of the cerebrum and the plexus choroides are very
large. The olfactory bands are short, key-shaped, and hollow.

The face lengthens somewhat. The zygomatic arch receives a
filament of ossification from the zygomatic and temporal bones.
The upper jaw forms a triangle, the base of which is the alveolar
edge. The palatine process is almost perfectly ossified, and com-
pletely separates the nasal and buccal cavities. The articular and
coronoid processes of the lower jaw begin to be distinguishable :
points of ossification commence at their summits, and at the angles
of the jaw. The alveolar edge of the two jaws is indented, from
the internal developement of the 16 follicles for the incisor and
two front molar teeth: the lower jaw is still but little elevated,
is rounded, and, till the end of the month, without chin, and its
lower edge is continuous with the chest.

The eyelids are still, in the ninth week, narrow and circular
folds of skin. In the tenth week, they form at their inner side
a vast lachrymal sac, situated lower than the external angle of the
eyes, so that the slit of the eyelids is rather oblique. In the
eleventh week, their edges touch and cohere: the membrana
pupillaris forms.

The external ear acquires the form of a spiral line; and the
helix, antihelix, and tragus arise: it is flat, and the concha not
hollow. From being a thin fold of skin, it contains a little car-
tilage. The meatus auditorius is closed by unctuous substance.
The frame of the tympanum ossifies. Its ossicula appear in the
ninth week, and begin to ossify in the twelfth. A cartilaginous


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 913


mass, separate from the petrous portion, represents the labyrinth,
whose cavity is lined by a membrane. The cochlea is a thick
membrane, and of its permanent form. In the twelfth week, the
first points of ossification appear both around the fenestra rotunda,
which is almost parallel with the membrana tympani, and in
the superior and posterior semicircular canals.

The nose is broad and scarcely projects ; its openings are very
close to the mouth, directed forwards, divided by a broad par-
tition, and stopped by a sort of cutaneous mass. From being
membranous it becomes cartilaginous; the ale form; the par-
tition narrows; and, in the twelfth week, ossification commences
in the nasal bones. The turbinated bones are only projections of
the mucous membrane ; the cribriform plate is only a fine mem-
brane.

After the ninth week, the lips grow as slight cutaneous folds,
like hems; the lower more slowly than the upper, and situated
farther back. Towards the twelfth, they touch each other, and
close the mouth; and the tongue, which before was protruded
from the mouth, retires. The palate is developed in the tenth
week, and the salivary glands appear as vesicles resting upon
ramified canals of mucous membrane.

The neck grows between the head and trunk, short and thick.
The ribs lie close to each other, and all but the lowest ossify.
At the end of the month, from being rounded, they form an angle.
Some muscular fibres appear in the diaphragm : its tendinous part
is proportionally very large. The bodies of the vertebra ossify
from the 5th cervical to the 5th dorsal. The arches are formed
in all the cervical.

The os hyoides is visible in the ninth week. The thyreoid and
cricoid consists each of 2 lateral parts. The cartilaginous arches
of the trachea appear as narrow transverse bands, more delicate
in the median line, where, consequently, it is flatter. The lungs
are white, dense, at the back of the thorax, and covered by the
heart: deep slopes divide them into the lobes: the lobules are
not quite united together, and they make the surface irregular by
projecting as vesicles. The thymus consists of 2 small flat bo-
dies, behind the upper part of the sternum, united at their lower
extremities.

The heart is at first nearly half as large as the liver. It be-
comes more conical, chiefly by the swelling of its right edge: the

30 4


914 GROWTH OF


venous part grows broader, and the arterial longer and pointed.
It at length lies a little obliquely, the apex being directed to the
left. The pericardium is completely developed. The auricles,
especially the right, are very large: the right half of the organ is
the larger. The depression between the ventricles is not so deep.
The valve of the foramen ovale forms. The Eustachian valve is
very large, and directs the blood of the superior cava from the in-
ferior into the right ventricle, and the greater part of the blood of
the inferior into the left side of the heart. The pulmonary artery
runs straight, as the canalis arteriosus, towards the middle of the
arch of the aorta, is equally large, and opensinto it: at a later period
this canal inclines to the left, bends somewhat, and unites with the
aorta below the origin of the left subclavian, forming properly the
descending aorta, and receiving but little blood from the left
ventricle. The descending aorta ends in the iliacs, which send
very small branches only to the pelvis and lower extremities and
are continuous with the umbilical arteries.

The liver becomes more firm and red ; occupies the chief part
of the abdomen, though its left lobe does not descend so low as
previously ; its ducts are very distinct, and the gall-bladder is
long and rather conical.

The stomach is short, broad, and empty. During this month,
from being vertical, it gradually becomes horizontal, and makes
nearly a right angle with the cesophagus and duodenum, which
are perpendicular. Its left extremity begins to project, and its
upper margin to become concave.

The umbilical opening is reduced to a line, and lies higher,
because the hypogastric region has become longer. The um-
bilical vesicle vanishes, as well as the portion of the omphalo-
mesenteric vessels above the umbilicus. The duodenum is very
broad, and not distinguishable from the stomach; ascends to the
biliary duct, and descends again. The rest of the small intestine
makes from 3 to 5 spiral turns at the beginning of the third month,
before reaching the umbilicus ; after completely entering the ab-
domen, in the tenth week, it clusters, and lies in the middle and
left part of the cavity; its lower portion becomes a little nar-
rower, and its extremity plunges into the large intestine so
far as nearly to touch the opposite side. In the tenth week,
the appendix ceci appears: the colon obtains its valve, and no
longer ascends, but passes from right to left, and then descends :


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 915


at twelve weeks it is still destitute of folds and prominences. The
diameter of the rectum is no greater. At the end of the month,
all the intestinal mucous membrane is uniformly developed, and
produces folds and villosities : meconium is formed, especially in
the ileum; the round anus lies behind the uro-genital opening ;
but, as the spine and os coccygis elongate, it becomes an open
slit. .

The omentum begins to contain masses of fat; at the beginning
of the third month, the pancreas appears, composed of granu-
lations cohering little together, attached to the stomach and
duodenum, at first perpendicular, but gradually becoming hori-
zontal. The spleen also appears, as a small whitish body, pointed
above and below, hanging from the large end of the stomach, and
composed of many distinct lobules.

In the ninth week, the renal capsules are as large again as the
kidneys; their upper and outer extremity is pointed, and touches
the diaphragm; their lower and internal rounded, and by this
they are united, though they afterwards separate. They consist
of 3 or 4 masses of minute granules, each reposing upon a
vessel, as upon a peduncle ; and their vascular trunks are as large
as those of the kidneys.

The kidneys lie lower ; their summits become more separated,
but their lower extremities arein contact. In the tenth week, they
become as long as the renal capsules: they consist of a number
of granules, which, at the end of the month, are united into
7 or. § lobules, differing in form and size, but principally
square; held together by little more than cellular membrane,
though slightly also by vessels at their concavity, and arranged in
an anterior and a posterior layer. ‘The ureters are very large.
The bladder empty; at first narrow, and shaped like an intestine ;
gradually rounder ; though still oblong. The urachus reaches to
the navel only.

In the tenth week, the testes are at the side of the kidneys ; in
the twelfth, immediately below them, shaped like a French bean,
and about 2 lines in length: their convex edge is turned out-
wards and forwards; their concave, inwards and backwards; they
are fixed before the psoas muscle by a large fold of peritoneum ;
and converge by their lower extremity, which is obtuse. From
their pointed upper extremity, the epididymis issues, descending
behind and a little outwards, along the testes; after which, their


916 GROWTH OF


prolongation—the vasa deferentia, descend into the pelvis obliquely
inwards. The gubernaculum arises at the bottom of the peritoneal
sac, nearly in the centre of the crural arch, and ascends to the
origin of the vas deferens. The penis is large and retracted ; its
groove closes and becomes the urethra.

In the ninth week, the ovaries lie near and before the kidneys ;
and are longer and narrower than them. They gradually descend,
from being oblique become horizontal, are irregular in their sur-
face, and in structure almost like a grape. At the end of the ninth
week, the Fallopian tubes are separate from the ovaria ; they begin
by ablind enlargement, and become gradually a little tortuous. The
insertion of the round ligaments bounds them on the uterine side ;
and the future uterus is two long cornua, terminating in a single
body, of the same diameter with themselves. The cornua grow
shorter and broader than the Fallopian tubes, unite at a less acute
angle, and the body enlarges and becomes triangular. ‘The va-
gina is at first as broad as the uterus, and gradually narrows : it
ends in the posterior part of the vestibule, whereas the orifice of
the urethra lies more forwards. The clitoris is voluminous, and
retracted: but, after the twelfth week, it grows more slowly and
is proportionally smaller.

Differences in the general character of the organisation begin
to appear in the two sexes, while the genitals are still so similar.

The limbs grow more long and slender, and their roots cease to
be covered by the skin of the trunk, but acquire integuments of
their own.

The superior are longer and thicker than the lower, and have
larger joints. The clavicle, from being broad and nearly straight,
is arched in the tenth week, flat at its clavicular extremity, and
acquires nearly its permanent form. In the tenth week, a point
of ossification appears in the scapula, and the spine of the bone
is visible in the twelfth. The bone of the humerus is cylindrical
in the ninth week, and points of ossification appear in the radius
and ulna: the hand is as long as the fore-arm, and narrower than
the foot; lies before the face, and often the fingers are bent in-
wards: points of ossification appear in the metacarpal bones of
the fore and middle finger, and in the third phalanges of all the
fingers.

ii. In the second half of the month, ossification begins in each os
ilei. The buttocks, from being flat, grow prominent; and the tail


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 917


disappears. The thigh gradually leaves the skin of the trunk,
first in front; and the ends of the bone enlarge. The knee is
arched, and the thigh bent on the abdomen. The tibia and fibula
show points of ossification. In the tenth week, the feet, from
being extended, begin to form an angle with the leg: the sole is
turned inwards. The ankle is formed, as well as the toes, which
are less than half the size of the fingers, and pointed: at the end
of the month, ossification begins in the metatarsal bone of the
second toe.

5. The fifth period includes the fourth and fifth lunar months.

i, At the fourth month, the organs no longer grow irregularly,
but approach more to their permanent proportions; the re-
semblance to brutes therefore ceases, and the pure human form
is more evident ; there is some physiognomy, and the sexual dif-
ferences are greater. Very distinct fibres are visible in the brain
and spinal chord. Fibrin abounds more, and probably from the
influence of the foetal placenta, which is now well grown. The
muscles consequently become fibrous and red. Ossification is
rapid. The teeth begin to ossify, and the nails to become horny.
Movements occur, and the organs of sense begin to open.

In the fourth month, the placenta is much larger, and the
chorion has entirely lost its flocculi: the amnion contains some
ounces of fluid: the ovum weighs nearly 5 ounces.

The embryo is about 4 inches long from its vertex to the point
of the coccyx, and weighs nearly 2 ounces. It becomes bent
again, and more than formerly. The head occupies the lowest
part of the uterus.

The spinal chord grows fibrous at its surface, but there only.
The decussation of the fibres of the pyramids is evident. The
ganglion of the acoustic nerve is seen in the rhomboidal sinus.
In the cerebellum, the ciliary body and pons varolii appear,
though the latter is at first but a narrow band. The tubercula
quadrigemina cohere under the median line: the optic thalami
are united by the soft commissure: the pillars of the pineal gland
which arise from them unite to produce this gland; the pituitary
gland is hollow. In the optic thalami are the anterior pillars of
the fornix, which is long; and its posterior pillars extend to the
cornua ammonis. The ergot is discernible. The hemispheres
grow thicker, especially at their origins, or outwards and down-
wards, and some anfractuosities are visible on their surface: they


918 GROWTH OF


extend backwards sufficiently to cover a part of the tubercula
quadrigemina.

Theale of the sphenoid have their three faces, and the pterygoid
processes lengthen; a bony nucleus forms in its posterior body.
The nasal and malar process of the os frontis are still membrane:
the angles of the parietal not developed. The points of ossi-
fication of the occipital unite: the articular processes are reni-
form: the basilar portion filiform.

The eye is more convex ; the lids united by epidermis, sepa-
rated within only: the caruncles project: the sclerotic is translucid,
but firm ; the chorioid brown, and black in front ; the iris narrow ;
the spherical crystalline lies immediately behind the transparent
cornea ; the retina is thick in front, finer behind.

The shape of the ears is nearly perfect, but they are flat: the
cavity of the tympanum very narrow, so that the wall of the
labyrinth is close to the membrana tympani.

The nose is still broad and flat, and the nostrils large ; but the
ale grow, and the vomer ossifies.

The gutter of the upper lip is formed; the mouth proportionally
small and close ; the tongue thicker and less flat, and placed still
farther back. The uvula unites completely with the velum, and
the bony palate is perfectly formed and excavated. The angle
and condyles of the lower jaw form; the mental and suborbitar
foramina are visible. Four dental follicles, for the canine teeth, are
added to the 16. At the bottom of the internal follicles, the
dental germ arises, as a soft red body, receiving vessels and
nerves from its point of origin.

The neck is very distinct from the head and shoulders. The
vertebra are nearly globular, and the transverse processes very
large, especially at the neck. Towards the end of the month,
the sternum begins to ossify. The grand sympathetic nerves are
remarkable for their size, and their ganglia so large as partly to
touch each other.

The heart is more oblique and proportionately shorter than be-
fore, but broader. The auricles have lost their predominance, and
become smaller, and especially thinner, so as to resemble trans-
parent membrane on which very fine muscular fibres are scattered.
The foramen ovale has become rather smaller, and is half covered
by the valve, though still as large again as the opening into the
ventricle. The blood of the inferior vena cava does not pass so ex-


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 919


clusively into the left auricle, although the chief current takes this
course, because the foramen is placed on theleftside, more forward,
and, consequently, more opposite the inferior cava. The pulmonary
artery becomes stronger; the canalis arteriosus is a little narrower
than it, and passes almost horizontally backwards. The aorta
becomes arched higher than before, and is stronger after having
received the canalis arteriosus. The tendinous part of the dia-
phragm bears a smaller proportion to the muscular, and is united
with the pericardium more closely than before.

The lungs become red, and proportionally broader. Their sur-
face is more uniform, because their lobules flatten. The larynx
is proportionally less voluminous : the lateral parts of the thyreoid
cartilage unite in the median line. The trachea is no longer flat,
but cylindrical. The thyreoid is long ; its lateral halves united,
and its granular structure more perceptible.

The liver extends less towards the left, the left lobe not having
grown proportionally with the abdominal cavity ; but still de-
scends on the right side as far as the ossa ilei. The gall-bladder
contains mucus ; is quite vertical, and longer than before. Folds
are seen On its internal surface.

The stomach lies across: from the great developement of its
left extremity it seems round: its curvatures are more exten-
sive, and its walls thicker than those of the duodenum ; folds are
visible within it, and the pylorus forms. The diameter of the
small intestine becomes more uniform; the duodenum acquires
more villosities, but still has no valvule conniventes : the aper-
tures of the biliary and pancreatic duct project in the form of
tubercles, and are half a line apart. The large intestine begins
to have its permanent situation, the cecum placing itself on the
right ileum, and the colon ascending before it crosses the
abdomen: the appendix caeci becomes more slender and tor-
tuous: the rectum has longitudinal furrows, and differs from the
colon in thickness.

The spleen becomes gradually broader. The pancreas is sur-
rounded by a more dense cellular membrane ; its granulations lie
closer together, and its duct has a considerable diameter.

The renal capsules are not so granulated ; but more homo-
geneous, whitish externally, and yellowish within. The kidneys
equal them in size, and are larger, proportionally to the whole
body, than before. The lobules of their anterior surface begin


~


920 GROWTH OF


to unite; their middle portion becomes larger, in proportion to
their extremities and cornua. The greater part of their pelvis
is still open: the front of the organ is not so broad as the back..
The urinary bladder becomes more round ; and has its first ruge
within, but contains mucus only. The urachus ceases to be hollow
at the distance of 2 lines from it.

The testes lie some lines below the renal capsules ; and touch
the ossa ilei, which have now grown considerably: they receive
vessels at their upper edge. ‘Their proportionate size is not so
great as before; but, on the other hand, the epididymis is more
developed; and the vas deferens runs first upwards, and then
downwards. The gubernaculum is stronger, and rests on the
inguinal region. The penis begins to bend about the end of the
month.

The ovaries are proportionally smaller than previously, rounder,
nearly as broad as long, convex above, concave below, and much
sloped at their two borders: they no longer resemble the struc-
ture of a grape, and are placed horizontally, some lines below the
kidneys. The Fallopian tubes have advanced forwards; are longer,
more tortuous, and seem to acquire an opening at their origin.
The womb, whose cornua are now effaced, is a simple cavity, but its
upper edge still concave. The clitoris acquires a prepuce, and
lies rather more backwards: the nymphe are more distinct from
the labia.

The shoulders are more developed ; the hands broader; the
fingers thick. The metacarpal bones are entirely ossified, the first
phalanges have points of ossification, and those of the third in-
crease. The two upper vertebre of the sacrum ossify; the ex-
tremity of the os coccygis projects no longer.

The lower limbs grow now as long as the upper, and larger than
them at their superior part. The patella becomes cartilaginous :
a trace of calf is visible. The metatarsal bones ossify ; as well as
the third, and ultimately the second, phalanges. The toes are now
proportionally shorter than the fingers : both present membranous
rudiments of nails.

ii. At the fifth month, the ovum is about 6 inches long, and 5
broad ; and weighs nearly 6 ounces. The foetal placenta acquires
a diameter of about 4 inches. The length of the embryo from
the vertex to the anus is from 5 to 7 inches, and from the vertex
to the points of the feet from 8 to 10 inches. It weighs from


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 921


5 to 8 ounces. It now touches the amnion, and has a spherical
form. About the eighteenth or nineteenth week, the mother feels
the foetus move ; at first faintly and seldom ; but at length percep-
tibly to another-person whose hand is placed on her abdomen.

The hemispheres of the cerebellum are developed; and four
transverse grooves indicate its division into five lobes. In the
cerebrum is seen the septum lucidum, whose cavity is continuous
with that of the third ventricle. The corpus callosum extends
above the corpora striata. The hemispheres do not yet extend
above the corpora quadrigemina. The first traces of convo-
lutions are seen on their internal surface only or that turned
towards the middle line. The proportion of the head to the
body is as 1 to 3. The face becomes longer and broader, and
the forehead more developed and round. On the skin of the
cranium, eye brows and lids, small perforated elevations appear
for the hairs which sprout up the next month.

The eyelids are very convex, and no longer united by epidermis :
their separation is indicated towards the end of the month by a
line visible externally. The caruncles and puncta are large, and
resemble folds applied together. Vessels are discernible in the
membrana pupillaris.

The growth of the face causes the ear to stand farther back,
and more distant from the eye and mouth. All its parts are now
formed, though not of their permanent shape. The frame of the
tympanum unites with the pyramid; the Eustachian tube is
cartilaginous; the external semicircular canal begins to ossify,
and the whole labyrinth attains nearly its full size.

The nostrils open again; the ethmoid and turbinated bones
begin to ossify.

The mouth has a less proportion to the breadth of the face, and
opens a little. The upper lip is very large, and its gutter flat.
The cheeks are more distinct: the palate widens behind. The
four follicles of the third molares are added to the former 20.
Ossification begins in the milk teeth: the summits of the future
crowns appear on the free surface of the dental germ as small
fine scales, which gradually become more solid and thick, unite,
and surround the germ. This is observed first in the external
incisors, then in the inner, and at last in the anterior molares.

The apex of the heart lies still more to the left ;the right auricle
is much larger than the left: the foramen ovale is smaller and its


922 GROWTH OF


valve longer: it is directed from left to right and from above
downwards. As the inferior cava is now higher, less blood flows
from it through the foramen ovale.

The lungs become larger and redder, and contain more blood.
The larynx and trachea contain a mucilaginous fluid. The thyreoid
is proportionally more voluminous and broad. The thymus has
grown as much, and is composed of small round grains.

The hypogastric region grows more, so that the navel lies
higher.

The liver is redder and more dense and its size proportionally
less: the gall-bladder is more horizontal, and contains a greenish
yellow mucus.

The stomach has longitudinal folds and villi. The duodenum
also has projecting folds. The orifices of the biliary and pan-
creatic ducts lie nearer. The villosities of the large intestine
and of the lower part of the small become less than those of
the upper part of the small. The tranverse arch of the colon
begins to present enlargements. ‘The rectum becomes tortuous ;
the anus is closed.

The kidneys receive more blood: the ruge of the bladder are
larger, and clear urine is found in it.

The testes are broader, though not longer. The vasa deferentia
proceed in a serpentine course towards the pelvis, dilate below,
and are continuous with the vesiculz seminales, which are tortuous.
The gubernaculum is triangular ; its summit is at the highest part
of the scrotum, a little below the inguinal ring, and its base at the
lower part of the epididymis. The peritoneum forms a sac at the
crural arch. The scrotum is more prominent, and its raphé dis-
tinguishable. The penis is rather bent downwards; the prepuce
is an annular fold, extending towards the gland. The prostate
appears as a very small body.

The ovaries become proportionally smaller, and are situated
in the large part of the pelvis. The Fallopian tubes are more
serpentine, and have Jarge orifices. The uterus has a straight
upper border, and begins to descend into the lower part of the
pelvis. The vagina has folds, and the hymen is produced by two
lateral elongations. The clitoris bends in consequence of the
shortening of its inferior portion, but is not yet covered by the
labia. The mons veneris becomes more prominent.

The fore-arm is bent on the chest towards the head. The
lower limbs have a larger muscular mass than the upper.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. . 923

6. The sixth period comprises the sixth, seventh, and eighth
months. In it, the embryo may be born alive, respiring and
moving some time after separation from its mother, but it is
called in Germany an abortion or miscarriage, and, unless VeTY
near the end of this period, it generally dies.

i. In the sixth month, the ovum weighs about 8 ounces. The
embryo is 12 inches long, and weighs from 12 to 16 ounces. The
umbilical cord has convolutions, The skin becomes downy,
except on the palms, soles, and the seat of the organs of sense
and generation. The vernix caseosa appears, though scantily
and it is more mucilaginous than fatty. The fat increases under
the skin, particularly at the cheeks, nucha, and abdomen. The
nails grow horny. Some small hairs are visible on the wrinkled
skin of the head; the eyebrows and eyelashes also come. The
nipples appear as small rings.

The head is a quarter as long as the body. A great part of
the cranium is ossified. The corpora olivaria are seen on the
chorda oblongata. The lobes of the cerebellum are divided into
lobules by fresh transverse grooves; the cerebellum is thicker,
and the fourth ventricle within it is consequently shorter. The
mass of the tubercula quadrigemina is also thicker within, so that
their cavity is lessened. A whitish, but not fibrous, substance is
deposited on the surface. The pituitary gland is large, red, and
juicy. The corpus callosum extends beyond the anterior part of
the thalami optici. The hemispheres of the cerebrum cover the
tubercula quadrigemina and cerebellum; they become thicker,
since fibres of reinforcement are added to the rays of the crura
cerebri which alone constituted them previously.

The forehead is furrowed ; the face wrinkled like that of an old
man. The cornea is pale ; the crystalline soft, opake, and as it
were mucilaginous ; the membrana pupillaris solid.

The Jobe of the ear is developed ; the ear still very large ; and
the helix not very distinct.

The nose and septum are no longer so large; the nostrils are
open, but filled with mucus.

The mouth is open, and contains a white thready fluid. The
tongue is thick and red, and has a granulated surface and a long
frenum. The parotid is broad and granular, and has a large
excretory duct.

one


924 , GROWTH OF


The heart is proportionally smaller, and less round: the auri-
cles rather smaller in proportion to the ventricles.

The neck is very long. The thyreoid proportionally not more

voluminous than before. Cartilaginous rings form in the trachea.
The pulmonary arteries are larger. The lungs are solid, cel-
lular, and cannot be inflated without much force; on inflation,
vesicles appear of the size of poppy seeds, and the air imme-
diately comes out again.

The liver ascends, and pushes up the diaphragm. Its diameter
increases more from before backwards than from above downwards,
whence it projects more upwards, and its right lobe does not
descend so low.

The openings of the choledochus and pancreatic duct are
neither so prominent, nor so distant from each other. Propor-
tionally, the pancreas is smaller, and the liver much larger.

The renal capsules have deep cells and grooves, with a brown-
ish fluid. The kidneys are proportionally larger ; and are as big
again as the capsules. Their lobes are more confused within,
and separated at their surface only and by furrows. The ureters
are long and rather red. The urine in the bladder is scanty,
colourless, and odorous.

The testes lie on the ossa ilei and psoe; still bent back.

The ovaries lie deeper. The Fallopian tubes are more hori-
zontal, and each has a large fringed opening into the abdomen.
The upper and posterior surface of the uterus is more convex.
The clitoris is concealed by the labia.

ii. In the seventh month, the ovum weighs about 12 ounces.
The embryo is about 15 inches long, and weighs about 2 pounds.

The skin is very vascular. Epidermis is discernible, especially

_on the hands and feet. The abundance of fat renders the form
more plump. The rings which are substituted for nipples are com-
posed of the open orifices of thelactiferous tubes, disposedin circles.

The length of the head is only a fifth of thatof the body. The
canal of the spinal chord is narrower. The cerebellum is divided
into more lobules. The fimbriz and two posterior medullary valves
are very evident. The pons varolii augments. At this period are
the tubercula quadrigemina first divided by a transverse groove into
an anterior and posterior pair: at the same time, they become so
thick internally that the aqueduct is no longer a spacious cavity,
but a narrow canal. The corpus callosum extends above the


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 925


thalami optici. The mammillary eminences are separate. The
hemispheres extend over the cerebellum, and some convolutions
are discernible on their upper and outer surface. The lateral
ventricles are still large, and filled with the plexus choroides.

The eyelashes are longer and stronger. The puncta project
less. The cornea is more convex. The membrana pupillaris
more completely grown.

The ossicula of the ear are quite ossified.

The germs of all the milk teeth bony.

The thyreoid is rounded, and thicker. The thymus proportion-
ally larger.

The Eustachian valve pushed to the left; the valve of the
foramen ovale larger, so that the foramen admits less blood.

Bile exists in the gall-bladder. The villi of the large intestine
have disappeared. The cecum is more distinct from the colon,
and the opening of its valve lengthened. More meconium is found
in the rectum.

The kidneys are larger, and covered with a little fat: there is
but little urine in the bladder. .

The testes are near or in the inguinal ring, but a little pressure
pushes them back into the abdomen. The prepuce extends over
the gland.

The hymen projects considerably. The labia are full.

The upper extremities are bent on the chest, and the fingers
bent. The thighs are equally bent on the body, the knees turned
outwards, and the feet inwards and applied to the genitals.

iil, In the eighth lunar month, the ovum is about 9 inches long,
and weighs a pound. The embryo is 16 or 17 inches long, and
weighs 3 or 4 pounds.

The orifices of the lactiferous ducts are more closed, and the
nipple begins to project. The nails are still soft and short.

The cavities of the pituitary gland and olfactory band are
obliterated, and that of the septum lucidum closes.

The eyelids lie less close together.. The corneais less obscure.

The centre of the membrana pupillaris begins to disappear.

The semicircular canalsare quite ossified.

The os hyoides ossifies.

The 2 semilunar valves of the foramen ovale approach more,
and allow less blood to pass. The proportion of the canalis ar-
teriosus to the pulmonary branches lessens.

Ss eb


926 GROWTH OF


The cartilages of the larynx and trachea are more solid, and
the lungs more cellular.

The liver is of a deep red; and the urine straw-coloured.

One testicle, generally the left, descends into the scrotum,
while the other is still below the ring in the inguinal region. At
this time only does the vas deferens bend upon itself, after having
descended along the testicle, and then it ascends.

The womb attains its permanent form. White gelatinous mucus
fills the vagina, and the vulva is open.

7. The seventh period includes the ninth and tenth months.

i. The vitality of the foetal placenta lessens: the circulation
through the lungs is stronger ; and the heart favours the separa-
tion of the two circulations more and more. Thus the embryo
prepares to leave its mother: when the separation occurs at the
beginning of the period, there is no abortion, but a premature de-
livery; i. e. the foetus may live, though not yet at maturity.

In the ninth month, the ovum weighs 44 pounds. The embryo
is 17 or 18 inches long, and weighs 5 or 6 pounds.

The down begins to fall off, and the hairs lengthen: the nails are
firmer.

The bones of the head extend nearer together, and the fonta-
nelles lessen: the hemispheres of the cerebellum grow more
towards the base and the posterior part. Most of the convolutions
of the cerebrum are in the anterior and middle lobes.

Some fragments only remain of the membrana pupillaris, float-
ing at the edge of the iris.

The larynx and trachea are completely ossified, and contain a
thin mucus.

The bile is of a bright green, mucous, and mild.

The coats of the intestine are thicker, and the muscular is dis-
tinguishable. ‘The meconium is darker, and viscid.

The canal of the peritoneum into the scrotum is still open.

The limbs are fuller and rounder.

ii. At the tenth month, the ovum is 10 or 11 inches long, and 7
broad ; 18 or 19 in circumference. The placenta is about 9 inches
in its greatest diameter, 24 in circumference, and 1} thick. The
chord is 18 or 20 inches long, and 4 an inch thick. The embryo
is 18 or 20 inches long; from 34 to 31 broad at the head and
pelvis, from 42 to 44at the shoulders. The ovum weighs about
1} pound; two thirds of which depend upon the placenta and


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 927


chord. The liquor amnii weighs nearly 4a pound, and the em-
bryo 6 or 7 pounds; so that the whole weight is usually 8 or 9
pounds.

The downy hairs have chiefly disappeared. The epidermis is
solid and smooth; the skin dense and of a reddish white. The
hairs of the head are pretty long and firm: the nails solid. The
cartilages of the ears thicker. The limit between the skin of the
embryo and the membranes of the chord is more distinct at the
umbilicus.

The spinal chord now reaches to the third lumbar vertebra
only. Its canal is grown smaller, and surrounded by a reddish
substance. The grooves of the cerebellum are more numerous,
and have produced its ultimate divisions, even the amy gdale.
The spaces between the optic thalami and corpora striata are
filled up by the dense semicircular bands. The corpora striata
lie deeper in the substance of the hemispheres ; and the lateral
ventricles, though absolutely larger, are relatively smaller than
before.

The articular processes of the various bones are more ossified.
The first medullary cavities begin to form in the tibia, but con-
tain a jelly only, reddish, mucilaginous, and slightly unctuous.
Ossification begins in the second set of teeth, and in the os coc-
cygis.

The muscles are stronger and redder, the tendons more solid
and shining, the nates more prominent.

The testes are in the scrotum, and have a tunica vaginalis.
The peritoneal canal begins to close.

The labia are in contact, and close the vulva.*

Except the organs of vegetative or organic life, or of nutrition,
no part is a prolongation of another, like vegetable shoots. The sa-
livary glands, lungs, liver, and pancreas proceed from the mucous
layer; and the vascular glands from the vascular layer ; but all


* These statements of development are compiled chiefly from the inspections
of J. Hunter, Albinus, Seemmerring, Meckel, Wenzel, Reil, Blumenbach,
Autenrieth, Tiedemann, Carus, Wrisberg, Baer, Valentin, Kieser, Pockels,
Rathke, Miiller, Burdach, Senff, Mayer, Madai, and Velpeau. Our old coun-
trymen, “‘ Harvey (De Generat. Animal. p. 184. 235. sq. London, 1651), Grew
(Cosmol. Sacr. p. 37. 47.), Lister (De Humorib. p. 444.)” were aware of “ the
resemblance of the very early human embryo at first to the larve of reptiles,
afterwards in some measure to the foetuses of quadruped mammals,”


32 3


and


928 GROWTH OF


the organs of animal life are formed each independently of the
other, approaching and harmonising as they grow. The essential
organs are generally formed the first. Some parts in embryonic
life are below (as the spleen, nose, limbs), others above (as the
brain, spinal chord, eyes, ears, great end of the stomach, appendix
ceci, liver, heart, supra-renal capsules, thymus, and thyreoid
gland), their proportion to others in adult life. Some which are
below the adult proportion at the end are above it at the first of
foetal life, as the intestines, tongue, testes, ovary, penis, and clitoris.
There is a general tendency to surpass the limits of the due pro-
portion and equilibrium of the perfect state, as exemplified in the
elongation of the eyelids at the time the eye is to be covered,
till they touch and cohere: in the opening of the mouth extend-
ing at first across the face: in the venous and arterial sac, when
the heart first divides, being connected by an intermediate canal
only: in the distinction of the ventricles of the heart being at
first visible externally by a depression: in the fibres of the feetal
brain being more distinct than those of the adult: in the villi of
the intestines being longer: and in the mucous membrane and
cartilages of the larynx being originally almost separated.%

The periods of growth vary more or less in individual em-
bryos, notwithstanding their general observance: and, indeed,
the relative growth of organs is not always the same. These va-
riations occur in all animals. The ultimate period is the same;
but, according to original tendencies, the general and individual
growth accomplished in the period varies greatly in each being,
just like varieties in form and other qualities. Growth in gene-
ral, “both before and after birth, is more rapid as the age is
less, and vice versa.” It occurs, however, before birth, according
to Autenrieth and Scemmerring, in an oscillating manner, being,
in regard to length, very rapid during the first month, slower in
the second, rapid again in the third, slower at the beginning of
the fourth, quicker from the middle of the fourth to the seventh,
and slower after the seventh; while in other directions the re-
verse is observed at the same periods. Premature labour is more
common at times of the most rapid growth in length.

All the parts above the umbilicus, —the head, chest, upper
extremities, and upper part of the abdomen, grow more rapidly


1 Burdach, 1. c. § 478.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 929


than those below it. The same is observed in brutes ; the upper
extremities grow faster than the lower even in the kangaroo.

As all the solids proceed from liquids, the organs all be-
come more solid as age advances, till they have obtained their
due solidity. 10,000 parts of brain taken from a pretty advanced
embryo lose by evaporation 8,694; from an adult, but 8,096:
of the salivary glands from an embryo, 8,469; from an adult, but
7,600: of the liver from an embryo, 8,064; from an adult, but
7,600.* The proper colour and texture are likewise acquired by
degrees only; as well, no doubt, as the proper ultimate com-
position. The secretions are each at first, correspondently with
the softness of the solid products of nutrition, watery, and acquire
their due intensity of character by degrees only.

The embryo has at first no movement, and Bichat found that,
the younger an embryo was among mammal brutes, the greater
was the difficulty of stimulating the muscles; and that irrita-
bility ceased immediately on its death, and was not of much
amount till just before the full time, and then much less than
after birth. The human feetus is large enough‘in the fifth month
to make its motions felt by its mother; these gradually increase
in force, and may be felt by others who apply their hand to the
abdomen of the parent. They are very irregular. When the
hand is applied for a little time to the abdomen, different parts
will be felt thrust against it and striking the hand irregularly now
in some spot or spots and then in others. The application of cold
to the mother’s abdomen increases these movements very much.
In the last month or two of pregnancy they cease to increase,
from the want of room.

When the nervous system is sufficiently compounded and organ-
ised for consciousness and motive and will, these would scarcely
seem to be excited before birth ; at any rate, after their establish-
ment as powers, they remain long inactive, and the child is like any
one asleep till birth, and its movements must be the same as those
which occur in us unconciously in sleep. Respiratory movements
are not possible so early as those of voluntary muscles not con-
cerned in respiration. A foetus expelled at five months, seldom
breathes, though it may move its limbs; one at seven months
breathes weakly and irregularly, especially if the air is cool.


* Haller, El. Phys. t. viii. p. 266
oP 4


930 GROWTH OF


Just before birth at full time, nay, even at the seventh month,
a foetus has occasionally cried. Cases of vagitus in utero have
been often published in German collections s, on excellent autho-
rity, but generally dismissed in this country as too ridiculous for
credit. Burdach remarks, that generally there have been violent
movements of the foetus at the same time; an unusual develope-
ment of the lungs; a disengagement of gases in the amnion, or
something else morbid ; and that most such children have perished
soon after birth. He suggests that, if the liquor amnii happen
to be greatly reduced, air must supply its place, though generally
this may be unfit in quality and insufficient in quantity for re-
spiration, and the child’s position must prevent the act.


The facts which have been just detailed present one of the
magnificent views of the universality and simplicity of the plans,
by which results, so different from each other, are effected in
nature. A hand, a hoof, a paw, a fin, a wing, are identical fun-
damentally; so are the gills and bivalve shells of mollusca, and
the wings and elytra of insects, the proboscis of the elephant,
and the human nose: but they have variously grown; and the
case is the same with all organs. They grow, with their con-
stituent or elementary parts, so variously in different animals,
that their identity is not recognised without study: but still one
idea, one plan, carried shorter or farther, varied in this way
or in that, pervades all animal formations, although the results —
the function and shape, may have no analogy in differgnt ani-
mals.' “ The organs of the higher, and those of the lower tribes,


’ See an abundance in Hesse’s work, entitled Ueber das Schreien der Kinder
im Mutterleibe, p. 57—72.

* Aristotle founded his classification of animals very much upon this doctrine
of unity of organic structure, or theory of the analogies of organs ; unfortu-
nately, he was not content with it, but fancied a unity and analogy of form
and function, and thus admitted great error into his system. Geoffroy St. Hilaire
pointed out his errors, and set the doctrine right, in his Philosophie Anatomique,
1818. His views are now adopted by the best naturalists on the Continent ;
though Sir C. Bell, with the same ignorance and assurance with which he
treats phrenology, says, sneeringly, in irony, that St. Hilaire’s conceptions
deserve to be marked as the commencement of a new wera. (Bridgewater Trea-
tise, London, 1834, p. 154.) Dr. Grant speaks, throughout his lectures, of the


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 93]


if not of plants, certainly of animals, are, in both, essentially
the same; the nucleus or structural elements of each organ in
the former not only existing, but being, in fact, in all their
essential characters, identical with those of the corresponding
organ in the latter; so that the history of the advancement of
each organ towards perfection is merely the history of the pro-
gressive developement of an imaginary unity. And as the more
elevated tribes of animals embrace generally, in a greater or less
degree, every improvement successively made in the moulds of
the several organs of the tribes below them, the splendid human
organisation itself consists merely of the same organs, regarded
fundamentally, as exist in the polype: the difference consisting,
chiefly, in their different degrees of elaboration.” Thus, in the
words of Dr. Grant, “in every case where we imagine we have
got elements that do not exist in other animals, but only in the
particular species we are examining, they exist under another
form in man.” “ If we prosecute this scrutiny from the highest
to the lowest, we advance by such insidious steps, that we never
lose sight, for a moment, of the nucleus, as it were, of our crystal,
however varied it may become in form and office; and are at
length surprised, on arriving at its extreme developement, to per-
ceive that the organ from which we started, and that with which
we finish, and which do not, perhaps, when placed abruptly in
juxtaposition, present a single point of resemblance, anatomical
or physiological, are, in fact, rude copies of each other.”

It is, however, more correct to say, with Dr. Knox, that the unity
is rather of structural elements, or primitive types, than of organs,
in the series of animals; since a portion which is found in one
organ of one animal may be found in another organ of another
animal. For example, the os hyoides loses two of its elements
in man, which are found as portions of the temporal bones and
termed styloid processes, as well as other portions found in other
contiguous parts, so that it has none of the appearance of the


ingenuity and boldness of the speculations of St. Hilaire, and Says that we are
a century behind our Continental neighbours in this department of science and
thus “ his views are very inadequately appreciated among us.”

“ Dr. Fletcher, Rudiments of Physiology, part i. chap. ii., in which he has
compiled so well on this subject, that Ihave not hesitated to borrow either his
details, or his clear and forcible language.


932 GROWTH OF


complicated pharyngeal bone of fishes and reptiles; and, on the
other hand, the distinct intermaxillary bone of so many of the
lower tribes forms one bone, in man, with the lower jaw. Nor
is every part more developed in the higher than the lower tribes.
The large opercular bones of fishes are the small bones of the
tympanum in man: the large coracoid arch of fishes becomes
the furcula of reptiles and birds and the small coracoid process
of man. I remarked at page 2., that the scale of animals, though
real, was not regular and uniform; that a lower animal might in
one point excel a higher; and, on close anatomical investigation,
a part may be found poorly grown in a higher species that is
large in a lower; a part may be found in a single species, or
variety, or tribe, in a condition in which it is found in no other
species, not to say of that tribe, but of other tribes for some
distance above or below it. Some parts arrive, in some lower
animals, at a higher degree than in higher animals. “ The central
organ of sensibility,” says Burdach, “ is at first hollow in all ver-
tebrate animals, and the spinal chord retains a cavity in all brute
mammalia, whereas this is completely filled in the human embryo :
but in fish the cerebral vesicles are also completely filled, while
in man their cavity is diminished only.” The stomach, at first
like an intestine, is gradually divided by strangulations ; but this
difference goes much further than in man. The cartilages of the
trachea grow from before backwards; but, whereas in man their
posterior extremities only approach each other, in saurian reptiles
and birds they become perfect wings. *

Before arriving at a higher grade natural to any particular
animal, each organ passes through the inferior grades natural to
some other animals; and, as Dr. Grant remarks, ‘‘we witness
the same stages of developement, by tracing it through the highest
animal in the course of its progressive elaboration, as by tracing
it through the great body of the animal kingdom.” The science
of the stages of all the organs in different animals, and at
different periods of the same animals, is denominated Tran-
scendental Anatomy. The gills of mollusca and osseous fishes
are met with in all superior tribes at one period of their pro-
gress to maturity, — when they have passed through about one
sixth of their incubation. The heart of the foetuses of fishes is


XL Gy SAT 2°


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 933


moulded on that of invertebrate animals: that of the foetuses of
fish and reptiles is originally the same,—a simple tube, which
gradually becomes contracted in the middle, and afterwards
turned upon itself, so that the auricular is brought above the
ventricular portion; but in the higher reptiles, a partial division
of the two sides takes place. In the chick, the heart, about the
thirtieth hour of incubation, is a simple tube, lying in the neck,
as it does permanently in fish: about the forty-fifth hour, it be-
comes contracted in the middle, and turned upon itself; and
about the sixty-fifth hour, a division of the two sides begins to take
place, — first in the ventricle, and then in the auricle, which about
the sixth or seventh day leaves no communication except the
foramen ovale. The heart of the dog is a mere tube, contracted
in the middle, turned upon itself, and lying in the neck, about the
twenty-first day of utero-gestation; that of the human embryo,
about the fourth week: both cavities afterwards divide, first the ven-
tricle, and then the auricle; and at the end of the third month the
foramen ovale is the only spot of communication. The five branchial
loops, arising on each side from the single vessel which proceeds
from the heart of osseous fishes, are repeated almost without
change in the foetuses of batrachian reptiles; and, in proportion
as the gills disappear, those branches which went to them become
also obliterated ; and of those which remain are formed the two
aorte, and from these branch off the pulmonary arteries, &c. In
the embryo of serpents and lizards, the same primary trunk and
its loops are seen, and become the carotid and subclavian arteries,
and aorta and pulmonary arteries. In the chick, and the feetus
of brute mammals, and in man also, as I formerly detailed, the
same five loops are discovered along the borders of the clefts of
the pharynx, and some become obliterated, others enlarged; so
that the carotid and subclavian are produced, with the single
aorta and pulmonary artery.

The condition of the human brain, in the description just
given of its growth, is similar, before the second month of preg.
nancy, to that of an invertebrate animal; at the second month,
to that of an osseous fish; at the third, to that of a turtle; at
the fourth, to that of a bird; at the fifth, to that of one of the
rodentia ; at the seventh, to that of one of the digitigrada; at the
eighth, to that of one of the quadrumana;; till, at the ninth month,
it has the genuine human stamp. Not that the foetal human brain,


934 GROWTH OF


perhaps, at any time perfectly resembles that of any individual
among lower animals; for the brain of all osseous fishes, turtles,
birds, rodentia, digitigrada, quadrumana, is not precisely the
same: but it represents their brains in general, — the aggregate
of their brains. Nor that, although the germs of all animals start
together, — some, as that of the zoophyte, proceeding but a short
way, and reaching and stopping at their destination almost instantly ;
that of the molluscous and articulated animals, annelida, crustacea,
insecta, successively, farther and later ; that of fish, reptiles, birds,
and quadrupeds, successively, farther and later; and that of man,
the farthest and latest of all,—the human embryo, at any period of its
growth or organogenesy, so far resembles an inferior animal, that it
can be mistaken for one,—that all the organs, at any period of the
human embryo’s growth, resemble all the organs of another animal:
for each organ grows more or less independently of every other ;
and, while one at a given period may resemble that of a fish, another
resembles that of a reptile, a third that of a bird, and a fourth
that of a quadruped. Consequently, as Dr. Rudolphi says, <<‘ the
human embryo is still a human embryo, distinct from all other
animals and animal embryos, and never was a worm.”” Still man
is at first a kind of zoophyte. He so resembles an hydatid,—a
cystic entozoon, that he might be mistaken for one; and the
human embryo gradually, though irregularly, passes up the scale
of animals, irregular as I have represented this of itself to be. An
immature molluscous animal corresponds very nearly with zoo-
phytes ; and an immature animal of the family of annelida with a
molluscous animal ; an immature crustaceous animal with one of
the annelida; and an immature insect in the state of larva with
one of the annelida, and in the state of pupa with one of the crus-
tacea: an immature frog, or salamander, is very nearly a fish.

It is apparent that, the lower the animal, the more its organs
are diffused and subdivided ; and that increase of excellence is
associated with increase of concentration. The organs of plants
differ from those of animals in being at once more diffuse and
more simple, and in not being contained in specific cavities, like
the viscera of animals, but tending all towards their surface ;
and so diffuse are they, that some are mutually convertible. In
zoophytes, the respiratory organs are as diffuse and as undistin-


¥ Grundriss der Physiol. § 129.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 935


guishable from the general surface as in acotyledonous plants ;
but, as we advance through the other vegetable tribes, as well as
the other tribes of invertebrated animals, they assume the ap-
pearance, first, of distinct vesicles, opening in plants by stomata
of various forms on the surface of their leaves, and in animals by
different kinds of apertures on the surface of various parts of their
bodies ; in insects, the different stigmata opening on the surface
of the body are prolonged into tubes which ramify throughout
every part of their substance. In the vertebrata, they are much
less diffuse, though some fish breathe by numerous vesicles,
called internal gills, the entrance to which is from their gullet,
while the exit is in general by corresponding apertures on the
sides of the neck; and even those fish which breathe by external
and more concentrated gills still conduct the water over them
from their pharynx by numerous apertures; the latter seem to
employ further their air-bladder, connected as it is in general
with some part of the alimentary canal, as an additional respir-
atory organ, in the same manner as some reptiles, for example
the Proteus and Siren, use both gills and lungs, while others have
both lungs and a reputedly urinary, although, perhaps, not really
urinary, bladder ; and it is not till we arrive at the highest verte-
brated fishes that we find the respiratory organs settling into a
compact pair of lungs. In the lowest vegetables and animals
we have merely scattered cells for circulation, which, by their
union, form tubes : these tubes are at first diffuse, though distinct, in
most plants and some zoophytes; but they at length exhibit di-
latations, as seen in the numerous little hollow bands in the vas-
cular semicircles which surround a portion of the intestinal canal
of the earth-worm. Similar dilatations in the cuttlefish take the
form of the three hearts, and in the ship-worm of two; and, ulti-
mately, we arrive at the one compact heart of the vertebrata:
the large arterial, venous, and absorbent tubes are double or
still more diffuse in the lower tribes, though single in the higher,
In the invertebrata we have often numerous blind pouches con-
nected with the stomach, or even with the whole intestinal canal,
or numerous stomachs; in the vertebrata, subdivisions of the
stomach are very common. Ramifications, also, or plurality of the
organs are found in some ; bundles of scattered tubes serve as a
liver in most insects ; and in the lowest vertebrata, the liver has
deep fissures, and the pancreas is a collection of cecal appen-


936 GROWTH OF


dages to various parts of the alimentary canal, and at last is
divided into two portions. Inthe invertebrata, the kidneys are so
diffuse, as to appear wanting: and, among vertebrata, in most
fishes,they are a diffuse spongy, beaded mass, extending along the
greater part of the spine; in most of the lower tribes are lobulated,
and in some actually resemble a bunch of grapes. The genital
organs may be described as almost universally diffused through-
out the substance of such of the inferior tribes of vegetables and
animals as propagate by shoots. When distinct sexual organs
exist, they are frequently, as in most vegetables and many
animals, combined first in the same individual, and in vegetables
are generally also scattered over the system. Where the sexes are
distinct, the organs are progressively concentrated, the ovaries
and testes of the ascaris lumbricoides, &c. being an enormously
long convoluted tube and looking like the liver of insects; when
these tubes are condensed into solid organs, the ovaries are at
first deeply lobulated, and the testes of most vertebrated ani-
mals, except man, have the epididymis distinct ; the uterus is at
first double in the ornithorynchus, then doubly arched in the
opossum tribe, horned but not arched in most quadrupeds,
slightly bifid in the makis, triangular in the ant-eater, and com-
pact and pear-shaped in woman. The human mamme are
far more concentrated than in most other mammals. The
human placenta is a concentration of the cotyledons of qua-
drupeds, and these of the diffuse corresponding organs of
ovipara. In many invertebrata and vertebrata, the whole penis is
double ; in the opossum, the glans only. “ It is probable that
quite the lowest tribes of animals, as the polypes” (or rather the
zoophytes, of which they are parts), “‘ smell, see, and hear by their
whole surface; and in even the mollusca and articulata these
organs are much less individualised and compact than in the
higher tribes of animals. The organ of smell is in general very
obscure, and that of sight, though sufficiently obvious, from the
infusoria upwards, generally very diffuse,” as instanced in the nume-
rous stemmata of some annelida, and most arachnida, the hundreds
and thousands of compound eyes of insects, and the stemmata and
compound eyes of others. No animal with a lachrymal gland has it
so compact as the ape and man. The tongue of serpents is almost
double, and of many birds and some mammalia is slightly cloven.

If, as some fancy, a few vegetables exhibit traces of a nervous


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 937


system, it is in the form, not of masses, nor even of chords, but of
minute globules; among the lowest invertebrate animals in
which it has already been discovered, it is in the form of granules.
Next we see it as diffuse chords and knots, loosely connected,
and disposed in a circle in the lowest, but in a line running down
the body in the greater number, of the invertebrata. The con-
necting medium of the knots is double in some, single in
others, which must thus be supposed to have more concentration ;
and, in animals considerably farther advanced, the main part of
the nervous system is no longer in diffuse knots, but in one large
knot, called the thoracic ganglion, in the centre of the body. In
those which have a distinct spinal chord, as fishes, reptiles, birds,
and mammals, it generally reaches the os coccygis; but, in man,
it terminates about the second lumbar vertebra.

Now concentration gradually takes place in the growth of
animals. The respiratory organs in general are more diffuse in
the imperfect than in the perfect state of insects and reptiles ; the
larva of the frog, ex. gr., has both gills and lungs, but loses the
former as it approaches maturity. In the larva of insects,
the stomach and its appendages are more diffused than in the
pupa; and in the pupa, than in the imago. This holds among
reptiles; the intestines of the frog, for example, not exceeding
one quarter of the length they had in the tadpole. In those
animals which undergo metamorphoses, the nervous system experi-
ences more concentration as the animal arrives at higher grades of
organisation ; the chain of knots in insects, for instance, becoming
in some much shorter by the coalition of three or four into one,
—a circumstance looking like an attempt to produce a distinct
spinal chord and brain. The connecting chords, which were at
first double, frequently become almost or entirely single in the
progress of growth. But, in the growth of the human embryo, the
progress of concentration is the most remarkable. The germinal
membrane is probably of the nature of a zoophyte, — a uniform
mass, consisting, in every point, of rude structures performing
offices analogous to those of organs not yet formed. Its first
step to concentration is its division into the mucous and
serous layers ;. and afterwards the vascular layer appears. These
layers soon cease to be uniform, and farther concentration
takes place by the mucous dividing into stomach, intestines, and
other organs composed essentially of mucous tissue ; the vascular,


938 GROWTH OF


into heart and large blood-vessels ; and the serous, into spinal
chord and brain, bones, muscles, and common integuments.
Pre-existing central organs do not first form, and shoot towards
the extreme points, as Mayer contended?; while Serres would
have us believe that formation proceeds from without in-
wards. But each part, each minute vessel and nerve, has a
sort of separate existence and development; and coalition of all
the separate portions takes place ; junction being effected at least
as much from the advance of the extreme portions towards the
central, as of the central towards the extreme. The perfection
and insulation of each organ is, however, slowly attained. Not
only are all the organs that are ultimately single, at first double,
— as the stomach, intestines, heart, brain, certain bones, and other
parts in the mesial line, and concentrated by the union of the
halves on both sides of the body; but the proper instrument of
each function has, in the early human embryo, the same diffuse
character which it presents-in the perfect lower animals. The
human foetus, in its progress to maturity, had at one time a
kind of gills as well as lungs, to say nothing of the employment of a
yelk bag, an allantoid, and a placenta, as respiratory organs; all its
large blood-vessels, which were afterwards to become single, were
double; the intestinal canal was enormously long and sinuated;
the liver double, with each portion deeply indented; the kid-
neys were long and lobulated ; the ovaries of the female lobulated,
and the testis and epididymis of the male distinct ; the uterus was
at first distinctly double, and afterwards bifid; all the conglomerate
glands were merely distinct mucous tubes, shooting into gelatinous
masses, by which they at length became concentrated ; the spinal
chord, originally a double thread, extended at the third month
to the os coccygis, but gradually shortened, so that at the se-
venth month it terminated about the fifth, and at the ninth about
the second lumbar vertebra; the bones were at first innumerable.
The brain, by the more intimate approximation of its parts,
becomes one mass; the three segments of the heart become
one part: the kidneys were originally like a bunch of grapes ;
the salivary glands were distinct vesicles; the arches of the

“ Meckel’s Archiv fiir Anatomie, 1826, p. 228.

* Anatomie Comparée du Cerveau, t. i. p. 50. See Gall’s powerful refutation
of Serres’s doctrine of centralisation so far back as 1825. 1. c. 8vo, te vi. Pp. 355.
sgq Even poor Mr. Miller saw facts against it. Lancet, 1888, No. 762. p. 59.


THE HUMAN SYSTEM. 939


vertebra, and cartilages of the larynx, as well as the general walls
of the body, unite into one in the median line.

It must strike us, however, that, the higher the degree obtained
by an organ, the greater is its complexity. But this seems to me
no exception to the rule of its greater concentration. For, in
fact, complexity of organ occurs only where there are additional
or more exquisite results. The law of nature’s works, and of
man’s, is the same. Every advance is marked by more numerous
and more exquisite results, but necessarily by more numerous
means for the production of the more numerous results: and, in
order to render these more exquisite, the means become divided,
separate divisions being requisite for separate divisions of each
result. Division of labour is as necessary in nature as in art, for
exquisiteness. In truth, the greater complication of an organ, in
proportion as the results are more numerous or exquisite, is vir-
tually concentration. If the whole were as simple as previously
to the advance of the results, this would be virtually increased
diffusion, —the means of more numerous results would be in
a state of diffusion throughout the organ. But each portion
takes a subdivision of duty, and this is virtually concentration.
The brain of a lower animal is more simple than that of a
higher. Its fewer parts do everything. The higher animal has
more faculties, and more exquisite degrees of faculties: accord-
ingly, its brain has more parts — organs, notwithstanding that
every part which it has in common with the inferior tribes is more
concentrated. The greater complexity of a perfect organ, as the
farther and farther subdivision of the fibres of nerves, muscles, and
tendons ; the division of the heart into arterial ventricle and ve-
nous sinus, of the facial cavity into nasal and oral, of the alimentary
canal into stomach and large and small intestines, is no more than
the existence of serous, mucous, and vascular layer where before
there was merely the germinal membrane, or the existence of nu-
merous organs where before there was merely serous, mucous,
and vascular layer. The means for the more numerous and ex-
quisite results must be multiplied; but each of the means, ne-
vertheless, becomes more concentrated the higher we ascend ;—
as in art, the means are subdivided into sets, but, at the same time,
each set simplified. Complexity of organs increases from the first
period of growth, and concentration of each individual organ
advances till each organ is finished. Division into new portions,

3 Q


940 EMBRYOLOGY.


and the rise of new portions for new purposes, are going on from
the first ; while any organ or portion of an organ remains perfectly
the same in its results, it never becomes more complicated >, but
still constantly more concentrated till it is finished.


Harvey remarked that, the higher the ultimate developement of
animals, the more rapid is the progress through the stages. “ The
embryonic life of the chick is 3 weeks, and of man 40; the third
day of the chick, therefore, corresponds with the sixth week of
man: but the human embryo makes far greater progress during
these first six weeks. Hence the transitory organs of the em-
bryo disappear sooner in man than in brute mammalia. But this
rapidity renders it difficult to study the first stages of the deve-
lopement of mammals, and drives us to the analogy of birds.’*¢


Since the preceding pages were written, Dr. Martin Barry has
published farther investigations in the ovum of the rabbit. The
following are his discoveries.

An immature ovum has oil-like globules diffused in a fluid
The mature presents a peripheral stratum, sometimes of granules.
sometimes of vesicles pressed together in a polyhedral form; the
centre being fluid.

The oil-like globules are vesicles; and contain other vesicles,
opake internally, and often compressed into an irregular shape.
They collect and perhaps originate round the germinal vesicle.
Maceration has an effect like that of impregnation ; as far as it dis-
tends the chorion — a thick transparent membrane which was con-
sidered by him and Coste and Wagner to be and probably is the
vitellary membrane in birds and was called by some zona pellucida,
while the yelk ball retains its size and form, —a proof that this
has a proper membrane. During maceration, the germinal ve-
sicle, previously to disappearing, sometimes becomes elliptical.

During the period of rut, Graafian vesicles enlarge and grow vas-
cular; and more of them than discharge ova. In such Graafian
vesicles, the germinal vesicle, as was stated in the former paper, has


» That increase, concentration and complexity, are not uniform in the scale
of animals, has been illustrated at pp. 2. 932. sqq. Seealso infra, p. 945.

© Burdach, 1. c. § 476. 6°.

4d Phil. Trans. 1839, Pt. ii.


EMBRYOLOGY. * 941


moved.to the surface of the yelk, and the ovum to that part of the
surface of the Graafian vesicle which is nearest the exterior of the
ovary; and the yelk is matured. The germinal vesicle is often at
that part of the surface of the yelk which is nearest the surface
of the Graafian vesicle, and therefore nearest the surface of the
ovary. The fluid of the Graafian vesicles which are near the
surface becomes more viscid, and this change, as well as changes
of the yelk, increases as the period of the rut advances.

After coitus, the ova of the rabbit destined for developement
are very frequently discharged at the end of 8 or 9 hours, though
the condition of the animal, and especially the period of the rut,
probably cause great differences in this respect. All the ova of
one impregnation appear discharged about the same time. If an
unusually large number escape from one ovary, fewer propor-
tionally escape from the other.¢


© The sow from which John Hunter extracted an ovarium (supra, p. 783.)
produced in her time about half the number of pigs produced by an unmutilated
sow, but at eight farrows only; whereas the entire sow farrowed thirteen times.
He took two young sows in all respects similar to each other, and, after re-
moving an ovarium from one, admitted a boar of the same farrow to each, and
allowed them to breed. The perfect sow bred till she was about eight years old,
—a period of almost six years, in which time she had thirteen farrows, and in
all one hundred and sixty-two pigs ; the other bred till she was six years old, —
during a space of more than four years, and in that time she had eight farrows,
and in all seventy-six pigs. Thus it would appear that each ovarium is destined
to afford a certain number only of foetuses, and that the removal of one, although
it does not influence the number of foetuses produced by the other, causes them
to be produced in a shorter time. (An experiment to determine the effect of ex-
tirpating one ovarium upon the number of young produced, In his Observations
on certain Parts, §c. )

Domestication affects fertility. ‘The domestic sow brings forth commonly
two litters in the year, each of which consists perhaps of 20 young ones. The
wild animal, on the contrary, becomes pregnant only once in the year, and the
number of its young never exceeds 10. Both reach about the same age, viz. 20
years. A similar difference is found to obtain between tame and wild cats, and
between tame and wood pigeons.” (Blumenbach, Compar. Anat. s. 341.)

I might have remarked formerly at p. 794. that the number of young de-
pends on neither the frequency, nor duration of copulation, nor on the abundance
of male semen: and at p. 721. that treble copulation is requisite to the generation
of certain beings, for Sennebier declares some animalcule to be endowed with
so little sense of propriety that three individuals co-operate at procreation. See
his translation of Spallanzani’s Opuscoli di Fisica Animale et Vegetale, §c. p. 1xxvi.


3:Q 2


942 EMBRYOLOGY.


After some hours the germinal vesicle has left the surface of
the yelk and is returning to the centre where it was originally, but
whence it passed in the unimpregnated ovum to the surface. About
the same time a vesicle arises from the germinal spot, enlarges
speedily, and applies itself to the internal surface of the germinal
vesicle. This new vesicle imbibes the fluid of the germinal vesicle :
and the germinal vesicle in its new situation is finely granulous,
less transparent, firmer, and of a yellowish brown.

The germinal spot soon moves to the centre of the germinal
vesicle; exactly as the latter does to the centre of the yelk.

The fine membrane of the yelk after this suddenly thickens:
just before the ovum leaves the ovary, and very often even during
this change, the transparent membrane of the ovum imbibes fluid
and distends, leaving a minute space filled with fluid between
itself and the yelk ball.

These changes render it probable that the ovary in mammalia
is the seat of impregnation: the spermatozoa actually penetrate
“alive and active” to the surface of the ovary, according to the
late observations of Professor Bischoff inthe dog‘, and subsequently
of Dr. M. Barry in the rabbit; though in 17 out of 19 cases the
latter could not find them.

The peculiar granules or rather vesicles of the ovisac hang
less tenaciously together, and often seem passing to a fluid state.
Its tail-like appendages were distinctly seen continued into the
four persistent retinacula, and evidently contribute to the same
office. The retinacula, previously wrinkled, now enlarge.

Though most of these changes occur before the ovum leaves
the ovary, some of the latter occasionally do not take place till it
has entered the Fallopian tube.

Not the minute ovum, but the retinacula and tunica granulosa,
outsideit, are the parts which, besides their offices mentioned supra,
p- 790., present a surface to be acted on by the vis a tergo which
expels the ovum from the ovary: and the vis a tergo is produced
by the exuberant growth of a reddish fleshy mass which acts
through the medium of the fluid of the Graafian vesicle. The
retinacula and tunica granulosa are discharged with the ovum,
render its escape gradual, perhaps facilitate its passage into the
Fallopian tube, appear to be the bearers of fluid for the imme-


f Lehrbuch der Physiologie, 1. Leipsig, 1839.


EMBRYOLOGY. 943


diate imbibition of the ovum, and probably enter into the form-
ation of the chorion.

When the discharge of the ovum is very near, the portion of
the Graafian vesicle that is directed outwards is seen to have been
removed, so that little remains to arrest it but the peritoneum;
and this gives way the last. The Graafian vesicle was formerly
(p- 789.) shown to consist of the true ovisac and of a covering
gradually formed. The latter has now become thick and very
vascular.


am, Aronion.

amf, Union of the membranes am, and /.

bb, The true germ.

bb1, Central portion of the germ.

bb2, Future vascular lamina of the umbilical vesicle.
cho, Chorion, subsequently villous.


d, Yelk.
f, Thick transparent membrane of the ovarian ovum, — “ Zona pellucida.”


jf}, Fluid imbibed by the chorion.
gl, Tunica granulosa.
g2, Retinacula.


h, Ovisac.
i, Proper covering of the ovisac, — Corpus luteum: hi, Graafian vesicle.


k, Stroma, or substance of the ovary.
l, Peritoneum,
These references apply to this and the five following cuts.


SeGyS


94:4 EMBRYOLOGY.


A few hours after the discharge of the ovum, the true ovisac
may easily be squeezed out of its vascular covering, translucent,
spherical, with the margin of its ruptured orifice bloody, its dia-
meter less than half a line. Jf no pressure is applied, and the ex-
amination is deferred for a few days, the ovisac is not to be found,
whether expelled or entirely obscured: from the centre of its
vascular covering a mamillary process projects: and this vascular
covering becomes the corpus luteum.

Many ova, both mature and immature, disappear at this time by
absorption. The yelk of the mature liquefies, and first around the
germinal vesicle; the germinal vesicle collapses, and does not, as
after impregnation, return to the centre ; the germinal spot breaks
up; the zona pellucida becomes thin and distended with fluid, but
its imbibed fluid mixes with the yelk, which it does not after im-
pregnation; the proper membrane of the yelk does not thicken
and is not even visible; the tunica granulosa and retinacula
liquefy and leave the ovum uncovered. The yelk becomes at once
a colourless fluid, whether the oya are mature or immature, and
not nearly black from myriads of minute granules and oil-like
globules, as in ova absorbed before copulation. Some of the larger
unbroken Graafian vesicles, which the number of discharged ova
forbid us to suppose intended to discharge, contain a large quan-
tity of blood.

In some animals minute ovisacs are found in the infundibulum
or large end of the Fallopian tube, discharged probably by the
rupture of large Graafian vesicles in whose walls or neighbourhood
they had been situated.

The discharged ova generally lie very near each other in the
Fallopian tube. They seem stationary for some time at the com-
mencement of the uterus, — within half an inch or an inch of the
Fallopian tube.

The ovum enters the uterus in a state very different from that
in which it left the ovary. 1. An outer membrane—the chorion
becomes visible. For Dr. M. Barry confesses himself to have been
mistaken in supposing that the thick transparent membrane called
zona pellucida and furnished in the ovary is the chorion (supra,
p- 785. sqq.) On crushing an ovum of 41 hours, and about an
inch from the infundibulum of the Fallopian tube, a thin mem-
brane is found closely investing and rising from the transparent
zone. This is the chorion. It at first imbibes fluid, by which it is


EMBRYOLOGY. 945


for a time separated from the zone. Then the fluid passes into the
interior of the ovum, and the chorion is again in contact with the
transparent zone from which it rose,
2. The proper membrane of the
yelks, which had suddenly thick-
ened, disappears by liquefaction:
so that the yelk is immediately sur-
rounded by the zone. 3. Several
large and very transparent vesicles
form in the centre of the yelk
and successive sets of these ap-
pear, smaller and smaller, till the
centre of the ovum is mulberry-like. Each vesicle has a pel-
lucid nucleus, and each nucleus a nucleolus.

There is no fixed relation between the size of the entire ovum
and the degree of developement of its most essential parts:
ex. g. the embryo may be far larger or far smaller proportionally
to the ovum in some of its parts than in others. Nay, no two
parts necessarily keep the same pace: ex.g. the umbilical ve-
sicle may be far behind the advance of the embryo.»

In the uterus, a layer of vesicles of the same kind as those of
the last and smallest set here mentioned makes it appearance on
the whole of the inner surface of the
membrane which now invests the
yelk. The mulberry-like structure
then passes from the centre of the
yelk to a certain part of that layer,
(the vesicles of the latter coalescing
with those of the former, when the
two sets are in contact, to form a
membrane,—the future amnion,) and
the interior of the mulberry-like
structure is now seen to be occupied by a large vesicle contain-
ing a fluid and dark granules. In the centre of the fluid of this
vesicle is a spherical body, composed of a substance having a
finely granulous appearance, and containing a cavity filled with


& Dr. M. B. retains the word yelk to signify the contents of the ovarian vesicle,
within the ovisac, and around the germinal vesicle, but doubts the analogy implied
by it.

h See supra, p. 928. sq.; infra, pp. 956. 983. sq.

3 Q4


946 EMBRYOLOGY.


a colourless and pellucid fluid. This hollow spherical body seems
to be the true germ; unless it were
more correct to regard the vesicle
with all its contents as the germ.
The vesicle containing it disappears,
and in its place is seen an elliptical
depression filled with a pellucid fluid.
In the centre of this depression, is the
germ, still presenting the appearance


of a hollow sphere.

“‘ The germ separates into a central and a peripheral portion,
both which, at first appearing granulous, are subsequently found to
consist of vesicles. The central portion of the germ occupies the
situation of the future brain, and soon presents a pointed process
and resolves itself into vesicles, disposed in layers.” « This pro-
cess becomes a hollow tube, exhibiting an enlargement at its
caudal extremity, which indicates the situation of the future sinus
rhomboidalis” of the spinal chord. We have already seen that the
foundation of the vascular system also is part of the primordial
germ.

“ Up to a certain period new layers come into view in the in-
terior of the central portion of the germ, those previously seen
being pushed farther out.” It is by these layers that a structure is
produced having the form of the central part of the nervous system.
Possibly, there is not a separation into a central and peripheral
portion, but the spherical body in the centre of the vesicle seen in
the interior of the mulberry-like structure disappears by lique-
faction, and a linear trace, corresponding to the “ primitive trace ”
of authors on the bird arises in its place.

“From the region occupied by the germ there issues a hollow
process, which by enlargement is made to line the inner surface
of the ovum, —that is to say the inner surface
of the membrane entering into the formation
of the amnion and corresponding to the
‘serous lamina’ of authors; and the process
now lining it represents an incipient state of
the subsequently ‘vascular lamina’ of the um-
bilical vesicle, — a structure continuous with
the structure corresponding to the ‘area vasculosa’ ofauthors on
the bird.


EMBRYOLOGY. 947


«There does not occur in the mammiferous ovum any such
phenomenon as the splitting of a germinal membrane into the so
called serous, vascular, and mucous laminee.

‘« Nor is there any structure entitled to be denominated ‘ ger-
minal membrane’; for it is not a previously existing membrane
which originates the germ, but it is the previously existing germ
which, by means of a hollow process, originates a structure having
the appearance of a membrane.

“ The structure entering into the formation of the amnion is no
part of that which constitutes the embryo. The first appearance
of the amnion is in the form of an epithelium —an epithelium-like
layer of vesicles on the inner surface of the zona pellucida, to
which the mulberry-like vesicles are subsequently added, and with
which they coalesce. From the delineations of authors it appears
to be a corresponding structure, which in mollusca is the foundation
of the shell, and in crustacea and arachnida that of the outer
covering of the abdomen.”

“The ovum may pass through at least 21 stages of develope-
ment, and contain, besides the embryo, four membranes, one of
which has two lamine, before it has itself attained the diameter of
half a line; a fifth membrane” —the proper membrane of the yelk
while the yelk was incipient, ‘‘ having disappeared by liquefaction
within the ovum.” The four membranes are, if we examine from
without inwards, 1. the chorion, within which is imbibed fluid,
and within which again is the yelk, escaped from its membrane
but not mixed with that imbibed fluid ; 2. the thick transparent
membrane — zona _pellu-
cida, of the ovarian ovum;
3.the amnion; 4. the sub-
sequent vascular lamina of
the umbilical vesicle con-
tinuous with the peripheral
portion of the embryo,
having alamina internal to
it, and originating in the
hollow process described as
shooting out from the re-
gion of the germ. ‘The
lamina internal to it forms
immediately after the hollow process is sent off from the germ,


948 EMBRYOLOGY.


and enlarges so as to contain the yelk: whether it is the
foundation of the mucous lamina, or contributes to the foundation
of the lamina subsequently vascular, or to that of both, Dr. M.
B.’s observations have not enabled him to determine.

«With slight pressure the ovum, originally globular, becomes
elliptical. Its tendency to assume the latter form is referable
chiefly to a property of the chorion, and seems to be in proportion
to the size of this membrane,” so that it is obvious in those chiefly
which have reached the uterus.

The proportion of ova in the uterus that appeared aborted
was about 1 to 8. They were much smaller than other ova of
the same period, and some had no chorion. ‘The ova still in the
ovary all exhibited the healthy appearance.

Dr. M. Barry’s researches confirm the statement which I made
p- 862. sq., of every animal and vegetable, if not of every organ,
springing probably from a closed cell or vesicle. The vesicle
is formed on a previously existing nucleus, which again often con-
tains anucleolus. The peculiar granules of his first paper are
vesicles: and were represented by him with nuclei and nucleoli,
though he was then ignorant of their importance. ‘The vesicles
constituting the outer portion of the mulberry-like structure of
the present paper present each a nucleus and nucleolus. The
vesicles composing the layer called amnion on the inner surface
of the zona pellucida have each their nucleus and nucleolus. The
yelk globules are true vesicles, containing other vesicles. The
villi of the chorion appear very early and are vesicles in which
are objects having the appearance of vesicles. The whole embryo
indeed is composed of vesicles, and even the primordial germ
itself seems to have been the nucleus of the vesicle in which it lies.

Schwann has demonstrated that all elementary parts, however
different physiologically, have their foundation in cells formed
on nuclei, by modifications of which muscular fibre, nervous
tube, blood-vessel, or whatever else, is produced.

Dr. M. Barry at length proved his suspicion that the succes-
sive groups of vesicles were produced in the ovum while in the
Fallopian tube by two or more infant vesicles arising in the in-
terior of each vesicle, the parent vesicle always disappearing by
liquefaction: each infant vesicle in its turn becomes the parent
of others within itself, and then liquefies, till the mulberry-like
clusters are produced. The germinal vesicle is probably an in-


EMBRYOLOGY. 949


fant internal vesicle of the zona pellucida. Since the proper and
temporary membrane of the yelk forms around the yelk, as its
nucleus, just as in other situations a cyst, cell, or vesicle form
around a nucleus; and since the germinal vesicle exists before
the granules and globules of the yelk that collect and perhaps
form around the germinal vesicle; the yelk may form around the
germinal vesicle as its nucleolus. The germinal vesicle pro-
bably arises from the germinal spot seen on its interior, just as
the original cell of vegetables is shown by Schleiden (quoted
supra, p.862. sq.) to arise from a nucleus which he denomi-
nates from its purpose cytoblast. Within the proper membrane
of the yelk,—the parent cell, new vesicles arise, the interior of
each of these presenting others. In plants Schleiden finds this
origin of vesicle within vesicle to be perhaps universal: but in
the formation of animal tissues Schwann finds it rare: Schwann’s
observations, however, refer to a period later than that investi-
gated by Dr. M. Barry. Vesicles which are formed within vesicles
may form around portions of the contents, as around nuclei, in the
same manner as perhaps the outer membrane of the yelk forms
around the yelk, the yelk perhaps around the germinal vesicle,
and the germinal vesicle perhaps around the germinal spot.i

The early separation into one part which is the foundation of
the nervous system and into another which is the foundation of
the vascular shows that division into forms takes place before
there is a perceptible distinction of tissues: thus elucidating ‘the
fact that parts in different animals, having a general resemblance
in form, are sometimes the seat of very different functions. And if
the primordial germs of organised beings in general resemble one
another in appearance,” “it is not’ surprising that there exist re-
semblances in the subsequent forms of beings more nearly allied.”
The mammal germ and vesicle curiously resemble the cytoblast
of a cryptogamous plant (Rhizina levigata) as figured by Schleiden.
The foundation of man himself is a cell, vesicle, or sac, —a sort of
hydatid ; and this imbibes nourishment like an hydatid.* Nay, the
embryos of many mollusca, as well as the germinal granules of
some polypes, perform rotatory motions: even Leeuenhoek no-
ticed these in the yelk ball of some animals nearly a century


i See Schwann’s Mikroskopische Untersuchungen, &c.
k See supra, pp. 853. 862. sq., 934.


950 EMBRYOLOGY.


anda half ago (1695), though without exciting much attention till
Carus and E.H. Weber published their observations within the
last few years: and Dr. M. Barry actually once found, among
certain vesicles which he often saw under the mucous membrane
of the rabbit’s uterus, one, having on its inner surface a layer of
elliptic granules (vesicles) and containing a pellucid fluid, in the
centre of which was an object, resembling the mulberry-like struc-
ture containing the primordial germ, already described, of the
mammal ovum, and revolving round its axis. The revolutions were
in the vertical plane; and always in the same direction ; sometimes
rapid, sometimes nearly suspended. They lasted half an hour,
and then ended rather suddenly. In a few seconds the mass as

sumed a tremulous motion, which, interrupted for a few seconds
by a renewal of the revolutions, continued for about 15 minutes.
Afterwards it was broken up by force, and some of its parts, still
hanging together, presented a renewal of the tremulous motion.
Ciliary motions were very vivid on the mucous membrane in which
the vesicle lay, but none were visible on the revolving object.
The rabbit had been killed an hour and a half before the examin-
ation was begun. Though Dr. M. Barry witnessed this rotation
but once, he has not particularly sought for it, and has frequently
seen the same mulberry-like mass in these vesicles; and the
vesicles of the mass itself have repeatedly exhibited the tremulous
motion, which in one instance was comparable to that of separate
globules in the neighbourhood of cilia in motion. Whether the
mulberry-like structure with its germ in a mammal ova rotates, is
yet to be discovered!


1 I cannot refrain from expressing my admiration of Dr. M. Barry’s two
papers, With his very existence [am acquainted solely by them. But he de-
serves to be held up as a rare combination of intense love of truth, indefatigable
industry in learning from others and searching into nature herself, high intelli-
gence, perfect conscientiousness in regard to the merits of others, and rational
modesty. Let me intreat the student to imitate him in all these points. Some
fancy that intellect scorns plodding: but the highest geniuses who have been suc-
cessful have always been hard workers ; — the dullest man may work hard, but so
must genius if it will do great things. Some mistake worldly and temporary ap-
plause — the applause of those who are not able to appreciate, such as the trum-
pery firework-like blaze of a large practice, not necessarily ending in more than
silence and darkness, for honour: but the honest and ardent investigation of
truth is far, far higher happiness and secures permanent applause, —that only
which a sensible person can desire, and which he will after all value less than


CHANGES AT BIRTH. 951


As soon as the foetus is driven forth from its mother into the
world it breathes, and then begins to cry. The placental circula-
tion has for some time grown weaker and weaker; the lungs have
been more and more perfected: the compression of the chord
and the partial separation of the placenta obstruct the blood in
the foetal umbilical arteries, and thus in the aorta, so that it is in-
clined to pass more to the lungs, through the canalis arteriosus,
than into the aorta. The chemical changes being impaired, the
blood must find difficulty in passing through the lungs, and the
want of respiration be felt." Still the facts mentioned above, at
page 214. sq., render it probable that the ordinary exciting cause
of the first inspiration is the impression of the cool air upon the
surface; and this alone will bring on respiration, should a child be
born at 7 months, — that is, before the placental circulation has
deciined or the lungs been perfected and when the circulation is
going on vigorously through the chord. But the child must have
a certain amount of excitability to be so impressed. It may not
breathe till slapped, rubbed, suddenly wetted with cold water, or
subjected to a stronger stimulant than cool air. Irritation of the
surface by mechanical means, while the foetus is still enclosed in
its membranes, will cause respiratory efforts. That the want of
chemical changes simply is not so important before respiration


——


the merit which gives rise toit. Some who even are intelligent and industrious,
and successful in cultivating science, are unhappy unless they fancy them-
selves valued above others, and are constantly attempting unjustly to lessen
the credit of others and setting forth their own merits: but such persons are un-
happy; they are not alive to the superior joys of obtaining truth for its own sake
above those of applause, they are not alive to the serene comfort of doing
justice to our fellow men, nor to that of duly estimating ourselves, and of being
thankful, and not vain, when it is certain that in some particular we are superior
to another person. Those men of science, who in their passion for applause rob
others, are infinitely worse than common thieves; for no combination can be more
lamentable than that of acquirement or talent with baseness or even me
™ See suprd, p. 227. sq.


anness.


SQ 7


952 CHANGES AT BIRTH.


has once begun, is shown by the facility with which puppies and
kittens live without respiration if taken from the womb under
water." When the growth of the foetus is nearly accomplished,
the instinct to breathe appears to be generated, just like that of
sucking ; so that irritation of the surface within the membranes
causes a degree of respiratory effort. Osiander has observed the
mouth to open and shut, and the diaphragm to rise and descend,
in foetuses expelled in their membranes ; and even while he was
performing the obstetric operation of turning. These efforts, no
doubt, generally are made during the contractions of the womb in
labour by healthy children in which there is no cause of inactivity,
but are almost always necessarily fruitless till the foetus comes
into the air. Not only old writers, however, but moderns, as Pro-
fessor Osiander® and other German authors, declare they have
heard the child cry during labour, after the membranes were rup-
tured, but while the head was still in the vagina or still in utero
with its mouth near the os uteri. Under peculiar circumstances,
its cries are said to have been heard (supra, p-930.°) in the last days
of pregnancy, before the commencement of labour. Portal was
thought to have proved that the right lung inspires the first * ;
but, since the establishment of auscultation, Mr. Jowitt declares
that the respiratory murmur may be heard equally in both lungs
immediately after birth." The upper portions, being nearer
the trachea, respire sooner than the inferior. When once respir-
ation has occurred, the lungs and thorax acquire a degree of ex-
pansion which they never lose. Bernt states that before respir-
ation the transverse diameter of the chest is from 2} to 3 inches,
but, after it has once begun, from 3 to 44 inches; the antero-
posterior diameter from 2 inches to 21 before its commence-
ment, but from 3 to 34 inches afterwards : and that the diaphragm
reaches the fifth rib before respiration, but never reaches higher
than the sixth rib after respiration has once begun: whereas in-


" See Haller, El. Physiol. t. iii. p. 225.

Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, t. ti. p. 44.

Roose, Physiologische Untersuchungen, p. 66. quoted by Burdach, § 50.
° Handbuch der Entbindungskunst, t. i. p. 660. sqq. Burdach, § 506.
P See a case in the Ph. Trans, abridged, vol. xi.

4’ Hist. de 0 Acad. des Sciences. 1769. p. 549.

* Dr. James Johnson’s Med. Chir. Review.

® Handbuch der gerichtlichen Arzxneikunde, p. 248.


CHANGES AT BIRTH. 953


flation of the chest after death produces no permanent enlargement
of the cavity. After the first inspiration, the epiglottis no longer
lies immediately upon the glottis; and the glottis becomes more
open: the trachea grows permanently wider, the folds at its
posterior part are effaced, and the transverse muscles which
unite the two extremities of its cartilages become permanently
tense: the left bronchia becomes more oblique and situated
nearly as forward as the right. The lungs experience the
greatest change, becoming permanently distended and absolutely
heavier; but they become specifically lighter, and, though pre-
viously they sank in water, they now swim, crackle under the
finger, and give out bubbles of air if pieces of them are pressed
under water ; and they still swim, whatever pains be taken to de-
prive them of air, whereas, if they have been inflated artificially,
they may be sufficiently deprived of air to sink again. The freer
entrance of the blood into the pulmonary arteries from the en-
largement of the chest, and from the impediment to its flow into
the descending aorta by the canalis arteriosus, since the umbilical
arteries are obstructed, adds to the bulk and absolute weight of
the lungs ; so that, if previously they displaced 17-10 cubic inches
of water, they now displace 33:10 cubic inches, and, if their pre-
vious weight to that of the whole body was as 1 to 60, it now
becomes as 1 to 45 the first day, 1 to 41 the second day, 1 to 37
the third day, and 1 to 38 the fourth day: their absolute weight
being in girls from 84 to 144 drachms, in boys from 9 to 16
drachms, before respiration, and gaining 6 drachms in the former
and 7 in the latter by inspiration.

The air contributes very much more than the blood to their en-
largement, and the blood very much more than the air to their in-
crease of weight. Before respiration the lungs were solid and of
a dark red like liver, and presented hundreds of small lobules:
they now become spongy, more of a vermilion colour, with points
and strize of the hue of cinnabar, and each lobule is seen to con-
sist of four still smaller, on which capillaries full of blood are
spread, giving it the appearance of a red marbling on a white
ground. After artificial respiration in a still-born child the vesicles
necessarily remain white, and this renders it difficult to discover
the four lobules of which each consists. I before stated that
respiration and its effects are not at once universal throughout
the lungs, and therefore some parts of them still sink and exhibit


954 CHANGES Al BIRTH.


the other characters of the foetal organ, while others swim and
are changed. If a child has breathed but faintly and died soon,
a sufficient portion of the lungs may not have been inflated to
support the rest in water. Torres declares this to have been ob-
served at the end of twelve days from birth.t Inflammation or
solidification of a portion of the lungs may at any age cause them
to sink in water."

As soon as respiration occurs, the blood of the right ventricle
rushes into the expanded lungs and no longer into the descending
aorta, which is now supplied by the ascending aorta only that pro-
ceeds from the left ventricle and receives blood purified in the
lungs. From the placenta no longer attracting blood to itself, since
it perishes by parturition, and from the blood now streaming freely
to the lungs and rendering it useless, the course of this through the
umbilical arteries declines; so that in perfect children their pulsation
is at an end in a few minutes, although, in those which die prema-
turely and in which the pulmonary circulation therefore does not
continue, their pulsation may last above an hour. When these puls-
ations cease, respiration may be presumed to be complete, and the
chord may be tied: should this be done before they have ceased,
the imperfect respiration may be insufficient for the purification of
the blood, and asphyxia may take place: and, should the chord be
divided and not tied, there may be fatal hemorrhage.

The inflation of the lungs causes the heart to be pushed to the
left by the larger right lung, and also downwards; and the supe-
rior vena cava is thereby lengthened. As the inferior vena cava
descends with the diaphragm, the valve of Eustachius is drawn
downwards, and thus no longer directs the blood towards the fo-
ramen ovale, and soon wastes: the hepatic veins, which before re-
spiration opened near the foramen ovale and poured their blood
almost horizontally into it, now become more distant from it and
open more obliquely into the cava: besides which circumstance the
inferior cava furnishes less blood, as it no longer obtains a supply
from the umbilical vein: and the valve of the foramen ovale, situated
inthe leftauricle,is now pushed back by the large quantity of blood
passing into this from the lungs, and closes the opening. When


t Mém. des Savans étrangers, t. i. p. 147. sqq.

« Besides Blumenbach’s references on those points at p. 845. in connection with
State-medicine, see Dr. Beck, Elements of Medical Jurisprudence. London,
1825.; Dr. Hutchinson, 4 Dissertation on Infanticide. Ed. 2d. London, 1821.


CHANGES AT BIRTH. 955


sufficient time has elapsed for all the blood of the right ventricle
to pass into the lungs so that the left auricle acquires a prepon-
derance, which previously it had not, over the right auricle, the
valve is firmly pressed against the opening, allows no blood to
pass from the right to the left auricle, and becomes adherent by
fibrin to the sides of the foramen. Usually its adherence is ac-
complished about the end of the first year ; but the time varies,
and the foramen not very rarely remains open for life. The right
ventricle, thus receiving more blood, comes not only to equal but
at length to surpass the left ventricle in capacity, and its coats
become thinner and thinner.

From the blood flowing so freely into the expanded lungs and
the descending aorta receiving so large a supply from the as-
cending, the canalis arteriosus is obliterated; and earlier than the
foramen ovale. Its obliteration necessarily proceeds from the aorta
towards the pulmonary artery. Before respiration it is nearly as
large as the pulmonary artery, and much larger than any of the
branches of the latter; but it becomes conical, some say after the
very first inspiration, and much smaller than the pulmonary artery;
on the third day it usually contains a coagulum, which in two
months is converted into a fibrous chord. From the descent of
the heart and the ascent of the arch of the aorta after the lungs
are once inflated, the canalis arteriosus is instantly lengthened, and
no longer lies horizontally, but makes an angle with the aorta:
and it is moreover now compressed by the dilated left bronchia
lying below it,

The umbilical arteries shrink a few days after birth, and at the
end of about three weeks become fibrous chords, permeable at
their origin only below the bladder.

The descending aorta, now receiving all its blood from the su-
perior, ceases to be larger below than above the opening of the
canalis arteriosus; and, as its blood is now all decarbonised and
oxygenated, and it parts with none to the umbilical arteries, its
ramifications to the pelvis and lower extremities enlarge, and the
lower half of the system begins to grow rapidly and equal the
upper.

The umbilical vein is shrunk and empty on the second or
third day, and about the end of the second month is converted
into a fibrous chord. It is obliterated first near the inferior cava;
and this in consequence diminishes, while the pulmon

5 R


ary veins, on


956 AGES OF MAN.


the other hand, increase. The liver not only descends, but grows
proportionally smaller from receiving so much less blood, and
loses its depth of colour.

The whole system becomes more animated from the higher puri-
fication of the blood in the lungs, and the more complete filling
and emptying of the heart’s cavities, and consequent force of the
circulation. *

The liver at first retains its great proportional size, though it
receives much less blood. As this fluid is now highly carbonised,
bile is secreted abundantly; and from the profusion of bile, jaun-
dice is common.

After birth, changes continue in the composition and amount of
every fluid and solid; in the shape, size, consistence, and hue of
all solid parts, and consequently in the vital properties and in the
functions of every organ; and, in consequence of the changes of
the brain, the mental character changes equally with the cor-
poreal. All organs improve, though not simultaneously or pro-
portionally, till their perfection is attained, and then all deteriorate
till the system is good for nothing and perishes.

The changes after birth have been variously classed into periods.
Leonell’ divides human life after birth into two: Zacchias says
it may be divided into twelve, since those who divided it into ten
gave seven years to each division, and thus terminated with the
age of seventy, to which two stages more must succeed, — ex-
treme old age and decrepitude. Intermediate divisions into three,
four, five, six, seven, and ten, have been made by others. Seven,
which is equidistant from two and twelve,—the extremes, and
neither too comprehensive nor too minute, is perhaps the most
convenient, was made by Hippocrates and Proclus, and adopted by
Zacchias, the most sensible and learned writer on this point of
' State-medicine, as well as by many other medical writers, and by
Shakspeare’, who, in remarking that “man in his time plays many
parts,” adds “ his acts being seven ages.” These divisions may
be into Infancy, Childhood, Boyhood and Girlhood, Youth or
Adolescence, the first and second Adult Period, the first or green
Old Age, and the second or Decrepitude.


* Greater minuteness on these points may be found in Burdach, whom I
have followed.

Y De Hominis preced. Quest. 5, art. 3. See Zacchias, Quest. Med, Leg. I. 1. 2.

% As You Like It, Act ii. se. 7.


INFANCY. . 957


I. Infancy (in and fari) extends from birth, when there is im-
perfect speech or none, and the young creature is ‘‘mewling and
puking in the nurse’s arms,” to the end of the first dentition, —
about the second year.

2. Childhood, from the end of the first, to the end of the second
dentition.

The commencement of infancy is a sudden revolution; all
having proceeded before in a purely vegetable manner. Now the
being is suddenly insulated, suddenly becomes conscious of its
own existence, feels hunger and want of breath, external tempera-
ture and mechanical contact, and exerts its will to indulge its in-
clinations. It breathes, it cries, it sucks, and moves its head, body,
and limbs at pleasure. Great functions suddenly begin in its head
and chest, and the functions of its abdomen suddenly become
great. Its organs were all ready, but the means of excitement
have been suddenly supplied. Still it is weak and helpless ; can
neither stand, nor sit, nor even hold up its head: and, though in-
sulated, is perfectly dependent. It still requires a secretion af-
forded by another’s system, and requires this to be brought to it ;
it requires others to keep it warm, to protect it from injury, to keep
it clean, and to tend it in every way: and I suspect, for reasons
which I shall hereafter give, that a living influence was commu-
nicated to it in utero, by the maternal fluids which entered into its
system, and by the surrounding body of its mother in whom it lay,
and that, after birth, a living influence is communicated of the
highest importance in the milk poured into its system directly from
its mother’s breast without the intervention of a moment for this
to lose its vital properties, and by the contact of the mother when
it is lying in her bosom. Not only do children generally die which
are fed with milk that has stood in vessels after having been taken
from the breast of a brute, and with vegetable matter, what-
ever care be taken of them; but chickens which are hatched and
afterwards kept warm artificially, though their food is the same,
and the utmost care be bestowed upon them, acquire size and
vigour more slowly than those which have the benefit of the hen’s
nursing* and therefore the contact of her body.


* Burdach asserts that almost all young birds brought up without the mother
perish. (§ 515. IT. 13°.) The thousands hatched at the Eccaleobion in Pall Mall
disprove this.


on 2


958 INFANCY.


There was an old idea that animal heat was different from com-
mon heat. The moderns argue that caloric is always caloric, and.
that therefore the wisdom of our ancestors in this matter was folly.
But though caloric is always caloric, it does not follow that with
it some other principle may not co-exist in animals and be commu-
nicated. I know a clergyman in Essex who has severe pains in his
legs relieved by no other friction than with the hand of another,
nor by any other warmth than that communicated to his lower
extremities when sitting between two persons, as in a coach, in
which he was struck with the discovery The aged David had
good reason on his side, when he had a young virgin to lie in
his bosom. The communicator of course loses in proportion,
and therefore Dr. Copland declares he has frequently known
children become weak and pale from sleeping with the aged.”
The greatest foe of the church, therefore, cannot doubt the pro-
priety of its order that a man shall not marry his grandmother.
While a woman can bear children, she is in the prime of life, and
therefore not in a state to derive vigour from her infant but to
impart vigour to it. If old women bred, their nursing as mothers
would probably be deleterious.

Though the human being remains longer in its mother, and goes


> « A not uncommon cause of depressed vital power is the young sleeping with
the aged. This fact, however explained, has been long remarked, and is well
known to every unprejudiced observer. But it has been most unaccountably
overlooked in medicine. I have, on several occasions, met with the counterpart
of the following case : — J was, a few years since, consulted about a pale, sickly,
and thin boy of about five or six years of age. He appeared to have no specific
ailment; but there was a slow and remarkable decline of flesh and strength, and
of the energy of all the functions — what his mother very aptly termed a gradual
blight. After enquiry into the history of the case, it came out that he had been
a very robust and plethoric child up to his third year, when his grandmother, a
very aged person, took him to sleep with her; that he soon afterwards lost his
good looks; and that he had continued to decline progressively ever since, not-
withstanding medical treatment. I directed him to sleep apart from his aged
parent ; and prescribed gentle tonics, change of air, &c. The recovery was rapid.
But it is not in children only that debility is induced by this mode of abstracting
vital power. Young females married to very old men suffer in a similar manner,
although seldom to so great an extent; and instances have come to my know-
ledge, where they have suspected the cause of their debilitated state. These facts
are often well known to the aged themselves, who consider the indulgence fa-
vourable to longevity, and thereby often illustrate the selfishness which, in some
pe sons, increases with their years.” (A Dict. of Pract. Med., art. Dexitiry. )


INFANCY. 956


through a more perfect incubation proportionally to his size than
any other animal; yet he comes into the world more helpless than
almost any other. Some brutes at birth can see, some are
well covered, some can walk and help themselves to extraneous
food, and there is no proportion in the advanced condition of the
various organs and functions, nature here as every where taking
delight in endlessly varying the same thing and the means of ob-
taining the same object ; but he cannot move from his place, keep
himself warm, avoid danger, or see, except to distinguish light
from darkness, and that so slightly at first that he can look at the
sun. When he wants any thing he cries, nature’s purpose in this
being that others may attend to him; for which reason children
cry till they acquire a good amount of independence, as well as
women, who also look to others for succour. The young has no par-
ticular instinct towards its mother; it seeks for and from others,
and it becomes accustomed and attached to its mother just as to
any other individual who may supply its wants. But a powerful
instinct is provided by nature in the parents, and particularly
in the mother. In proportion to the helplessness of the young
animal in respective species is the facility of all means for its
preservation and, if necessary, of parental love; and, in propor-
tion to the necessity of self-dependence, is the developement of
the organs which are respectively required. In different brutes,
this instinct is confined to the mother or given to both parents ;
exists generally just as long as the young are dependent,
after which the parent drives the young away; does not exist at
all or may be spent upon the offspring of others: all according
to the necessities of the young. In the human race parental
love continues to the end of life, for the parent can benefit his
adult offspring by the counsels of his longer experience and by
the property which he has amassed. Forcible, however, as
is parental love in the female, it yields to hunger. In besieged
towns, when the stock of food is exhausted, women eat their
children. Ants and other insects eat their larva when in want
of food: sows and ferrets also eat their young if very hungry


© Many brutes will die for their young. The doe of the roe and deer will
cause themselves to be hunted in order to draw off the dogs from the neighbour-
hood of their young: the lark will expose herself to a dog for the same pur-
pose; and swallows dash into a house on fire to save their voung.


oR S


960 PARENTAL LOVE.
gy


when they bring forth. To save their reputations some women
will destroy their illegitimate offspring. But, with the exception
of hunger, parental love is in most women the strongest im-
pulse; stronger, probably, than love of life. In man it is gene-
rally less powerful than sexual desire; and Don Juan, when in
danger of emasculation, exclaims —


‘«¢ For what is losing children, few or many,
To cutting off one’s hopes of having any.”


But a large number of women I believe would leave their hus-
bands rather than their little ones. Poets of all countries and
ages have depicted the passion, but none more forcibly than
Byron.


“ The love of offspring ’s nature’s general law,
From tigresses and cubs to ducks and ducklings ;
There’s nothing whets the beak or arms the claw
Like an invasion of their babes and sucklings ;
And all who have seen a human nursery saw
How mothers love their children’s squalls and chucklings.”’


As most persons in this country have derived their knowledge of
Phrenology not from Gall’s works, but second hand from Dr. Spurz-
heim or third hand from Mr. Combe, and many still more remotely
from others, I shall not hesitate to extract what the Founder of
Phrenology says of the natural history of the love of offspring. 4


4 « The greater number of insects, fish, and amphibia, endeavouring to protect
their young from external accidents, lay their eggs in a situation calculated for
the exit of the young and where they may find food. The care of their posterity
does not extend farther.

‘In some species of these animals, the care of their young is more varied.
Certain species of spiders carry their young upon their back, in a little sac which
they never let fall except in the most urgent danger, and which they hasten
to take up again as soon as the danger is past. Whoever has once destroyed
an ant’s nest must have seen with what ardour the ants collect their eggs and
the larve to put them in a place of safety. Wasps and bees, which at all
other times allow themselves to be watched without anger, become formidable to
all that approach them when they have young. Who is not aware of the inde-
fatigable activity with which they nourish, with what courage they defend, their
young, with what eagerness they lick and caress them from the moment they
have left their.cells?

‘« In birds we find the same touching affection for their offspring. |The more
sad experience they have had of the dangers that threaten their young, the more


PARENTAL LOVE. 961


That this,—parental lovee, is a distinct faculty is proved from
its bearing no proportion to any of the other faculties or to any


care do they take to construct solid nests, and conceal and protect them. When
they have perseveringly hatched their young, both parents nourish them with ex-


® Gall, in whom was no trifling nor pedantry, was satisfied with the simple and
appropriate term — love of offspring: but Dr. Spurzheim, without adding a particle
to our knowledge, was not easy till he, a foreigner, had conceitedly coined for our
language the sesquipedalian word, Philo-pro-genitive-ness. I know not the
advantage of one long word over two or three short ones,—of portions of dif-
ferent words made into one of seven syllables — phi-lo-pro-gen-it-ive-ness, strung
together like Byron’s satirical expression carotid-artery-cutting- Castlereagh, over
the four syllables of the separate words— Parental love or love of offspring.
Besides, the word is illegitimate ; for no good writers employ compounds of Greek
and Latin words, or Greek and words of any modern tongue : this is left to unclas-
sical Frenchmen and puffing English tradesmen. Words of the same language
only can be legitimately compounded together. There is, indeed, no such Latin
word as progenitivus or English word progenitive: so that he has actually
coined another word from which to coin his grand compound. What, however,
is most amusing, progenitivus or progenitive cannot signify that which is
generated, but signifies that which has the power of generation. As destructive-
ness comes from destructive, which signifies not that which is destroyed, but that
which has the property or tendency to destroy, and destructiveness means the
power or tendency to destroy, and philodestructiveness would signify a fondness
for what destroys; so progenitive would really mean that which has the power or
tendency to generate, and progenitiveness would mean the power or tendency to
generate, and philoprogenitiveness would signify fondness for the generator or
parent and be synonymous with filial love. If any person should contend that -
philo-destructiveness would signify, not fondness for a destroyer, but fondness for
destroying, even then he must allow that philoprogenitiveness must signify fond-
ness, not for offspring, but for generation and be synonymous with amativeness,
The proper word would be philoprogeny ; but then Dr. Spurzheim, in his trifling
and vanity, having absurdly divided certain faculties grouped by Bischoff in 1805
( Exposition de la Doctrine de Gall. Berlin, 1805.) as one of his three great divi-
sions of the faculties (see swprd, p. 378. ), into two— propensities and sentiments,
and having absurdly resolved to give to the former and the former only the ter-
mination iveness, had to coin an adjective ending in ive, and then a substantive
ending in ness; and ignorantly (Phrenology, vol. i. p. 157. Amer. ed.) fancied he
was coining an adjective from progeny.

Dr. Vimont is as wrong as Dr. Spurzheim. Because hens sit on their eggs and
rabbits tear the down off their breasts to make a bed before their young come into
the world, he contends that the instinct cannot be mere love of offspring, and there-


BR 4


962 PARENTAL LOVE.


combination of them either permanently or occasionally in an
individual. It may be naturally strong when they, one or more,


treme tenderness, their watchful love foresees all the accidents to which they may
become victims, instantly warns them of these, makes them remain quiet and hide
themselves, or quickly conveys them to a place of safety. When the father
and mother perceive that their nestlings are threatened, what uneasiness, what
alarms they display, what stratagems they practise to deceive the bird of prey, the
serpent, the weazel, or man! and, when the enemy succeeds in carrying off their
young, what plaintive cries, what obstinate resistance! Sometimes, while
uttering plaintive accents, they follow the spoiler to a considerable distance, even
to the place where he deposits his prey, and never leave the spot till all hope of
recovering their young is lost: even hunger will not compel them to quit their
young in the moment of danger: frequently after long continued cold and wet,
male and female are both found dead on the body of their young, which have
equally perished with the cold.

«In the mammalia likewise, the love of offspring is the most active and im-
perious of all the instincts. The mother watches with solicitude and anxiety
every thing that may be injurious to her young. As soon as the fox, the cat, the
squirrel, &c. give the least sign that their place is discovered, they instantly
abandon it and hide their young in another retreat. Birds of prey, however shy
and wild they were previously, and whatever prudence they displayed in their neigh-
bourhood before, become rash when they have young ones to support: no danger
stops them: they penetrate without hesitation into gardens, yards, hen-houses,
pigeon-houses, &c. When all the openings of a fox’s earth are beset with snares,
the animal if it have no young will stay within for a fortnight, till there is no
alternative but to die of hunger or fall into the snare. But when they have
young, the barbarous fox-hunter too well knows that the moth ill not Jong
resist the groans of her young, and that the father also, after having exhausted
all the means of safety, will not hesitate to become the victim of his tender love
for his offspring. Cats suckle the young of those whose mother is ill or dead.
With what earnestness does the bitch implore the mercy of her master when
taking away her young! The doe and she-goat forget they have no weapons, and
rush blindly upon the enemy, when they have to save or defend their young.
With what rage does not the wild sow defend her litter? How formidable do
beasts of prey become, when they are searching for food for their young!

« Finally, who does not recognise this adorable inclination in the human race ?
From the most tender age nature makes the female perform the prelude to the part
of a mother, and makes her pass through ooo thie gh of instruction to prepare
her for her future destination. Do you see this girl so intently occupied in


fore styles it the love of the product of conception. According to this nomencla-
ture, the hen should love the emptied egg shells, and the quadruped and biped
mother the placenta, as much as she does her little ones.


PARENTAL LOVE. 9638


are naturally weak: it may be naturally weak, even be completely
absent, when they are naturally strong: it may be highly excited,


playing with her doll? She dresses it, undresses it, ornaments it ; gives it to eat and
to drink, prepares its night linen, puts it to bed, often takes it up, caresses it, gives
it a lesson, scolds it, threatens it, tells it stories. It is thus that she passes the
whole day, weeks, and months, with her beloved doll. She takes charge of those
brothers and sisters who are younger than herself with a cordial kind feeling ;—she
feels their pleasures and their griefs more acutely than they themselves. Hardly
does a new inclination develope itself in her heart than nothing appears in her eyes
more precious and attractive than children. Where is the father, where is the mo-
ther, who does not recollect with ecstacy the time when, not being yet married, they
hoped soon to be so? And, when the first indications appeared that their union was
not barren, what delight! what mutual congratulations! what projects for the future !
Some young women feel an inexpressible joy at the moment when they first perceive
the movements of their conception. The young wife becomes the object of the
eager cares of all the family, every one waits for the decisive moment with im-
patience and anxiety united. Is there a more pure happiness than that which is
depicted in the looks of a mother watching with tenderness the wants of the little
one which she presses against her bosom? What duty is more respectable and
more sacred than the cares which married people take of the precious pledge of their
love! If I hadacity, an emblem of domestic love should be erected in the midst of
it,—a mother suckling her child. As often as a grandmother sees her grand-
children and great-grandchildren, the sentiment of maternity springs up anew in
her heart, and this beneficent instinct acts again when all the other inclinations
are nearly extinguished in her soul.

** Every sacrifice, the least action, tending to save a child or secure its happiness,
moves us deeply ; everything that discloses the heart of a stepmother fills us with
indignation and horror; every crime against feeble infancy, or against a woman
with child, or against a mother who suckles, makes us revolt.

** The interest which childhood excites inclines judges in favour of the guilty.
Galba Sergius, who, being accused of assassinating 30,000 Lusitanians, was to
be banished, was absolved by the people, melted at seeing him shed tears and
press two young infants against his heart.

“ On reflecting upon everything which characterises the love of offspring, it is
impossible to deny that it is an innate instinct and intimately inherent in the
organisation.

“To prove that it is an innate and peculiar instinct, let us follow it in its
different manifestations in different sexes, in different species, and in different
individuals. 7”.

‘In many species the male has little or no love for its young. Such are the bull,
the horse, the stag, the wild boar, the dog, the cock. In these species the love of
offspring appears to belong exclusively to females. It is rare to see a dog carry
food to a bitch who has a litter.

*‘ In other species, on the contrary, the male and female equally love their


964 PARENTAL LOVE.


when one or more of them is inactive: it may be dull when any
other is active.


young and take care of them in common. This is especially the case with those
in which nature has established a marriage as durable as life ; for example, in the
fox, the wolf, the marten, the polecat, in almost all birds, as the stork, the swan,
sparrow, the merlin, the nightingale, the pigeon. In these species, when the fe-
male dies the male continues to hatch the egg and nourish the young. While
both are alive, they usually sit on the eggs alternately and take care of the young
in common.

‘* However, even in these species we remark that the female possesses this instinct
more powerfully than the male, In imminent danger the father flees sooner than
the mother.

‘« In every one of these classes there is a difference between individuals. There
are cows, mares, bitches, which bear the loss of their young with much indifference ;
some females even abandon their young as soon as brought forth. Pigeons, both
male and female, generally sit upon their eggs carelessly. They often allow their
eggs to cool; they often crush their young ones; sometimes they abandon their
nests for the slightest reason; and, if their young ones are taken from them,
they do not express much regret. The king of quails sits with such assiduity
that its head is frequently cut off by the scythe of the mower. When a building
takes fire in which there is a stork’s nest, the old birds precipitate themselves into
the flames rather than abandon their young.

“« The female of the silver rabbit and that of the hampster quit their young easily,
and eat them sometimes even when they have plenty of food. Nothing is more
original than the idea of M. Virey, when he maintains that females kill their
young through maternal love, not having milk enough for them. If he would take
the pains to compare the heads of such stepmothers rabbits, sows, and women, with
the heads of good mothers of the same species, he would discover the true reason.
Other females are inconsolable at this loss, grow thin with grief, and utter cries of
lamentation. I have seen bitches seek their young ones for whole months inces-
santly with the most anxious restlessness, dart furiously upon every one whom they
suspected might have taken them away, and load with plaintive caresses all those
whom they thought they could depend upon to pity them and restore their young ;
and when they saw their hope defeated they would utter prolonged howlings.
Some mares have such a passion for foals that they steal those of others and take
care of them with a zealous tenderness.

‘« In the different species maternal love manifests itself with different modifica.
tions. The female of the silver pheasant loves its young remarkably, for which
reason the nest and the management of young nea fowls are intrusted to it in
preference toa Guinea hen. Certain females love their own young only and hate
those of other females of the same species. The female partridge loves its own
young with great tenderness, but pursues and kills those of others. The common
hen pheasant, on the contrary, shows much less love for her young, and abandons
with much indifference those which have wandered away, but receives with joy


PARENTAL LOVE. 965


By all these circumstances, Gall was the first to prove that it is
a distinct faculty‘; and, after extensive and laborious observation,


young pheasants which are strangers to it. Some animals live a long time with
their young and constitute a family ; others quit them as soon as they can do
without the aid of a parent.

** There are many families of insects, amphibia, and fish, neither the male nor
female of which troubles itself about its young. Among birds, the cuckoo is en-
tirely a stranger tothe love of offspring. All its cares for its posterity are limited
to its eggs, which it lays in the nests of other birds whose eggs it takes away or eats.
The owners of these nests, always smaller than the usurper, not only hatch the egg of
F the cuckoo, but also nourish with indefatigable kindness the voracious young one
which comes out of it. When the young cuckoo is taken from the nest and put
in an aviary with other birds or exposed in a garden, all the birds which are able
hasten to adopt it. I have many times caused a young cuckoo to be reared
by a wren; it was a very amusing sight to sce the nursing father obliged to get
upon the shoulders of its nurse child to put nourishment into its beak.

“Man belongs to that class in which the male and female both love their young
and take care of them in common. However, woman surpasses man in this
respect. The instinct manifests itself from infancy ; the little girl holds out her
hand after a doll, as the little boy does after a drum or sabre. When a child
has to be taken care of, a female and not a man servant is sent for, Females
who do not wish to marry, or married women who are barren, often adopt the
children of others, in order to bestow upon them the care which nature imposes
upon a mother, All the physical constitution of a woman coincides with her
moral and intellectual character, to prove that she is destined more particularly
than man to take care of infancy.

“ These striking differences in the manifestation of the love of offspring prove
that it is not a voluntary or factitious inclination, but an instinct resulting fron
the organisation, varying with it, but always natural and innate.’ (Gall, l.c.
Ato. t. iii. p. 140. sqq. ; 8vo. t. iii. p. 419. sqq.)

* Before his time, some referred the love of offspring to general instinct, as
though it was not an individual instinctive feeling ; others explained it by saying
that it was natural! others that a mother loves her child because it contributes to her
happiness, is a part of herself, or of the man she loves, or was made by him, because
she is fond of being a mother, because she has felt it move in her inside, &c. &c.
(Journal de ? Empire, et Dict. des Sc. Méd. t. xxi. p. 210.) Even now Bur-
dach (§ 515.) asserts that parental and sexual love are the same instinct. His
argument is that the care of the young after birth is a continuation of incubation,
and incubation a continuation of procreation. This is about the same thing as
saying that hunger is identical with the desire of defecation, because defecation is
continuous with digestion, and digestion with eating. He adduces as a physical
proof the fact that some brutes call their young with the same note with which they
call the male. Painting and music must therefore be the same, because they are
both executed by the hand. This reminds me of an absurdity of Richerand, who

says (Nouv. Elém. de Physiol. t, ii. p. 201.) that maternal love results not from
* EB 6


966 ORGAN OF PARENTAL LOVE.


he established that it is seated in a particular part of the brain.
Its situation is undoubtedly the posterior extremities of the poste-
rior lobes of the brain.

The greater projection backwards of the superior part of the
occiput in most women than in men puzzled Gall for many
years, and was not accounted for by him in his lectures; and it
was not till he noticed the same difference in all the male and
female skulls of his collection that the true reason for this ordi-
nation of nature struck him. To suppose this not to be for an
important purpose would augur stupidity: and all observation
shows that in proportion to the developement of the portion of
brain which causes the projection of this part, in species at large,
in varieties, and in individuals, whichever be their sex, is the force
of parental love. The man is to be pitied who can be interested
with the mechanical purposes of the size and form of a lower jaw
or thigh bone, and not be more excited by the size and shape
of a particular part of the skull dependent on the form and
size of the corresponding part of the brain, — the organ of the
most wonderful of our functions, nor be anxious to learn Nature’s
reason for them. If the posterior extremities of the posterior
lobes are large, and the cerebellum small, there will be intense
love of the offspring, and great indifference to the other sex; and
vice versd: if they are large, and the sides of the head just above
the ears also large, the being may be most ferocious, as the tiger
and hyena and the Carib £, yet all devotion and gentleness to the


any cerebral action, but takes its source in the bowels ; — “ c’est dans les entrailles
quil prend sa source.’’ See Gall’s refutation of such writers,

* The New Zealanders are remarkable for their love of war, their cruelty, re-
venge, deception, and thievery; yet Mr. Ellis mentions, in his Polynesian Researches,
I, 26. that a chief, Tetoro, in setting out with him on an excursion, accidentally
struck one of his little ones with his foot: the child cried ; and though the chief
had his mat on and his gun in his hand, and was in the act of stepping into the
boat, and the men were waiting for him, he no sooner heard the child cry than he
turned back, took the child in his arms, stroked its little head, dried its tears, and,
giving it to the mother, hastened to join us.” Attachment is also intense among
them. “ The wifeis not enjoined, as among the Hindoos, to devote herself on the
funeral pile of her husband by any doctrine of the national religion, nor is it even
expected that she should give sucha proof of it ; yet it is by no means unusual for
her on occasion of her husband’s death to commit suicide, in order that her spirit
may follow his.” (Library of Entertaining Knowledge, New Zealanders, p. 388.)


INFANCY. 967


offspring, submitting to every privation and hardship for its sake :
if they are large, and the love of property and the instinct to
destroy life large, and the coronal surface low and sloping at the
sides, a man may be the greatest villain and yet the most affec-
tionate and tender father.

The sticky liquor amnii and the vernix caseosa require to be
washed off; the soft and highly coloured surface to be kept warm
and in contact with what is soft; and food to be supplied. The
young of all mammalia instinctively desires and seizes with its
mouth the nipple of its mother or some other individual ; and it
soon falls asleep. It requires food very often, and in larger propor-
tion than adults, and bears the want of it worse: it passes the chief
part of its time in sleep, and, the more premature it is, the more
does it sleep. It gapes much; and cries; and very frequently dis-
charges the contents of its bladder and rectum. It at first takes no
notice by the eye or ear: the functions of these organs are gra-
dually established. The fine down which is seen upon the whole
of its surface comes off; and the hair of its head grows pretty
freely. The temperature of the infant and of all other new-born


» It is lamentable to witness the ignorance of well-informed minds of the va-
riety of faculties that constitute the mind, and their independence to a certain
extent upon each other. In the Examiner newspaper, —a weekly real treat for men
of liberal views and education, the mention of the phrenological organisation of
the young murderer Marchant was sneeringly headed, ‘* The amiable Master Mar-
chant ;” and a few Sundays afterwards (January 19. 1840.) it said, “In the fine qua-
lities found in Burke, Hare, Corder, Thurtell, &c. there is nothing richer, &c. &¢.”
What fine qualities were ascribed to Burke and Hare I cannot say. However,
not only may parental love but attachment to parents and friends coexist with in-
famous qualities. Young Marchant was an affectionate son, in the midst of his
wicked qualities. A dog is as innocent and playful as an infant to the master or
the children whom he loves, but strangers and rats will see him in a yery different
light and give him a very different character. Shakspeare knew human nature
better : —

* Oh! thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon’st
In those two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs, blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head: and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchaf’d, as the rud’st wind
That by the top doth shake the mountain pine,
And make him stoop to the vale.”

Cymbeline, Act iv. se. 2.


968 INFANCY.


animals is lower than that of the adult, and they maintain a pecu-
liar temperature much less, being more easily cooled and heated,
and vitiating the air less, proportionally, than adults.’

Dr. Edwards discovered that brutes which are born with thejr
eyes closed, or cannot at first walk about and procure food, or
have not integuments sufficiently copious to preserve their tem-
perature, are little warmer than the surrounding medium if re-
moved from their nest or bed: but that they acquire about the
fifteenth day, if quadrupeds, and about the end of the third or
fourth week, if birds, the calorific power of adults. In all these
the ductus arteriosus is generally large and open, and closes as
the calorific powers increase. Upon its state, and not upon the
circumstances first mentioned, does the temperature depend. As
the calorific powers change rather suddenly, we must suppose the
completion of the closure to be rapid.k

The human foetus resembles these brutes in having the eye
closed by the membrana pupillaris for many months, and children
born before time long continue to require much artificial warmth.
But, although the temperature of the very young is so easily low-
ered, the ill effects of cold are better recovered from than by
adults.

Life also continues longer without respiration, or with a limited
quantity of air, than in adults.

Le Gallois found that a rabbit 30 days old would live without
air about the same time as an adult, —2! minutes: a rabbit 10 days
old, 74 minutes; one 5 days old, 16 minutes; and one a day old,
30 minutes.

Bohn mentions having seen two female infants alive who had
been buried deep in the ground by their incontinent mothers and
not dug up for some hours. He says also that, in 1719, a female
infant was dug up alive after being buried for some time at its
birth by the mother ; and that in 1764, a new-born child was taken
alive from a heap of straw, in which it had been placed, wrapped
in several cloths by its inhuman parents, seven hours previously,
Dr. James Curry has recorded a case, upon the authority of a sur-
geon of the Northampton General Hospital, of a child which was


' Dr. Edwards, |. c. p. 165. sqq. See supra, p. 240.
* lie. P. iii, ch. i, and p. 618.


INFANCY. 969


born apparently dead, and, on account of the attention required
by the mother, put aside, and then carried by a woman to a wash-
house, in the depth of winter. After two hours the surgeon in-
quired after the child, and by perseverance recovered it!: and this
confirms my belief that many infant lives are annually lost from
the want of perseverance in resuscitating measures.

In regard to respiration only, if a stupor has been induced,
or a peculiar nervous state exists (as mentioned at page 54.
sq-), respiration may be dispensed with —I dare not guess how
long.

The greater retention of life in the young was shown by Le
Gallois, who found that the abstraction of the heart destroyed
a rabbit 30 days old in 14 minute; one 15 days old in 2? mi-
nutes ; and a rabbit one day oldnot before 20 minutes.” Injuries of
the brain also are borne better than at a later period. The irri-
tability of the muscles was found by Le Gallois to last a quarter of
an hour after the decapitation of new-born rabbits; and only two
minutes after the decapitation of those a month old. These cir-
cumstances connect the cold and warm-blooded, and the hyber-
nating and non-hybernating, animals. I mentioned, at p. 696.,
an analogous fact in regard to hybernating animals. When these
are in their torpid state, they are far more tenacious of life as
well as less susceptible. Mangili cut off the head and neck of a
marmot in the state of hybernation in March, and put it in spirits :
yet movements were evident in it at the end of half an hour,
and galvanism produced strong contractions in pieces of volun-
tary muscles three hours after they had been cut off, and even
four elapsed before their excitability was much diminished; the
heart beat for three hours after decapitation. He made the same
experiment in June with a marmot which had been out of hyber-
nation two months: the muscles showed little excitability under
galvanism at the end of two hours; and the heart ceased to beat
in fifty minutes after decapitation. Such facts probably depend
upon the low degree of the properties of the organs injured or
removed, so that these have less power over the rest of the


! Obs. on App. Death, &c.
™ Experiences sur le Principe de la Vie, p.'78. See also Braschet, l.c., and
Lallemand.


970 INFANCY.


system; and upon the imperfection of susceptibility throughout
the system, so that one part is incapable of greatly sympathising
with another. ‘The imperfection of susceptibility is shown in the
common occurrence of all the children of a nursery labouring
under an infectious disease, — measles, scarlet fever, or small-pox,
except the baby. Susceptibility seems much less before respir-
ation ; for Herholdt states that animals are very little affected by
galvanism before respiration, which, after its commencement, are
affected violently." In the imperfect state of insects, insuscep-
tibility is very great. I have soaked a caterpillar in Scheele’s
prussic acid, and after a time it has begun to move again and
been apparently as well as ever: but, when I held a fly over a
small vial containing only a few drops, it stretched out its legs
and perished. Infants, however, who of course must have
breathed, are more easily affected by agents than adults; much
smaller doses of narcotics and purgatives must be given them:
yet they bear, proportionally to their age and size, larger doses
than adults.

Yet, notwithstanding this greater tenacity of life, external cir-
cumstances are so often unfavourable to early existence that a large
proportion of new beings perish. Still-born children may indeed
have perished before or during labour; but the proportion of still-
born children to others, at Paris, during seven years, was as 1 to
19, and in London, as 1 to 30.° Itis more frequent where there js
more than one child. While in Dublin it was 1 to 202 among single
children, it was 1 to 13} among twins.” Male infants are univer-
sally more frequently still-born than female, whether from their
greater size, and greater want of support before birth, and their
greater want of air, or, as Burdach suggests, from their greater
vigour throwing them more frequently into unnatural positions
and thus rendering delivery more difficult: and, in truth, Rieckeq
found that the number of instrumental deliveries among female
children to male was as 1 to 1:40; and still-births in ordinary deli-
very as 1 to 31, and in instrumental as ] to 2. During seven years


" Commentation iiber das Leben, p. 74.
° Guerson, Magazin, t.xiv. p. 419.

P Phil. Trans. 1786. p. 352.

1 Topographie von Wurtemberg, p. 31.


a. oo


MORTALITY OF INFANCY. 971


at Paris, female births were to male as 1 to 1:05, and female still.
born children to male as | to 1-29. In Belgium, of 2,597 still-
born children, 1,519 were males, 1,080 females, —a proportion of
nearly 15 to 10, while the male births to the female were as 15
to 14. In Prussia, from 1826 to 1831, the still-born males were
59,144, and the females only 43,533 The proportion of still-
births is greater among illegitimate than legitimate children, from
the greater difficulties of the mother’s situation.

Usually about one fifth of children die in the whole of Europe in
the first year; and, though the proportion is various in different
cities, and has diminished of late years, the number is larger
as the age is less, and particularly in the first month; and
the first week of the first month is more fatal than the second,
and the second than the third: after the second week the mor-
tality greatly lessens. Thus, in Belgium, out of 100,000, there
died in the first month 9604 ; in the second but 2460; in the third
1761; in the fourth 1455; in the fifth 1149; in the sixth 1045;
and but 833 on the average in each of the next six months ;
indeed a larger number perish in the first two weeks, than in any
other of the first month: in Berlin the mortality was as 1 to 32
in the first week; 1 to 35 in the second ; 1 to 106 in the third;
and 1 to 124 in the fourth. During the whole of the first year a
greater proportion of boys die than of girls, and of twin than of
single children. From the difference of care, as is generally sup-
posed, a larger proportion of children die who have wet nurses than
of those whose mothers perform the duties of nature, and of illegiti-
mate than of legitimate children. The compression of the head
in labour, the much lower temperature of the air than the degree
of 98 which they invariably enjoyed before birth, all the wants,
vicissitudes, and mishaps to which the young are exposed, their
feebleness of generating heat®, their great want of food and repose,
and their small energy, would cause even a far greater mortality,
had they not a greater insusceptibility and tenacity of life than is
enjoyed by adults. The defence of the infant against injury is


" Dr. Bellefroid, Bulletin Belge, 1839.

* Drs. Villeneuve and Milne Edwards found that, as infants in France are
always carried to the mayor for registration a few hours after birth, most deaths
occur among the new-born in winter, in northern and colder departments, and
where the mairie is extensive so that the infants are carried to a greater distance,
(De I’ Influence de la Température sur la Mortalité des Enfans nouveau-nés, )


38


972 GROWTH OF INFANTS.


passiveness and insusceptibility; the defence of the adult is ener-
getic resistance.

The crying at birth, probably from the disagreeable feeling of
the cold and new medium, and perhaps partly from consequent
alarm, drives the blood freely to the brain, which had been com-
pressed and deprived of its proportion of this during labour, and
to all other parts: and the increase of the heart’s action, by re-
spiration, now maintains a strong circulation, so that the brain
and organs of sensation, and the digestive organs, are com-
petent to active function, on the application of their respective
external stimuli, Nutrition proceeds vigorously, and, as before
birth, not merely do all parts grow, but change in their com-
position, and acquire new consistence, new hues, new structure,
and thus greater and new powers. The sympathetic nerve has
hitherto been proportionally more firm and dense than the
nerves of sense and motion; but the latter gradually improve in
these respects. The proportionate weight of the brain to the
whole body, from being 1 to 8 soon after birth, gradually declines,
till in the adult it is as 1 to 40 or 50; but its composition im-
proves, it becomes firmer, the fibrous and pulpy substances
become more distinct, and the yellow substance between the two
diminishes. At birth, according to Meckel t, “the cerebral trunk is
still greyish; soon the corpora pyramidalia grow white; then

the olivaria; at about the third month, the pons; after the sixth
month, the crura cerebri and the medullary eminences ;” agree-
ably, be it remarked, to Gall’s assertion, that grey or pulpy sub-
stance precedes the fibrous." The preponderance of the cerebrum


* Handbuch der Menschlichen Anatomie, iv.

“ After Gall had promulgated his views on this point, M. Richerand wrote as
follows : —

“A circumstance very worthy of attention and upon which no anatomist has
dwelt ” (Zlémens de Physiologie, 7th edit. t. ii, p- 127.), ‘‘is, that the brain of
the foetus and of the new-born child appears to consist almost entirely of a
greyish pulp, insomuch that it is difficult to distinguish the medullary substance.
Would it be absurd to think that the medullary portion of the brain is not per-
fectly organised until after birth, by the developement of the fasciculi of me-
dullary fibres within these masses of greyish substance, which should be re-
garded as the common base from whence the nerves derive their origin, as their
matrix, to use the expression of Dr. Gall? The almost complete inactivity, the
passive condition, as it were, of the foetal brain, are such that the existence in it
of the medullary apparatus, to which the most important operations of the intelli-


PROGRESS OF INFANCY. 973


over the cerebellum, that distinguishes the human from the
brute organisation, is greater than in the adult ; for the new-born
- infant’s cerebellum weighs but as 1 to 9 or even 23 compared
with the cerebrum, whereas it is as 1 to 5 or at the utmost 7
in the adult.* All parts, by degrees, receive less and less
blood proportionally, and, assuming their destined characteris-
tics, are less vascular, so that the brain receives less blood in its
interior. The cornea and humours become more transparent ;
the aqueous humour increases and makes the cornea project
more than zz utero, where it was more like the cornea of an aquatic
animal. At first the infant must see all objects confusedly; but
gradually it sees well, though for a time it is near sighted: it
hears well later. It gradually acquires more smell and taste,
but for a long time readily takes things which, when it is older,
disgust it. The nasal apparatus is very small at birth. Gall
states that the nerves of smell and taste are usually developed
earlier than those of sight and hearing, as well as in brutes which
are blind and deaf at birth.’ By the time it distinguishes individual
things and parts, it grasps small objects; then recognises faces
and voices; smiles and chuckles with delight if played with, and
tosses about its head and extremities; instinctively distinguishes
agreeable looks from frowns, and endearing from cross sounds of
the voice ; desires to possess all that is shown it, and cries and falls
into apassion if disappointed. It tries to touch every thing, and puts |
alltoits mouth. As its faculties spring up, so do their affections or
modes, — attention, judgment, memory: and experience inces-
santly makes fresh acquisitions. As soon as a faculty springs up,
there isa strong desire to exercise it: and there is a strong desire
to acquire knowledge, —the curiosity of a child is boundless. It
desires not merely to examine all objects, but to judge in every
way, and have every thing explained, and proposes questions and
objections which its parents often cannot answer. In the latter half


gence appear confided, was unnecessary: its rudiments exist in the foetus at its
full term.” ‘I intreat the reader,” subjoins Gall, « to compare with this passage
what J have said upon the subject in the first volume of my large work, already
printed in 1809, in order to judge whether it is to M. Richerand that this obsery-
ation belongs.” (8vo. t. ii. p. 432. sq.; compare 4to. vol.ii. p. 408.)

* Gall, l. ¢. 4to. vol. iii. p. 92. ; 8vo. t. iii. p. 255.; and supra, p. 866.

Y l.c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 406. ; 8vo. t. ii. p. 429,

Oy Se


974 IMITATION, HABIT, BELIEF.


of the first year it begins to try to walk; it utters various sounds,
indicative of its desires and feelings ; and it endeavours to imitate
those of others. Imitationis one of the most powerful and important
principlesin our nature, causing us to use a particular language, to
dress, to live, to behave, nay, in a great measure, to think and be-
lieve, nationally and sectionally, if I may so speak, though we may
fancy that in all these matters we act of our own most excellent free
will and sound unbiased judgment, founded on positive knowledge.
The force of imitation is immense in the young.?_ It soon compels
the child to talk the language of those around, and do as far as pos-
sible all they do. Without this impulse, little advance could be
made. With the impulse of imitation, there soon co-operates that of
habit, and then that of belief. What we have done we do more
easily, and moreover acquire an inclination to do again , and what
we witness or have communicated to us by others, we gradually
acquiesce in and are reconciled to, objection and repugnance
declining by repetition of the facts or opinions, till ugliness may
be confounded with beauty, vice with virtue, absurdity with
sense, and what is proofless with what is certain. The disposi-
tion to believe is so strong in us that experience only of decep-
tion brings us to doubt each other. The child believes all it is
told; and incessantly asks questions, necessarily believing that
it will be told the truth. It soon may deceive others; but still
it believes implicitly, till taught by experience that others must
not always be believed. This disposition to believe each other
remains through life, and without it social intercourse would be
confusion. It is shown by our asking the way of strangers in the
street, and in fact all day long; though experience of the bad feel-
ings and of the ignorance of others prevents uniform belief. The
importance of imitation, habit, and belief, must be far greater
than the mischief. They enable us to act long before positive
knowledge would qualify us: they produce uniformity of thought,
action, manner, and language, among those who associate, so that
there is peace comprehension, and co-operation. Their evils are
the absurd or detrimental views and practices of individual na-
tions, sects, or parties. But in man’s natural progress, the under-
Standing becomes more cultivated, and intercourse between sects


* See my Essay on the Physiology and Pathology of Imitation, read to the Phre-
nological Society, in the Lancet, 1827, No. 190.


EXPERIENCE. 975


and parties becomes greater. We are naturally impelled to effect
every thing more easily and rapidly, and means of intercourse, whe-
ther by locomotion or signs, are advanced beyond all preconceived
views of possibility, and thus the distance between individuals and
nations becomes a trifle. Hence each sees many things that it
considers indispensable dispensed with by others advantageously ;
each sees many things effected better by others; one avails him-
self speedily of the improvements of another, in doctrine, conduct,
and all matters of science and arts, and the narrow sectarian
wretchedness of mixing but with one party is more and more
broken down. ‘Thus are the evils of imitation, belief, and habit
at length corrected. Experience is enlarged, and judgment better
exercised; all are brought more to think for themselves, — that is,
to become less and less the slaves of narrow imitation, habit, and be-
lief. Now each child, though it thinks and acts chiefly through these
three impulses, advances more and more in experience, and in dis-
position and power to judge. It questions and objects; and at
length begins to think considerably for itself, though the greater
part of mankind are, in the immense majority of their opinions and
doings, still the unconscious slaves of imitation, habit, and belief,
through the defect of sound education and the narrowness of their
reading and direct intercourse.

While experience and knowledge enlarge, and judgment be-
comes more exercised and riper upon some things, and various
passions are felt, the composition and structure of the various
cerebral parts.ripen, and their size increases, so that the facul-
ties become stronger, and more and more able to avail them-
selves of experience.» Not only colour, but music, becomes ap-


4 Printing, steam vessels and carriages, the magnetic telegraph, and even the
penny post, effect what could formerly not have been looked forward to without
subjecting the man of philosophic penetration to the imputation of madness.

> « In new-born children it is difficult to discover, without previous maceration in
spirits of wine, any traces of fibres in the large mass of reddish grey substance in
the great cerebral ganglions which strengthen and perfect the hemispheres, or, as
others will have it, which put them into a state of activity, — into action, The
nervous fibrils are visible in the middle and posterior lobes earlier than in the an-
terior. In the same way, the fibrous structure of the white substance of the cere-
bellum is perceptible to the naked eye, only by degrees, and in proportion to its
developement. All the nervous fibrils, at this early age, are still so submerged in
the more or less red and gelatinous substance, and in the blood-vessels, that the
whole brain has the appearance of a pulp, — of jelly.


3s 3 ‘


976 AFFECTIVE FEELINGS.


preciated, and all the faculties of the lower and higher frontal
region are displayed; benevolence, veneration, attachment, cou-
rage, cunning, violence (destructiveness), love of praise, pride,
&c. &c. are felt. Very young children manifest more or less of
these, and they manifest more and more of each according to
their individual nature. It is amusing to see the cunning, fury,
and vanity of the little creatures gradually develope. The facts
acquired by the external senses have been viewed as the causes
of these faculties, whereas they can serve only as stimulants of
faculties already in existence; otherwise the same facts would
give to each individual and each species of animal the same
mental character. Boys and girls have a far freer intercourse
before puberty than afterwards, yet the impressions on the ex-
ternal senses excite no sexual thoughts: these are excited when
the sexual faculty comes into existence, and that is when a cer-
tain portion of the brain acquires a certain composition, structure,
and size. Neither are impressions on the external senses really
necessary to excite dormant passions; they supply merely ob-
jects, and augment the force of the faculty: but the faculty may
be felt without them. The sexual desire may be felt as a want,
without objects. .

All the faculties are imperfect at first. One faculty comes
into existence after another, and some are faint, and when stronger
perhaps still indefinite, long before they are what they are destined


“ The only functions of the infant, at this period, are those of the five senses, of
voluntary motion, hunger, the sensation of ease and of pain, and the want of sleep ;
and even these are very imperfect.

“ After some months, those parts of the brain situated towards the anterior su-
perior region of the forehead begin to increase more rapidly than the other parts,
The forehead, from its previous flattened form, juts out in front, and the child
begins to fix its attention upon external things, to compare them, and to form
abstract ideas, —to generalise.

“The whole brain is successively more and more developed, until, at the age of
from 20 to 40 years, it has attained its full growth relatively to each individual.
The cerebellum too, which, relatively to the cerebrum, is smaller in proportion to
the youth of the individual, is developed and becomes perfectly formed towards
the age of from 18 to 25 years. The youth, and the young man and girl feel an
interest for each other ; the talents and propensities are manifested, are exercised
and perfected up to the age of maturity.” (Gall, l. c. 8vo. t.ii. p. 156, Sq-3 see
also 4to, vol. ii, p. 256.)


GROWTH OF FACULTIES. 977


to become, for instance, parental ¢ and sexual love?: just as every
proximate principle ® and every structure, —the result of nutri-
tion, and every secretion, and all other functions than the cerebral,
are at first of low degree and imperfect quality. A very large organ
in the brain of children is that just above the nose, and termed
by Gall the sense of things, —that by which we observe things
in general. The whole augments, and each cerebral organ in-
creases and changes in its composition and structure, and in the
very Same proportion its faculty becomes more forcible and definite.

Experience of course is of the highest. importance: but with-
out the internal faculty it would do little. Experience will not
give a brute the intellect of a man; neither will it make a genius
of a blockhead. The internal faculty is requisite to experience.
It, in truth, is what experiences. The improvement and ripeness
of the internal faculty is too often mistaken for the result of ex-
perience. The faculty ripens as the organ becomes more per-
fect, judgment becoming true. The slow perfection of structure
is seen in the eye and ear. A child is very near-sighted till the
fourth month, and hears near sounds only; and till then the cornea
is very convex and the lens round, and the meatus auditorius Is
shallow and the mastoid process very small. Many assert that
all external objects are as a coloured mass presented to the in-
fant’s eye: that, when some of them move, it is as if certain parts of
the mass detached themselves: and that thus the distinction of ob-
jects is learnt, and subsequently that by experience distances are
appreciated. But, when the eye is perfect, and the corresponding
internal faculties also, at birth, objects are known as distinct, and
distance is appreciated, at the very moment of birth. Ifa chicken,
just after leaving its shel], sees a motionless fly, it will dart at the


© The little girl loves her doll though she knows it is inanimate.

4 See p. 1002.

e « The strong tenacious glue, employed in the arts, is made from the firmer
parts of the hides of young animals: while the gelatinous size, or weak glue, is
made from the skins of younger and more delicate animals. These two varieties
of glue differ from one another in the weights of the modifying supermolecules of
water which enter into their composition. In general, it may be observed, that
the substances composing the frame of young and of old animals differ chiefly in
the weights of their modifying supermolecules of water; and that the dissimilarity
of their properties is chiefly owing to this difference.” (Dr. Prout, Bridgewater
Treatise, p. 488. )

oS 4


978 EXPERIENCE.


insect, and measure the distance between the point of its beak and
the insect most accurately; without experience, it knows there is a
distinct object, and how far this is from it: and it feels the instinct
to take food, and exerts its will and the requisite‘action of the mus-
cles with unerring nicety.£ Much knowledge, and much volition,
is intuitive; much the result of experience. But much of the
result of the perfection of the internal organ, and of its faculty, is
erroneously ascribed to experience: for different animals possess
different degrees of knowledge of objects, distance, &c., at very
different periods of existence and experience ; just as they possess
different degrees of muscular power at different periods, the lamb
and calf standing and walking as soon as they are born, while
the child cannot under atwelvemonth, and the chicken possessing
at birth the powers just mentioned.¢ A young monkey, as soon


f Sir James Hall was making experiments on hatching by artificial heat. A
chicken was in the act of breaking from its confinement when a spider ran along.
The chicken instantly darted forward, seized, and swallowed it. Here not only
was the eye perfect, but minute muscles, instinct for feeding and judging what
was proper for food, for judging of distance, and for putting its limbs in motion
and duly apportioning them for given ends. (Phrenological Essays, by Sir George
Mackenzie, Bart., p.38.) I laid.a dead fly near a chicken scarcely dry from its
shell, in the Eccaleobion, with the same result, as soon as it was descried, except
that it was not swallowed down.

® [ must indulge my readers with a quotation from Gall in refutation of the
third-rate, unphilosophical, inconsistent, and, in regard to the brain and its func-
tions, the uninformed and the careless, if not dishonorable, Professor Rudolphi.
See also Gall’s ample exposure of them, 1. c. 4to. vol. ii. pp. 393. sqq. 401. sqq.
413. sq. 426. sq.; 8vo. t. vie p. 119. sqq., t. ii, pp. 441. sq. 458. sqq-; and Dr.
Combe’s sensible remarks upon Dr. Rudolphi in the Phrenological Journal, vol. i.,
and in his brether’s Z'ranslation of Gall on the Cerebellum, p. 241, sqq.

“ Objection. —M. Rudolphi thinks that the non-simultaneous developement of the
qualities and faculties may be explained otherwise than by the developement of
the organs which takes place at the corresponding periods. ‘ The child,’ says he,
* commences by receiving impressions ; it is not until after having seen or read
much that he can begin to compare.and judge: judgment, therefore, will be sub-
sequent to the impressions, for judgment supposes acquired knowledge. It is
the same,’ says he, ‘ with all the faculties of the mind: they cannot be developed
until the conditions necessary to their existence are fulfilled.’

“Answer.— Without doubt, it is necessary to have experienced many sentiments,
to have acquired many ideas, in order to draw comparisons and form a judgment,
But neither experience, nor any amount whatever of sentiments and ideas, could
enable man to compare these sentiments and ideas or to form a judgment upon
them. According to M. Rudolphi’s view of the case, each intellectual faculty


EXPERIENCE. 979


as it can move, calculates distances with precision when it jumps
or seizes an object. hy


should be the more completely manifested as the materials coming from without
are moreabundant. The soldier who has been in the greatest number of battles
would make the best general ; the literary man who has studied rhetoric and the
art of poetry with the greatest care, and read orators and poets with the greatest
assiduity, would make the greatest orator, and poet. The lower classes would
be justified in regarding the attendant who has passed his life in hospitals as an
excellent physician. The means would be found of forming great men of all
kinds at pleasure.

“ But experience belies this supposition. Let thousands of facts be presented
to a child; he will seize them perhaps with facility, and retain them without for-
getting one; but will he therefore judge of them with the deliberation of a man ?
Where are the great orators, the sublime poets, formed by the study of the prin-
ciples of the art? Why do the intellectual faculties deteriorate in old age,
although experience and the copiousness of the subjects of comparison are con-
tinually augmenting ?

“ External objects are nothing to animated beings, except in so far as these are
rendered capable of receiving impressions from without and of re-acting upon
them by external and internal instruments. Let the monkey live for ages in the
midst of men, he will always remain a monkey. Give facts to an imbecile, teach
him the rules of the arts and sciences, surround him with thousands of models;
useless cares! The charms of a very Venus would not move the Passions of an
unripe boy.

** But, when the senses are perfect at birth, they need neither experience nor
exercise for the manifestation of their functions. The spider spins its web as
soon as it quits the egg; scarcely has the butterfly spread its wings, when it begins
to suck nectar from the flowers, and experiences the sexual desire ; just as the
robust young man, the moment his organs have acquired their full developement,
burns with the desire of finding a companion, It is not, therefore, the accidental
influence of external objects which is the first cause of the action of an organ ;
it is the activity of the organ itself. Now as, according to eternal laws, the
different organs do not all acquire their final developement at the same period, the
manifestation of their functions ought to commence, diminish, and terminate at
different epochs : —epochs and periods from which the plurality of the organs
must necessarily be inferred.” (I. c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 409, Sqq.; 8vo. t.ii. p. 435,
sqq-)

I cannot refrain from giving a most interesting illustration of Gall’s soundness
by quoting the history of a little girl now living in America, destitute from birth

of all external influence by eye, ear, or nose. The boy Mitchel, reported by
, Dugald Stewart in the Trans. of the Roy. Society of Edinburgh, vol. Vii., and by
Dr. Gordon, vol. vi., was destitute of sight and hearing only,

“There is one whose situation is so peculiar, and whose case is so intere
in a philosophical point of view, that we cannot forbear making particular
tion of it; we allude to Laura Bridgman, the deaf, dumb, and blind girl.


Sting


men-


989 LANGUAGE.


The knowledge of signs, —of language, hourly increases: not,
however, as adults improve in learning a language, by mere prac-


«The intellectual improvement of this interesting being, and the progress she
has made in expressing her ideas is truly gratifying.

“ She uses the manual alphabet of the deaf mutes, with great facility and great
rapidity ; she has increased her vocabulary so as to comprehend the names of all
common objects ; she uses adjectives expressive of positive qualities, such as hard,
soft, sweet, sour, &c.; verbs expressive of action, as give, take, ride, run, &c.,
in the present, past and future tense ; she connects adjectives with nouns to ex-
press their qualities ; she introduces verbs into sentences and connects them by
conjunctions; for instance, a gentleman having given her an apple, she said
man give Laura sweet apple.

“‘ She can count to high numbers ; she can add and subtract small numbers.

‘‘ But the most gratifying acquirement which she has made, and the one which
has given me the most delight, is the power of writing a legible hand, and ex-
pressing her thoughts upon paper; she writes with a pencil in a grooved line, and
makes her letters clear and distinct.

“‘ She was sadly puzzled at first to know the meaning of the process to which
she was subjected ; but when the idea dawned upon her mind, that by means of
it she could convey intelligence to her mother, her delight was unbounded. She
applied herself with great diligence, and in a few months actually wrote a
legible letter to her mother, in which she conveyed information of her being well,
and of her coming home in ten weeks. It was, indeed, only the skeleton of a
letter, but still it expressed in legible characters a vague outline of the ideas
which were passing inher mind. She was very impatient to have the man carry
this letter, for she supposed that the utmost limit of the Post Office Department
was to employ a man to run backward and forward between our Institution and
the different towns where the pupils live, to fetch and carry letters.”

«‘ She has improved very much in personal appearance as well as in intellect ;
her countenance beams with intelligence ; she is always active at study, work, or
play; she never repines, and most of the time is gay and frolicksome.

« She is now very expert with her needle, she knits very easily, and can make
twine bags and various fancy articles very prettily. She is very docile, has a
quick sense of propriety, dresses herself with great neatness, and is always cor-
rect in her deportment. In short, it would be difficult to find a child in the
possession of all her senses, and the enjoyment of the advantages that wealth
and parental love can bestow, who is more contented and cheerful, or to whom
existence seems a greater blessing than it does to this bereaved creature, for whom
the sun has no light, the air no sound, and the flowers no colour or smell.”

“It has been ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt, that she cannot see a
ray of light, cannot hear the least sound, and never exercises her sense of smell,
if she has any. Thus her mind dwells in darkness and stillness, as profound as
that of a closed tomb at midnight, Of beautiful sights, and sweet sounds, and
pleasant odours, she has no conception ; nevertheless she seems as happy and


LANGUAGE. 981


tice ; but because the various ideas signified by language, and to
which a child is originally a stranger from the imperfection of its


playful as a bird or a lamb ; and the employment of her intellectual faculties,
the acquirement of a new idea, gives her a vivid pleasure, which is plainly marked
i her expressive features. She never seems to repine, but has all the buoyancy
and gaiety of childhood. She is fond of fun and frolic, and when playing with
the rest of the children, her shrill laugh sounds loudest of the group.

‘When left alone, she seems very happy if she has her knitting or sewing, and
will busy herself for hours ; if she has no occupation, she evidently amuses her-
self by imaginary dialogues, or recalling ‘past impressions; she counts with
her fingers, or spells out names of things which she has recently learned, in the
manual alphabet of the deaf mutes. In this lonely self-communion she reasons,
reflects, and argues: if she spells a word wrong with the fingers of her right

and, she instantly strikes it with her left, as her teacher does, in sign of disap-
probation: if right, then she pats herself upon the head and looks pleased.
She sometimes purposely spells a word wrong with the left hand, looks roguish
for a moment and laughs, and then with the right hand strikes the left, as if to
correct it.

‘* During the year she has attained great dexterity in the use of the Manual
Alphabet of the deaf mutes; and she spells out the words and sentences which
she knows, so fast and so deftly, that only those accustomed to this language can
follow with the eye, the rapid motions of her fingers.

« But wonderful as is the rapidity with which she writes her thoughts upon the
air, still more so is the ease and accuracy with which she reads the words thus
written by another, grasping their hand in hers, and following every movement
of their fingers, as letter by letter conveys their meaning to her mind. It is in
this way that she converses with her blind playmates; and nothing can more
forcibly show the power of mind in forcing matter to its purpose, than a meeting
between them. For, if great talent and skill are necessary for two pantomimes
to paint their thoughts and feelings by the movements of the body, and the ex-
pression of the countenance, how much greater the difficulty when darkness
shrouds them both, and the one can hear no sound !

“When Laura is walking through a passage way, with her hands spread before
her, she knows instantly every one she meets, and passes them with a sign of
recognition ; but if it be a girl of her own age, and especially if one of her
favourites, there is instantly a bright smile of recognition — an inter-twining of
arms —a grasping of hands—and a swift telegraphing upon the tiny fingers,
whose rapid evolutions convey the thoughts and feelings from the outposts of
one mind to those of the other. There are questions and answers — exchanges of
joy or sorrow — there are kissings and partings —just as between little children
with all their senses.

« One such interview is a better refutation of the doctrine, that mind is the result
of sensation, than folios of learned argument. If those philosophers who con-
sider man as only the most perfect animal, and attribute his superiority to his


G82 CHANGES OF INFANCY.


brain and experience, become successively possessed by it. At
first, not the signification only, but the thing itself signified, was not
and could not be known toit. As it knows things more, it rapidly
acquires a knowledge of their signs. Children learn languages,
when their intellect and feelings are ready with the ideas, as
fast as languages can be communicated to them.

The great proportion of the size of the heart gradually lessens :
at birth its size is to that of the body as 1 to 120 or 150; in the
adult as 1 to 200. The arteries grow more spacious, but the
veins continue narrow till about the fifth year; the foramen ovale
and canalis arteriosus are quite obliterated about the second den-
tition. The pulse gradually becomes slower, though stronger :—
from being at birth 130 or 140, it is reduced to 120 or 125 at the
third month, and to 115 at the end of the ninth month. The
respiration also becomes slower but deeper; the blood grows
redder, and acquires more fibrin ; and calorification becomes more
vigorous.

The red colour of the skin subsides greatly at the end of twenty-
four hours. The skin remains dry and perspires little for the
first few months, so that the deficiency of calorifying power is
compensated by more difficult cooling.

The epidermis of birth all comes away during the first few days.
The characteristic colour of the variety does not succeed the


senses, be correct, then a dog or a monkey should have mental power quadruple
that of poor Laura Bridgman, who has but one sense.

 & We would not be understood to say that this child has the same amount of
knowledge that others of her age have ; very far from it: she is nine years of age,
and yet her knowledge of language is not greater than a common child of three
years. There has been no difficulty in communicating knowledge of facts — posi-
tive qualities of bodies — numbers, &c. ; but the words expressive of them, which
other children learn by hearing, as they learn to talk, must all be communicated
to Laura by a circuitous and tedious method. In all the knowledge which is
acquired by the perceptive faculties, she is of course backward ; because, pre-
vious to her coming here, her perceptive faculties were probably less exercised
in one week, than those of common children are in one hour.

“What may be termed her moral nature, however, her sentiments and af-
fections, her sense of propriety, of right, of property, &c., is equally well de-
veloped as those of other children.”” (Annual Report of the Trustees of the Per-
kins Institution and Massachusetts Asylwm for the Blind. Boston, 1839, 1840.)
I have been unable to procure the report of 1838, in which, I believe, the case is
first mentioned.


CHANGES OF INFANCY. 983


redness of birth till about a week has elapsed; and the negro is
not perfectly black till the sixth or seventh year.

In Europeans the iris is at first blue and the hair light, though
both are black from the first in the negro. The colour of the
pigmentum grows deeper, the yellow spot of the retina brighter,
and the hair darker as the period of the second dentition ap-
proaches, but frequently permanent depth of hue is not acquired
till after this is passed. The bile becomes more abundant, and the
liver much less; the first watery milk purges away the meconium,
and if, instead of the mother suckling, a nurse who has furnished
milk some time is employed, purgatives are required. The bile is at
first weak and small in quantity, so that the feces and intestinal
flatus smell sour, and the stools are of a pale yellow. The latter
afterwards become darker, and smell feetid. The gall bladder, from
having been cylindrical, becomes ample and pyriform. The spleen
increases, and at the end of the year weighs double ; its weight is
to that of the body at birth, as 1 to 400; in the adult, as 1 to 200.
The kidneys are proportionally as heavy again as in the adult, —
being to the weight of the body as 1 to 120; their lobules gradually
coalesce, and the right kidney at length becomes placed rather
lower than the left. The first urine usually soon follows the first
respiration, and is nearly as inodorous and colourless as water,
without much urea or phosphate of lime, but impregnated with
benzoic acid" and does not become yellowish or acquire a urinous


® A female child was still-born at 8 months with each ureter impervious: the
pelvis of the left kidney contained 4 ounces, and of the right 9 ounces, of fluid, of
1012 sp. gr., brown, transparent, inodorous, slightly acid, containing lithic acid
and urea, albuminous, affording the phosphate of magnesia and ammonia on the
addition of ammonia after the removal of the albumen, and a strong acid, like
that of the amniotic or rather allantoid fluid, on the addition of alcohol to the fluid
evaporated to dryness by Dr. Prout. Cases of similar accumulations had often oc-
curred before from obstructions in the foetal urethra ; and, as urea and benzoic acid
have been found in the human liquor amnii in the advanced periods of pregnancy,
justified Berzelius ( Traité de Chimie, t. vii. p. 566.), and Billard ( Traité des Enfans,
p. 451.) in concluding that the foetal urine is naturally discharged in utero.
Neither Dr. Prout nor Dr. Bostock could discover urea or uric acid in liquor
amnii obtained for them at six months by Dr. R. Lee. (Royal Med. Chir. Transs
vol. xix.) All the various digestive processes go on a little at the latter end of preg-
nancy; and Boerhaave mentions chyle being visible in the lacteals before food
was taken in a child whose abdomen was torn open during labour. (Prel. in Instit.
Rei Med. t.v. Pt.ii. p. 350.) That the liquor amnii may find its way into the


984 INCREASE OF LENGTH AND WEIGHT. .


smell till the fifth month; grows yellower towards the end of
the second year, and begins to contain more urea and phos-
phoric acid. It and all the secretions, except the saliva which
diminishes after the first dentition, gradually grow more abundant
and acquire more intensity of character, just as the solids increase
and become more perfect.

It is to be remarked that growth is still not uniform in any
respect. This not only proceeds at very various rates in different
organs at the same time, but at various rates in the same organ
at different times ; and in the body at large, at different rates at
different times.!

During the first week after birth, the body does not grow ; and
during the first four days was found by Quetelet, in seven children,
to lose 44 ounces of its weight. From this time it grows rapidly,
and afterwards less ; but the progress is irregular. From a length
of about 18 or 20 inches, and a weight of about 10 or 12 pounds at
birth, it attains 24 or 26 inches, and about 18 ounces, by the end
of the ninth month; increasing in weight more than in length.
The extremities grow proportionally stronger than the rest of
the body, and the lower than the upper.

The average length and weight are thus given by Quetelet in
French measures and weights :


Boys. Girls.
Years.
Length. Weight. Length. Weight.
Inch. Lines. Lbs. Oz. Inch. Lines. Lbs. Oz.
2 a 24 3h 29 9 a2 124
3 33 O 26 10 32 25 3
Ao ly 88 veal 30 6h 35 0 27 123
5 37 9 oo 11 Of 3 30 11
6 39 O 36 13} 39 6 34 3
i 42 O 40 13 41 6 nef | 8


The incisores teeth of the second set ossify; and, from the


stomach is proved by the hair of the quadruped feetus being sometimes found in
the meconium. (Phil. Trans. 1755. Haller, Elementa Physiolog. t. viii.)

i See supra, pp. 928. 945. 956.

k sur VHomme et le Development de ses Facultés. Paris, 1835.


y THE TEETH. 985


eighth to the tenth month, the follicles of its first and second
molares form, in addition to its already ossified third molar and
the follicles of its canine, so that, with the 20 teeth of the first
set, at the end of this period the jaws contain 44 dental germs.
At the fourth month, the rudiment of the crown of the inner
incisors of the second set is seen, in the form of a fine
band, with a sharp undulating margin elevated in three points.
At the sixth month, the external incisor has the same form,
but the internal has grown higher. The third molaris, of
which at birth only a small pyramid existed, consists of three
detached tubercles in the upper jaw, and of four or five in
the lower, disposed in a circle, and having at their bases three
narrow tongues which unite them. In the third month, the
tubercles form a crown, but still are not entirely united ; the fol-
licles of the second set lie between the milk teeth and the pos-
terior wall of the alveolus and rest immediately upon this ; their
connection contracts to a mere chord, and there is developed, at
the bottom of the alveolus between the two sets, a long partition,
which allows an opening at its upper part only for the passage of
the chord. In the lower jaw, the teeth of the first set have a
particular branch of the maxillary artery which penetrates the
jaw, below the permanent dental artery, through a special fo-
ramen, traverses the bone below the artery, escapes through
another foramen, and anastomoses with the artery.

_ ‘About the ninth month the first set are so grown that, being
resisted below by the bony floor of the alveolus, they begin to
pierce the gums, and are all cut by the end of the second or the
middle of the third year. The germs of the second set insinuate
themselves below the roots of the first set, and must contribute as
they swell to the extrusion of these. The coverings of the first
set, having now performed their office and existed their time,
naturally perish. The dental follicle, after having secreted the
enamel for the crown, becomes fine and dry, and its vessels dis-
appear ; it splits opposite the summit of the crown, and is borne
away in fragments, except a small portion which invests the root
and serves to guide the vessels. The fibrous follicle also opens
at the points corresponding to the projections of the crown, and,
after they peep forth, it attaches itself loosely to the neck of the
tooth, while, like a periosteum, it lines the ossifying walls of the
alveolus.


986 THE ‘TEETH.


The cartilage, growing thinner and thinner towards the end
of the first nine months, disappears when the teeth, instead of
which it existed, are cut, since it cannot but perish when the
dental vesicle to which it is attached and from which it probably
received vessels is opened. This first dentition often is very
painful and produces pyrexia and sympathetic irritation of various
organs. But the daily ascription to it of every disease which a
child may happen to have during dentition, even when it is not
severe, is as absurd as the blame attached to intestinal worms
daily and when they even do not exist. The lower inner inci-
sors are generally cut the first, and in the ninth month; then the
upper; the four external generally appear in the tenth month.
The four first molares are cut at the beginning of the second year ;
the four canine towards the middle ; and the four second molares
at the end of it. The order of teething is beautiful: for, when a
tooth is cut, that which corresponds to it in the other jaw appears,
and thus both are at once useful ; and the corresponding teeth on
the two portions of each jaw follow each other, so as to produce
a row. Whatever be the difference in the length of the teeth,
the crowns are all of the same height, so that they co-operate
perfectly in mastication.

Children are sometimes, though rarely, born with one or more
teeth, as was reported of Richard the Third.' Sometimes teeth
never come: and sometimes the first set, or a number of them,
are never shed, and the corresponding ones of the second set do
not appear.

In all other mammalia teething is earlier and more rapid:
many are born with teeth. But, as labour is agonising to them as
well as to the mother descendants of naughty Eve, so teething is
painful to their young as well as as to naughty Eve’s little descend-
ants. Moses gives no moral reason for this, as he does for women’s
agony in labour. The pain and irritation appear inevitable in
the nature of things. As soon as a toothis cut, its enamel, which
was of a dead white, becomes brighter and more solid ; its root
still grows; but the crown soon wears down. The pointed summit
of the incisors becomes flat and even the.enamel is worn away at
the fourth year, so that a yellow streak of bone is seen upon the


1« OQ, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!” Henry VI, 3d Pt. Act vy. se. 6.


INFANCY. 987


edge of their crown, and a brown spot upon the flattened top of
the canine which becomes a semilunar surface.

All this time the second set of teeth are growing. The crown
and bodies of the incisors are formed ; the crown of the canine
and first molaris, and the body of the third molaris, form at two
years; the crown of the third molaris at the third; the root
of the incisors, and third molaris, the crown of the canine and
two first molares, in the fourth year, when also the tubercles of
the fourth molaris ossify, and the follicle of the fifth appears,
so that there are now 52 teeth, — 20 cut, 28 ossifying, and 4 still
in formation. At seven years, the incisors and third molaris
are perfect ; the root of the canine and two first molares begin
to form; the crown of the fourth is developed ; but ossification
has not yet begun in the fifth.™ In beautiful conformity with
dentition, but not in consequence of it, the child in the latter
half of the first year begins to like other food than the milk, and
is not contented with one kind nor with liquids; and at length
cares little for the breast. At the same time the milk becomes
less nutritious, sometimes it grows of bad quality : sometimes the
catamenia recommence or pregnancy takes place. The mother’s
milk was very sweet: and sugar is highly grateful during the
whole of infancy and childhood, whereas fat, so agreeable to adults,
is disliked. As the food now taken requires a long process of as-
similation, for which the more vigorous digestive organs are qua-
lified, it remains longer in the stomach and intestines ; whence nei-
ther hunger nor the desire to defecate is so often felt : the stools
become more consistent, of a deeper yellow, and of a fecal odour.

From the increase of strength, the mortality diminishes ; so


that,


Inthe Ist yearitisasl] to 4


29 — — 1— 8or 9
Sd —) oS 1. = 16
4h, a ek i D0)

Sth — - — « 1 — 30— 40


m Serres, Essai sur les Dents.
Ph. Blandin, Anatomie du Systeme Dentaire.
Rousseau, Anatomie Comparée du Systeme Dentaire.
Prochaska, Opera minora. Burdach, t. iv.
a7


988 CHILDHOOD.


In the 6th year itis as 1 to 40 or 50
th — — 1— 60— 70
8th — — 1 — 70—100


Whatever be the average of any of these years in a country, the
average of the following year is less: and the greatest diminution
is about the seventh or eighth year."

Ossification all this time proceeds, but for details I must refer
my reader to Meckel and Beclard. The greater fontanelle dis-
appears at the second year; the serre of the sutures are scen on
the edges of the bones at the third year, and at the fifth year
they begin to close into one another. There is still no diploe, and
the processes form but gradually.

As the child becomes able to notice more and more, and to
comprehend, and to be susceptible of more emotions, power of
appreciation and capability of passion thus advancing together, it
displays passion more and more from the period of its birth till
the general diminution of irritability and the influence of reason
and education bring it to control itself. At first it not only cries
at every disappointment, but falls into a violent rage, and, from
its strength of emotion and the great excitability of the respiratory
organs, sobs violently. Adults sob only when they are in extreme
distress. At length it cries without sobbing unless under great
vexation or grief. The two sexes at the third and fourth year
begin to show a difference in this respect as well as in others.
The boy at least is less disposed to cry, and also feels that it is
unmanly to cry, while the girl still sobs and cries: the boy
plays at soldiers and horses and whatever demands activity of
his muscles; the girl prefers dressing and nursing a doll and
playing at company.

There is so strong a disposition to vermin in the head, and
to worms (oxyures and ascarides lumbricoides in this country)
in the intestines, that many writers declare their absence to be a
morbid condition. The disposition is ascribed to the abundance
of albumen in all the secretions and of vital or nutritive energy.
This is much lessened about the time of the second dentition, as
well as the extreme irritability which gave an intense liability to
inflammation of the contents of the head, chest, and abdomen.


" Burdach, § 538.


CHILDHOOD. 989


Theskin, not abounding in red vessels so much as the mucous mem-
branes and the substance of the viscera, is not so liable as those
to inflammation: nor is acute rheumatism so prevalent in children
as adults, probably from the copious covering of fat possessed
by the parts most subject to this disease.

With the progress of the mind, the brain increases and becomes
matured in composition and structure. Sdmmerring® and the
Wenzels? declare that the brain attains its full growth by at least
the seventh year. The two brothers, however, conceive that,
though the size does not increase, the structure improves. But
Burdach opposes them in this, and asserts that the fibrous por-
tion does not augment or improve, supposing that perfection of
both size and structure long precedes perfection of function, and
performs function at last only through exercise.4 Now, if he were
right, we must have the strange fact of a human organ being
ready for its function at least twenty years before its perfect
size, composition, and structure perform perfect functions; for
the mind is not at its full strength till near the thirtieth year.
If general perfection of organ only waits for exercise to make
it available, how is it that one faculty appears after another,
not according to the chance of exercise, but to a regular law?
How is it that children seven years of age, sleeping and play-
ing together, for the most part do not show the least sexual
feeling, but that all at once in a few years they feel desire, even
though each sex is kept in the utmost seclusion, with no ex-
ample and no exercise. Excitement from without and exercise
will arouse dormant faculties ; but the faculties must exist, and
the organs of the faculties must be more or less advanced. The
new being sees, hears, thinks and wills at eight months, if acci-
dentally driven into the world then, and would do none of these
things for a month if allowed to remain in the womb till its full
time. But let it be born before the cerebral organs are much
advanced, and it will do none of these things with all the external
means of excitement which act successfully on the brain at a
later period of developement. The external causes of excitement
and the exercise of the majority of the faculties, as well as of


° De Corp. Humani Fabrica, vol. iv.
P De FPenitiori Structura Cerebri.
q Te § eal;

rad bat


990 GROWTH OF


sexual desire, are always sufficiently strong at least in civilised life
at all ages; but the character makes itself distinct at every age
and in every individual, in all circumstances, and this according
to the successive growth of each cerebral organ.* When an organ


r «May I not ask, whence the first men, who were surrounded only by
brutes, acquired their faculties, and how they created or invented them? Even
now, are not many persons, during their childhood, surrounded more by brutes than
men? Why do not these children acquire the instincts and propensities of brutes
as well as the faculties of men? If children had not similar dispositions with
their parents and instructors, how would they be capable of receiving their instruc-
tion and profiting by their example. During their early years, when children
are almost entirely in the hands of their mothers, and nurses, and women, the
boys are constantly distinguishable from girls ; every child even differs from ano-
ther. In process of time nothing can create a resemblance between the faculties
of the man and the woman, nor between those of different individuals. In fine,
is any art known by which an instructor can create in children envy, love, attach-
ment, anger, goodness, wickedness, ambition, pride, &c.? Can we create any
faculty whatever? So little does this power belong to man, that, even when we
are absolutely our own masters, we cannot avoid the changes produced by the
course of years in our moral and intellectual faculties. Every thing confirms
the truth of what Herder says, —‘ that education can only take place by imi-
tation, consequently by the passage of the original to the copy. This supposes
that the imitator must have the faculty of receiving what is communicated to
him, and of transforming it into his nature like the food which nourishes him.
But the manner in which he receives it, the means by which he appropriates it
to himself, and employs it, can only be determined by the faculties of him who
receives it. Whence it follows, that the education of our species isin some sort
the production of a double action, viz., that which gives and that which receives
it. Thus, when we see that men assume the forms which we wish to give them,
it is not to be concluded from this that we have created these forms in them ; they
have borrowed them from other men endowed with the same dispositions.’

« The influence of education, instruction, example, and surrounding circum-
stances takes effect principally when the innate dispositions are neither too feeble
nor too energetic: every sane man, possessing the organisation essential to his
species, has, by virtue of it, a capacity for every thing relative to the dispositions
proper to man. It is to this that Nature has confined herself in the greater
number of individuals. With this mediocrity of moral and intellectual powers,
we are passive, so to speak, relatively to the impression of external objects; the
internal faculties are not announced by themselves; they are in a state of indif-
ference ; they seize nothing, reject nothing forcibly; and, as nothing moves these
individuals towards a marked end, they have not, therefore, any determinate vo-
cation. It is of this great majority of men that it is said with reason, that man
is an imitative animal. Precepts, institutions, discussion, the cold exposition of
the most interesting truths, have but little power over them. It is example—imi-


ae


2D


THE BRAIN. 991


is perfect, its tendency to act and its strength find in external
circumstances sufficient cause of excitement and exercise, —


tation—which draws them on, which gives the solemn air, and often character, to
the son of a magistrate; and the fierce countenance to the son of a warrior ;
which makes the Frenchman, the German, the Italian, the Englishman, the
Russian ; which makes slaves, freemen, republicans, &c. ; but mediocrity will
always be their portion. It is for these men, therefore, that education is almost
every thing, at least in relation to social life: it is for them that institutions must
be calculated. Yet it is not allowable to conclude from this, that their disposi
tion to receive this education is not innate. When Helvetius maintains that, if
dispositions were innate in man, education could not change any thing in him
nor give him any thing, he abstracts from the nature of man and brutes every
possibility of being modified, and confounds simple modifications with essential
qualities and faculties.

“It must not, however, be imagined that, even for this class, the impressions
which come from without have an exclusive, absolute, and always equal in-
fluence. If we succeed in introducing into a nation a certain uniformity as re-
gards customs, opinions, manners, professions, the arts and sciences, the laws, and
religion, it is because all these things are founded, not only upon positive rela-
tions, but likewise upon natural dispositions. Without denying the influence of
institutions, it is always evident that the general progress of civilisation is the
result of the organisation proper to mankind.

In the midst of these positive things which seem to have been introduced by
institutions, by arbitrary inventions, every individual differs from another in spe-
cific character, just as he differs from him in the external form of his body.
Such a quality is given to one, and not to another. Each has a predilection, or
a more decided talent, for such or such an object. There is, in every man,
therefore, something which he does not derive from education, which even re-
sists all education. Accordingly, all instructors have experienced that parti-
cular rules must be observed for each pupil, if they would perfect the good and
correct the evil qualities which are peculiar to him, and put him in a condition
to employ them in the manner the most useful to society and to himself.

“* This individuality, this character peculiar to each individual, shows itself in a
thousand ways at every period of life, without education having any part in it,
From his infancy, man announces the character which will distinguish him in
adult age. When you exalt his merit for some excellent quality, or censure
him for some vicious quality, he appears surprised at it himself, as at a thing of
which he acquires a knowledge for the first time. You bring him to the point.
‘ Ah, well!’ he exclaims; ‘it is in my nature ; I cannot do otherwise ; it is stronger
than I, &c. Let us therefore follow the example of Marcus Aurelius, who
held it as a maxim, ‘ That it is not in our power, nor in that of a sovereign,
to create men such as they should be, but that it depends upon us, and upon
the prince, to employ them, such as they are, each according to his talent.’

“Ffow can we attribute to education those most decided dispositions and facul-


PS a bas.


992 GROWTH OF


makes opportunities of circumstances which, though rendered a
thousand times more favourable, would be lost on an organ a


ties which are sometimes observed even in children, and which consequently are
anterior to every kind of instruction. Most great men haye manifested their
future greatness in their early years. Achilles, disguised in the clothes of
Pyrrha, seized a sword from amongst the presents brought by Ulysses; The-
mistocles, when still a child, said that, if he were intrusted with the government
of a small town, he should know how to aggrandise and render it powerful ;
Alcibiades, seeing a carter about to derange his game of knuckles, lay down
across the middle of the street, crying out to him, ‘ Come on if yow dare;’
Alexander would not contend for the prize in the Olympic games unless his
rivals were kings ; it was at the age of 14 that Cato of Utica disclosed the great-
ness of his character and his horror of tyranny; Pascal, at 12 years of age, gave
promise of his genius by publishing a treatise on the conic sections.

‘‘ Experience proves how little is thefpower of education, when acting upon very
energetic dispositions. Men endowed with an eminent character and great in-
lectual faculties make their way and elevate themselves in spite of the greatest
obstacles: Moses, David, Tamerlane, the Pope Sextus Quintus had been shep-
herds. Gregory VII. was the son of a carpenter; Socrates, Pythagoras, Theo-
phrastes, Demosthenes, Shakspeare, Molicre, J. J. Rousseau, were the sons of
artisans. These examples, with which history abounds, refute Hobbes, who
maintains that the difference of talents or mental faculties is produced by wealth,
power, and the condition in which we are born,

“It is even observed that, in spite of the most decided opposition and of an
education the most opposed to the innate character, nature, when endowed with
energy, almost always prevails both in the good and the bad. ‘Tacitus justifies
Nero’s two instructors. This prince was cruel from his infancy, and to all the
lessons of humanity given him by his masters he only opposed a heart of brass.
Wise and learned philosophers cultivated the heart and mind of Commodus : but
nature prevailed over education ; in him was seena second Nero. ‘The energetic
character of Peter the Great could not be enervated either by the corrupt prin-
ciples with which,he was surrounded, or by the pleasures by the aid of which
it was attempted at a tender age to render him effeminate.

«‘ The greatest men, it is true, bear the stamp of their age, and cannot entirely
escape an impression from surrounding objects; yet we constantly see that he
who possesses a predominant energetic quality or faculty pursues his particular
course, and seizes with force the object which nature has indicated to him.
Thomas, in writing the eulogy of Descartes, did well, therefore, in not dwelling
much upon his education. ‘ For,’ says he, ‘ when we have to do with extraor-
dinary men, we must consider education much less than nature. There is an
education for common men ; the man of genius has the education which he gives
himself, and which consists principally in forgetting and effacing that which he
has received.’ Fontenelle, in pronouncing the eulogy of the Czar, said, ‘ Neither


OO


THE BRAIN. 993


thousand times Jess powerful. The truth is that the brain grows
for a great many years. If you examine the heads of children


ee ee ee SS eee


does a good education make the great character, nor does abad education destroy
it. Heroes of all kinds come out ready formed from the hands of nature, and
with qualities insuperable.’

« Great men have almost always been educated by inferi
all; Homer, Petrarch, Tasso, Dante, Raphael, Michael Angelo, Racine, Moliere,
Corneille, Titian, Rubens, Poussin, &c. &c. And great masters rarely form
great men. What, then, are we to think of the public, who innocently think
they must make the best choice, of a physician for example, merely because he
has been educated by a celebrated professor ?


« Geniuses of all kinds, say the antagonists of innate dispositions, are exceptions,
that the qualities and


or masters, or not at


and form a separate class; we cannot conclude from this,
faculties are innate. Genius is only a very energetic activity of some quality or
faculty ; if, therefore, in cases where the faculties have the greatest energy, the
cause which produces it, and which is then the more striking, is inherent in the
organisation, we must naturally conclude that the cause of their ordinary activity
is equally based upon the organisation. The difference of more or less proves
nothing against the common origin of obscure and decided faculties, otherwise we
must conclude from the piercing sight of the eagle, and the acute smell of the
dog, that the sight of the mole, and the smell of man, do not depend upon their
organisation.

‘«‘ If from any circumstances a man endowed with certain faculties very active
has been prevented from following his vocation, the predominant faculty or pro-
pensity determines the favourite enjoyments or occupation of his life. Kings
devote themselves to the occupations of artists and artisans; husbandmen, shoe-
makers, weavers, shepherds, become astronomers, poets, philosophers, actors, or
sculptors. The Czar Peter I. exercised the mechanical arts from inclination ;
Louis XVI. performed the labours of a locksmith; the pastor Hahn made
watches; Haller in the midst of his anatomical and physiological works became
likewise celebrated for poetry. é

«“ If any still maintain that precocious genius or any other genius is the result of
education and of surrounding objects, let them tell us why certain children who,
with regard to one of their faculties, evince extraordinary genius, do not raise
themselves above their companions in any other respect ; and why men who excel
in one point are so ordinary in every thing else. The celebrated Betty, who
at the age of 13 was already considered a very great comedian, would play
with other children in the street up to the moment when he had to appear upon
the stage. William Crotch, celebrated at six years of age for his musical genius,
was in every thing else a child of only moderate intelligence.

«JT made the same observation upon a boy of 5 years who manifested com-
plete virility and the most decided propensity for women : he had nothing to
distinguish him from children of his age in all his other inclinations. The


3T 4


994 GROWTH OF


seven years of age and upwards, you will find the average size
much below that of the adult head. Every hatter knows that


same contrast is remarkable in adults. The most extraordinary faculties prove
nothing in favour of qualities of a different kind. Cesar could never have been
made a Horace, nor Alexandera Homer. Helvetius himself is obliged to admit
that education would neyer have changed Newton into a poet, nor Milton into
an astronomer: neither would Michael Angelo have been able to compose the
pictures of Albano, nor Albano those of Julio Romano. We can explain
these different phenomena only by saying that certain organs are perfected earlier
and others later ; that, in certain individuals, some organs remain always in the
back ground, whilst others acquire the greatest energy. But this explanation
is a new proof that al! the moral qualities and intellectual faculties are innate.

** Some have recourse to little subterfuges in order to prove that our propensi-
ties and talents are the result of chance; it is, say they, insignificant impres-
sions upon the infant at the breast, it is particular examples and events, which
determine sometimes one faculty, sometimes another. If Demosthenes became
eloquent, it is because he was led on by the eloquence of Callistratus. If Vau-
canson became celebrated in mechanics, it is because, while an infant, he had
seen a clock in the antechamber of his mother’s confessor; he examined its
wheels, made a similar machine with a bad knife, and, his taste developing itself,
he soon constructed an automaton flute-player and the most astonishing ma-
chines. Milton would not have written his poem had he not lost his situation as
secretary to Cromwell, Shakspeare wrote tragedies only because he was an
actor: instead of becoming an actor he would have remained a wool-stapler,
like his father, if some errors of youth had not constrained him to quit his native
place. Corneille fell in love and wrote verses for the object of his passion; it is
to this circumstance that we are indebted for this great dramatic poet. Newton
saw an apple fall; what more did he want to discover the laws of gravitation ?

“ T admit these facts. All that can be concluded from them is, that our propen-
sities and talents are not always put into activity of themselves; that it is often
necessary that the impulse be given them by an external impression, or that the
material object upon which they should exercise themselves be offered them. The
cock does not fight if he has no rival to oppose him in his amours. The beaver
does not build if he has no branches of trees, just as no animal generates without
a female ; without an obstacle, there would be no firmness ; without an enemy,
no generous pardon. In all times, great events cause the appearance of great
men; not that circumstances engender their intellectual qualities, but they
furnish an ample career for the liberal exercise of their faculties. Many men,
without doubt, only arrive by these means at a knowledge of their own
genius; but, if certain qualities sometimes remain inactive at first for want of
circumstances, the power and solidity which these faculties afterwards evince
show plainly enough that their existence had preceded their action. Is it not
evident that, without particular dispositions in the examples opposed to me, the


oo cave“. qe Gh ei


THE BRAIN. 995


the sons of most of his customers require hats of larger and larger
sizes every year till they are men. Nay, the head grows in some


objects offered by hazard would not have been seized as they were, nor with the
same energy. How many are the children upon whom works of art make little
impression, or whom the sight of these works does not render artists !

** Vaucanson bestows the greatest attention upon the arrangement of the clock ;
he examines it with much care ; the first essays which he makes in such works,
with bad tools, are successful: now this very attention, and this rapid success,
prove that there existed a relation between his faculties and the mechanical arts.
Thucydides shed tears of emulation, on hearing Herodotus read his history to
the Greeks, It certainly was not that reading which created in him a style con-
cise, compact, lively, forcible, and rich in ideas. It was not the reading of the
poem of Henry IV. which inspired La Fontaine with his peculiar talent for
poetry, How many secretaries lose their situations without becoming Miltons !
How many persons are in love and make verses, like Corneille and Racine, and
yet these have not yet found a successor !

“If the most frivolous accessory circumstances produce striking differences in
the propensities and talents, why does not education, which can create circum-
stances at pleasure, adopt this new mode of forming great men? And why shall we
always have cause to complain that, in spite of so many establishments for edu-
cation, great men are such rare phenomena ?

“TI certainly do not deny that good models are of great utility, nor that the study
of these models ought to constitute an essential part of education ; but, if it be
necessary, or sufficient, to have excellent subjects for imitation, whence have
Homer, Petrarch, and Dante drawn their divine art ? Why are not the talents
of Tacitus, Cicero, and Titus Livius reproduced, although so many learned per-
sons know these great men by heart? Why do Raphael, Mozart, Haydn, pro-
duce so few disciples? and why is a lapse of several ages always necessary before
we can see a few great men shine in the annals of history ?

“« Another objection is drawn from that uniformity which we find amongst men
on a hasty review of all the individuals of a nation; and they would conclude
from this that the faculties of man are only a result of social institutions.

* But this uniformity proves precisely the reverse; for we find it in essential
things not only in the same nation, but amongst all people, in all times, however
different may be the external influences of climate, food, laws, customs, religion,
and education. In like manner is it preserved in all the individuals of the same
species amongst brutes, under whatever climate and whatever external influence.
This uniformity is, consequently, the strongest proof that nothing can derange
the plan which Nature has prescribed by means of the organisation. For the
rest, the panegyrists of the creative power of education are in contradiction to
themselves. At one time the uniformity which they remark amongst men serves
for them to prove that education does every thing: at another, in order to explain
the difference in characters, they allege the impossibility of the greater number
of individuals receiving a uniform education.


996 GROWTH OF


to a late period,—till near or past forty. Gall told me that Na-
poleon’s hatter assured him that the head of that ruthless de-
stroyer of human life grew to the age of thirty-five. Phrenologists
know that different parts of the head grow differently at different
ages, and that the forehead or particular parts of it sometimes
grow very much in young adults. Casts have now been taken of
the same individuals at various ages in many instances, and the
changes of the different parts of the skull and therefore of the
cerebral organs are very great; for the hard parts depend much
for their size and form upon the soft, and the skull exactly
represents the brain when in the healthy state and before decline
begins.* In some instances it is said that accidental exercise
has caused the increase. But generally this has been the result
of natural tendency to developement. No amount of exercise
will make a giant of a dwarf, make a small eye large, or lengthen
a limb or finger: exercise will make an organ plump, — make it
thicker and more vigorous: but it is limited in its power by the
limits of the natural laws of the individual. Deficiency of good
food and of the stimulants heat, light, &c., and the influence of
noxious agents, may stint the natural growth of an individual,


« After all, let us consult those persons who consecrate their whole life to the
education of man, such as Campé, Niemeyer, Pestalozzi, Salzmann, Gediké,
May, Eschké, Pfingsten, the Abbé Sicard, &c. Every day furnishes them oc-
casion to remark that the dispositions in each individual differ from birth, and
that education can only take effect in proportion to the innate qualities. If it
were otherwise, how could these benevolent men forgive themselves, and how
be forgiven, for not rooting out from their pupils, all faults, all vices, all fatal
passions, and base inclinations! How could satirical authors, moralists, an
preachers obtain so little success against absurdities and crimes? Why have
not the great and the rich yet purchased the art of giving a great capacity to
their children? Believe then that such an art is not entirely in the power of
men. It is Nature herself who, by means of the immutable laws of the organ-
isation, has reserved to herself, not the sole, but the first right over all exercise
of the faculties and propensities of man and of brutes.” (Gall, l.c. 8vo. t.i.
p. 133, sqq.; see also 4to, vol. ii. p. 40. sqq-)

s « Tf we examine the cranium comparatively with the brain, in all vertebrate
animals, and especially in man, as to national differences, as well as those equally
certain though more delicate differences of age, sex, and individuality, we shall
he easily convinced that the cranium represents the encephalon in general,”
Dictionnaire des Sc. Méd. t. vii. p. 301, See also further remarks and Gall’s
reply in his Fonctions du Cerveau, 4to. vol. iii, p. 19. sqq.; 8vo. t. iil. p. 34. sqq. )


THE BRAIN. 997


but the most favourable circumstance will not augment his growth
beyond its natural bounds in him. In excess, —carried to the
point of inflammatory irritation, or aided by an inflammatory ir-
ritation, exercise or irritation of any kind may indeed occasion
a diseased growth, — an hypertrophy, at the expense of the
healthy performance of the function of the organ and of general
health. No exercise will make a Sir Godfrey Kneller or a Sir
Peter Lely, into a Rubens or a Vandyke.


*‘ Sudet multum, frustraque laboret
Ausus idem.”


The same amount of industry at Oxford or Cambridge produces
very different proficiency in individuals. Moreover, those bro-
thers and sisters who resemble each other in character present,
though brought up apart and under different circumstances,
similar successive growths of the different parts of their heads:
while those who are incessantly together, quite in the same cir-
cumstances, and differ in character, have totally different pro-
portions of successive developement of the different parts of their
head. A physician, who was not a phrenologist, the late Dr. John
Sims, bestowed great labour in weighing brains, and his results are
very different from those of his predecessors. After weighing 237
brains, from the age of 1 year to above 70, he ascertained “ that
the average weight of the brain goes on increasing from 1 year
old to 20: between 20 and 30, there is a slight increase in the
average; afterwards it increases and arrives at the maximum
between 40 and 50; after 50, to old age, the brain gradually
decreases in weight.”t This, like all accurate observations on~
points investigated by Gall, confirms the statements made by Gall
years ago.

Objectors to the high estimate by phrenologists of the im-
portance of size should reflect that the growth of all parts from
the embryo to the perfect man shows the importance of size.
Nature does nothing in vain, and she would not cause the nu-
tritive power to augment the bulk of every organ if it did not
thereby acquire more functional power.

For minute measurements of different divisions of the brain,


t Royal Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xix. p. 358. 1835.
" Le. 4to. vol.ii. pp. 256. sq. 407. sq.; 8vo. t. ii, pp, 156. sqq. 430. sqq.


998 CHILDHOOD.


cranium, and face, I must refer to Burdach. The nose acquires
more of its proper shape and its cartilages lengthen. The heart
and liver grow less rapidly, so that proportionally they become
smaller. The right ventricle acquires more capacity and grows
thinner. The lungs increase; the larynx and trachea continue
small, so that the voice is still shrill. The stomach and small
intestines lengthen, and the large intestines grow broader. ‘The
urinary bladder becomes rounder as well as more capacious, so
that the urine is made less frequently and more copiously at a
time. As the bones, muscles, and tendons become firmer and
change in shape, the child, from sucking more and more strongly
and adroitly, begins to masticate; from tossing about, it is able
to shuffle from place to place as it lies; then sits also; and,
about the end of the first year, it stands; then it gradually walks,
first with assistance and for a very short time, afterwards alone
and longer, till at length it is independent and runs well; and,
from its impetuosity, the greater force of the flexors than of
the extensors, and the necessity it finds to make a great effort,
like those labouring under paralysis agitans or chorea, it runs
rather than walks; but it runs a few steps only, precipitating it-
_self as it were on the object it wishes to reach, and often
tumbles forwards. Its brain developing gradually at the same
time, it begins, from uttering inarticulate sounds on experiencing
feelings and sensations, to articulate, and at length talks as it
hears those around it talk, though long imperfectly and dis-
posed to coin words of its own. Its words are substantives—the
names of sensible objects: and next verbs. It imitates sounds
at first for the sake of imitating without a view to meaning.*


x The child does not at first use the words I, me, my, or mine, and does not
hear itself called I or me, or its things my or mine. It is always addressed by its
name, as “ Tommy come here—Tommy must not do that—that is Tommy’s
spoon.”” We feel that, to make ourselves intelligible, we must sospeak. It does
not know it is I or me; and consequently what belongs to it, it naturally calls
Tommy’s, not my, or mine. It calls people by their names, and does not say
you and your: and we do not speak to it of ourselves and our things as us and
ours, at least without explaining ourselves by adding individual names. The
mother says mama and mama’s book; for example, Tommy must not touch
mama or mama’s book,—not, must not touch yours; and so on, It is inca-
pable of the abstract notion of self, and the general meaning of personal pronouns,
As its faculties grow, it seems to comprehend the meaning of pronouns and soon


CHILDHOOD. 999


It often pronounces words without attaching meaning to them,
but from the pleasure of speaking, just as it uses the muscles of
its trunk and extremities. The facility with which children learn
languages is most astonishing. They appreciate the meaning of
any word in the most exquisite manner if they once} possess the
corresponding feeling or idea. A child will learn two, three, or
even four languages orally at once with ease. Of course, its pro-
nunciation is at first imperfect ; and not only from want of practice,
but from imperfect developement of the organs. For some adults
with sufficient knowledge and practice still pronounce certain
words like children, and cannot pronounce them otherwise: and
several members of the same family may have the same peculiarity.

These circumstances accord with sucha change in the digestive
organs that a new kind of food can be assimilated ; and with such
advances in the brain that speech and locomotion are now im-
portant ; and all these changes, as well indeed as all others which
occur, harmonise together completely to the various great ends
for which they serve.

Children and young brutes are more joyous than the adult.
Not only have they no care for the future, but all trifles give
them pleasure: they are angry and miserable for trifles, but they
presently grow happy again. They love fun, and rejoice in exer-
cising all their muscles. They frisk and halloo till they are tired ;
— to the annoyance of their elders, who forget that this is their
nature and the effect and cause of health. All children should
have ample space for exercise and noise. Existence, all their


employs them. I have heard it asserted that as children we generalise most,
and indiyidualise as adults. This would be doing, when our faculties are the
weakest, what requires them in the greatest strength. A child does not gene-
ralise, but is insensible of differences. It mistakes two similar objects for the
same, After seeing achicken and learning its name, a child will think a parrot isa
chicken and call it a chicken. Just as in after life, when we see numerous similar
objects, as a flock of sheep, we cannot distinguish the individuals till after long
observation of the flock, As its faculties grow and its experience augments, it
discerns the difference, and forms the general notion and indicates it by the word
bird. To confound is not to generalise. In generalising we are aware of all
the differences of individual things, we confound nothing, but, on the contrary,
discover what points of agreement there are among individual things which we
have considered as different from each other; and we group them according to
their agreement.


1000 BOYHOOD


faculties and powers, and all the world around them, are new and
fill them with delight ; and a child has said, in his transport of
freshness and happiness, “Mama! what a funny thing it is to
be alive.”

As the powers of the brain augment, a larger view is taken,
objects are seen in connection and in larger and larger number,
properties, phenomena, and events: and, since memory grows
stronger, and deductions are made, perceptions and all knowledge
make a more and more permanent impression. All emotions, like
sensations, are at first readily excited and rapidly pass away: but
they become gradually less easy of excitement and more durable.
Self-control daily increases. Attitudes and gestures in infancy
meant little: but, as the mind advanced in ideas and feelings,
these of course have all along become more and more expressive.

The first set of teeth were not of hardness to last long or of
size to bear the increasing force of mastication, and they cannot
grow or become of more perfect structure. The increased
length also of the jaw separates them from each other. Their
vessels and nerves shrink away about the 7th year; and, when at
length the vessels can convey no more blood, the teeth necessa-
rily drop out. As the alveoli grow larger, the roots become less
firmly fixed, and their separation is favoured by the pressure of
the second set, which gradually causes the partition of the alveoli
between the teeth of the two sets to be absorbed, so that both
teeth lie at last in one alveolus, as they did originally. The new
internal incisor lies below the old: the new external incisor partly
under the old external incisor, partly under the old canine, from
want of room: and the new canine behind the old external incisor
and old first molar: the new molars lie between the bifid fangs of
the old molars: the fibrous follicle of the new tooth sprung like
a bud from the surface of the follicle of the old tooth, and now,
by means of a prolongation like a chord, holds to the periosteum
of the alveolus into which the follicle of the old tooth is con-
verted. The crown of the new tooth transforms the chord into a
canal, through which the tooth, whose root is now forming,
penetrates into the alveolus destined to receive it and containing
the first tooth. If the old tooth is not ready to move, the new
tooth makes its way through the jaw, its follicles first cracking
like that of a tooth of the first set when being cut, and thus
becoming the periosteum of a new and special alveolus. The


ee


AND GIRLHOOD. 100]


third molaris, which is the largest and strongest of all, is cut at
about 7 or 8 years, and announces the commencement of the
second dentition. The old set then fall out, and the new appear.
First the internal, and then the external incisors change at 8 or 9
years : the first and second molar at 10: the canine at 1]. At about
12 the second dentition is completed by the appearance of another
molar tooth,—the fourth: and there are now 28 teeth. The roots
of the new set are not of full growth for 2 or 3 years, and during
this time their alveoli are strengthened by deposits of bony matter
within. — The new teeth soon begin to wear, and, about the 12th
year, the points of the incisors have disappeared and the crown
presents a straight andcutting edge.y

3. Boyhood and Girlhood extend from the second teething to
puberty. Inthe previous age, the general difference between the
sexes had become more and more striking. In the embryo we
have seen that general sexual differences are discernible sufficient
to indicate the sex ; and at birth that boys are larger than girls.
Sommerring remarks that in male embryos the chest is larger,
more conical, and more prominent anteriorly than the abdomen
and pelvis, and supplied with thicker ribs: in the female shorter,
broader above, narrower from the 5th rib, more like a cask than
a cone, whereas the abdomen is longer and more projecting than
the chest. In the male, the head is bigger and more angular,
the occiput larger, the vertex less high, the upper extremities
stronger, the upper arms more conical, the fore-arms more
conical, the wrists broader, the fingers less slender, the pelvis
narrower, the nates smaller, the thighs less bulky, the ankles and
heels more projecting, the great toes more distinct from the
others. Tiedemann says that the male brain is the heavier even
at birth.z The spinous processes of the lower dorsal and upper
lumbar vertebrae form a projection in males, and a depression in
females.2 The difference becomes more obvious daily. The boy’s
jaws and limbs, especially his hands and feet, grow faster: and,
while he loves muscular activity, she prefers playing with her
doll. He is bolder and more independent: she gentle and affec-
tionate. She loves small and weak animals: he the large and


y Burdach, § 551.
z Phil, Trans. 1836, p. 502.
4 Tcones Embryonum, p. 4.


1002 YOUTH.


strong. He destroys and disorders: she preserves and keeps all
in order, is better behaved, and more vain and cunning. Girls
catch the meaning and character of superficial matters better
than boys and inquire less deeply, being inclined to implicit
confidence in what they read and hear. Boys are not contented
till they have grasped the whole of a thing and ascertained the
reason of all belonging to it, and asked your grounds for what
you assert. Girls are thus quicker, and boys sounder. In Ger-
many more girls die now than boys. But the mortality of both
is lower at this than at any other period of life,—not being above 1
in 100. The minimum is obtained a year or two before puberty.”
Girls advance with more rapidity. Girlhood lasts but to 14 years
in this country: boyhood to 16.

Growth takes place less rapidly and uniformly. But weight in-
creases more rapidly. The following details are from Quetelet :


Boys. Girls.
Years,
Length Weight. Length Weight

Inch Lines. Lbs. Oz. Inch.; Lines. Lbs. Oz.
8 44 6 44 54 ig = OG 40 104
9 46 6 48 64 45 6 45 94
10 48 9 52 64 47 9 50 4

Jel 50 9 sf 144 49 6 5 14
12 52 9 63 114 51 9 63 1] 5

13 Do O ihe} 7 53 6 70 6
14 57 O 82 13 55 6 78 94
15 59 ) 93 63 57 3 86 le
16 60. 9 106 24 58 6 93 4}


The pulse at the end of this age is from 80 to 85. The sub-
cutaneous fat diminishes. ‘The pelvis of girls, and the thorax of
boys, increase more rapidly. The thigh in both sexes increases
so much more than previously that, whereas before it was shorter
than the leg, itis now as long. The thymus usually disappears
altogether about the 13th year. The head now ‘grows for the
first time more in breadth than in length; the serre of the su-
tures of its bones become longer.

4. Adolescence or Youth extends from the commencement of


> Burdach, § 452.


PUBERTY. 1003


puberty to the termination of growth, — from the 14th to the
20th year in females, and from the 16th to the 24th in males.

The general and local sexual bodily characteristics and the local
sexual growth both in the sexual organs and cerebellum are com-
plete. The female menstruates, the male discharges semen:
the sexual desire is in full force, and the copulative function ca-
pable of full performance. Some time before desire is felt, the
girl grows more reserved towards boys; and boys, though they
quiz girls for their gentleness, exhibit traces of a chivalrous
respect for them. At a later period, before puberty is manifest,
obscure desires are felt, not recognised till a still later period
to be sexual.¢

{n the female the countenance changes somewhat, and the voice
grows stronger from the increase in all the air passages. In the
male a great change is observable in the countenance to a degree
of manliness, and the voice alters considerably. For a time it is
cracked, becoming shrill and hoarse in its tone, and then settles
into a grave character, with increased strength and compass.
These vocal changes arise from changes in the larynx, just as
those of the mind arise from changes in the brain. The larynx
had previously grown but little; now it all at once grows with


© See Alfieri’s account of his unconscious and innocent love of the Fraticelli
Novizi of the church del Carmine, about twice his own age, when he was scarcely
seven years old,—an unusually early age for glimmerings of the feeling. Questo
mio innocente amore per que’ Novizi, giunse tant’ oltre, che io sempre pensava ad
essi ed alle loro diverse funzioni.’’ ‘‘ E questo in somma, sotto tanti e si diversi
aspetti, era amore, come poi pienamente connobbi e me ne accertai parecchi
anni dopo, riflettando su; perché di quanto io allora sentissi o facessi nulla affatto
sapeva, ed obbediva al puro istinto animale.” (Vita di Vittorio Alfieri da Asta,
scritta da Esso, cap. iii.) I saw a case of precocious puberty in a boy about three
years of age, at Dulwich, who endeavoured to lay hold of the genitals of every
body, male and female; his desires not being yet fully shapen. That the sexual
desire begins in this germ-like way, and sometimes at a very early age, others
testify. (See Dr. Vimont, ].c. t. i. p. 236.)  J’ai été deja consulté plusieurs
' fois par les parents de jeunes enfants des deux sexes de cing a sept ans, ayant
Phabitude de masturbation ; et je suis convaincu que le nombre de ceux qui s’y
livrent serait reconnu pour étre trés considérable, si les enfans n’employoient
la plus grande addresse pour cacher cette funeste habitude.” The frequency
of this precocity is the only point that can be questioned. Mr. White, of the
Westminster Hospital, details a male case of premature puberty, in which the child
masturbated when but two years old and not likely to have learnt the practice
from others. (Med. Chir. Trans, vol. i. p. 284.)

ou


1004 PUBERTY.


rapidity: the thyreoid cartilage projects, and the glottis is as broad
again as before. Richerand found it 54 lines in length in a boy
of 14, and in a year both its length and breadth doubled: while
in a girl its length does not exceed 7 lines. The blood acquires
an odour stronger than in women and children ; the blood and the
flesh have a peculiar odour not observable in old men or eunuchs.*
Down begins upon the pubes of both sexes; and after a year
above the upper lip of the male, then upon the chin, and at last
along the sides of the face. The down gradually becomes strong
hair, and thus, in general, moustache, beard, and whiskers orna-
ment the male face. But in some whiskers never appear, or but
thinly; and in some the beard also is very scanty. The ex-
ternal and internal genitals all at once grow rapidly; and the skin
of the penis and labia becomes dark. The breasts of the female
now suddenly swell forth, and ornament her as much as the new
hair does the face of the male. The eyes of both now sparkle,
and the whole aspect changes to an adult character. Both sexes
acquire the axillary and genital odour, as well, I dare say, as
others not discernible to us, but some to savages, and some to the
brute creation, one to one species and another to another. The
girl is surprised by the appearance of menstrual fluid, and the
boy by seminal emission: though neither fluid has at first its ma-
ture intensity of sensible qualities. The odour of the genitals is
useless in civilised man: but in brutes it gives information of the
sex, and of the presence of heat, being stronger during desire, es-
pecially in the female, and stimulates the opposite sex to gratify the
individual which, being ready, affords it. The penis is continually
erect.f In early youth, however strong the desire and able the


4 Nature’s treatment of man is hard. He feels strong sexual desire and can
copulate continually, Yet the burning youth can seldom marry, for he seldom
has the means of supporting a wife and family ; and, if he indulges nature’s strong
impulses, stronger in youth than in after life when means may be ample, without
marriage, he must probably either ruin the innocent or contract disease: and
moreover injures himself by the act; for early copulation arrests the growth,
induces phthisis, and predisposes to endless diseases and premature death. If
bulls, rams, or stallions, are allowed to copulate when they first would, they also
suffer, ceasing to grow, becoming impotent, or remaining feeble for life. Even
young trees are in danger of dying if they bear fruit too early,

© T attended a remarkably muscular and hairy gentleman who said he had a
strong beard before any hair appeared upon his pubes.

f Burdach, I.c. § 562.


PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY. 1005


organs for the mechanical deed, the organs are still mostly unable
to generate. Young girls are occasionally with child, and boys
occasionally become fathers ; but the acts of the boy or girl who
marries are more frequently for a year or two without result :
and the same is observed among brutes. I may remark that,
whatever be the cause, married people more frequently do not
manage matters so as to be fruitful till they have practised to-
gether for two or three months.

Every part in every person does not equally experience the
changes of puberty. For instance, the greatest growth of the
testes and of the occiput is often accompanied by little beard, or a
small larynx, or small calves; a small growth of them with a great
beard, or great calves. A boy only six years of age, without any
premature growth of the organs of generation, is recorded to have
had a beard. Nay, one of the set of sexual organs may be small
and another large in the same person. For the growth and also
the decline of every part of the system, however connected
with others, is more or less independent from the first days
of existence to the last. On account of this, instances con-
tinually occur in both sexes of early puberty, sometimes joined
with very rapid growth of stature. The intellect however does
not usually keep pace with the body, (or rather the parts of the
brain destined for intellect with the rest of the brain and body,)
nor are such individuals commonly long lived. Some males are
reported to have been adult before the completion of their first
year, an instance of which I will presently give. One of the
earliest examples of female puberty is related in our Medico-
Chirurgical Transactions”; the girl began to menstruate when
not three years of age, and soon after acquired large breasts,
broad hips, &c. Schurig quotes numerous, and for the most part
probably fabulous, instances of fecundity in either sex between
the seventh and twelfth year, and one of a little couple, who, he
being nine and she eight, managed to beget a child.‘ Blumen-
bach has published an account of a Swiss girl who procreated at
nine years of age.k

The activity of the grand organs of generation, —the testes in


& Phil, Trans. a Vial. tv,

i Spermatol. p. 185. sq.

* Communicated to him by G. E. ab Haller; see Bibl. Med. vol. i, p. 558.
ou Z


1006 EUNUCHS.


the male and the ovaria in the female, is so connected with the great
changes which occur in the rest of the generative organs and in the
system at large at the period of puberty, that these changes are
prevented if those organs are previously removed!, and are in ge-
neral proportional to their evolution and activity ; and, when the
testes or ovaria have experienced none of the changes of pu-
berty, even some of the marks of the other sex, as large breasts
in the male, may occur; and, if their removal is practised after
puberty is established, the system more or less relapses into its
former condition or acquires more or less the characteristics of
the opposite sex. ‘This is well known in regard to brutes and the
males of our species. Burckhardt, one of the latest travellers
in Egypt, says that the face of those unfortunate creatures who
are emasculated when boys appears “almost destitute of flesh,
the eyes hollow, the cheek-bones prominent, and the whole phy-
siognomy has askeleton-like appearance:” the operation is usually
performed, between the eighth and twelfth year.™ Windhus,
however, in his journey to Mesquinez met a troop of eunuchs
belonging to the king, and declares they were the fattest persons
he ever saw. They are said to grow faster than others, but their
muscles are poor. We have one instance of the castration of a
woman. Her ovaria protruded at the groins, and were so trouble-


1 Such eunuchs have no beard, nor pudendal hair, but a squeaking voice, nar-
row shoulders, large hips, &c. | Dupuytren found the larynx in such a person one
third smaller than usual, the rima glottidis narrow, and the cartilages but little
developed.*

™ The original absence, however, of sex, appears in some respects advantageous ;
for sexless insects are more active and have stronger instincts, and mules surpass
the horse and ass in the acuteness of their senses and the certainty of their in-
stinct. (Humboldt, Reise in die Aiquinoctialgegenden, t. ili. p. 274.)


* Eunuchs were made abroad to a very late period for the sake of procuring
fine singers. We have all heard Velluti. In Naples, formerly, were barbers’
shops with this notice; Boys gelded cheap here —Quwi si castrano ragazzi a buon
mercato. A fancy prevailed that if castration was performed in bad weather the
voice was not improved by it: and accordingly Paesiello in a rage one day, when
a chorus of eunuchs were singing badly, exclaimed, Maledetti da Dio, foste voi
tutti castrati in cattivo tempo. King Ferdinand cried out, Bravo! bravo!
Paesiello, and all the assemblage of ladies and gentlemen clapped loudly.

‘The operation has no good influence on the brain; for no eunuch, I believe,
has proved a great composer by the operation.


PUBERTY. 1007


some as to induce her to submit to their removal in St. Bartholo-
mew’s Hospital; she afterwards grew thinner and more muscular,
her breasts shrunk away, and she ceased to menstruate.® When
the ovaria have been found deficient, the signs of puberty had not
appeared.’ The absence of the uterus only is not necessarily at-
tended by any deficiency in the general changes ’, nor does its re-
moval destroy desire or give a woman the characters of the male.
Nay, where it only is absent there may be monthly pains, and
most severe ones, in the pelvis, with all the attendant circum-
stances of menstruation, as if the discharge were taking place.4
Sexual desire, like every other, being a mental circumstance,
must exist in the brain. The sexual organs are usually regarded
as its cause. That this is not the case may be shown by many
considerations. Desire is by no means commensurate with the


2 Pott, Works, vol. iii. p. 330, A castrator of sows and other brutes in Ger-
many is said to have bees so enraged with his daughter for giving loose reins to
her passions, as to have resolved to extinguish them, and to have completely suc-
ceeded by removing her ovaria.— “ Ita bilis mota est, ut, aperto latere, castraret
puellam, quam ab eo tempore nulla tetigit veneris cupido,”” (Boerhaave, Pralect
Acad, t. vi. p. 127.)

© Phil. Trans. vol. xcv.

P Mémoires de la Société Médicale d Emulation. Paris, tom. ii.

4 See a case read before the Medicinisch-Chirurgische Gesellschaft, and to be
found in the Lond. Med. and Physic. Journal, 1819, p. 512. sq. where another
is quoted from Theden. I believe I know a living case of this kind myself, but
dissection only could clear up the matter. A young woman with every mark of
puberty was brought to me by her mother on account of never having menstruated,
though experiencing severe monthly pains: remedies proved useless, and she
ceased to come to my house. At the end of a year, she returned in the same
state but married, and I gave it as my opinion that there was probably some
malformation, and requested a manual examination. I found no vagina, My
colleague, Mr. Cline Jun., at my request, made an incision between the labia,
below the urethra, but found no cavity. Her distress was great, and I requested
him, on another day, to introduce a sharp instrument as far ashe dared. Still no
vagina could be found ; nor, when the finger was pushed as far as possible into the
wound, could any thing like an uterus be felt, Coitus, such as it was, gave her
pain; but her husband was contented, and lived with her tilt he died of phthisis,
She soon married again, for her desires were evidently strong, her occiput and
breasts large, and her constitution vigorous. Whether her second husband was as
easily contented with his joys as her first, I cannot say: for I lost sight of her”
Quite a similar case will be found in the American Journal of Med. Sc. May,
1840, where are references by Dr. Chew to others.


5 oO 4


1008 CEREBELLUM.


size of the genitals: even when the genitals are precociously
developed desire is sometimes not felt." Desire is often felt
after the removal of the testes, and in old age when the genitals
are powerless.’ It must, therefore, depend upon some other
part. This part appears to be the cerebellum. Desire is, C@-
teris paribus, naturally strong or weak in the adult, not with any
relation to the size or strength of the body at large, of the genital
organs, or of the cerebrum, but in proportion to the large or small
size of the cerebellum, whether of the lobes or the fundamental
portion called the vermiform process, which alone exists in birds,
amphibia, fish, and insects"; whenever I have accurately known
the natural strength of the sexual propensities in either sex, the
size of the occiput has without a single exception corresponded.
Before puberty the cerebellum is small; its proportion in size to
the cerebrum is at birth from one ninth to one twentieth, or even
less: in the adult it is as one fifth, or at the least as one seventh,
and acquires its full developement between the eighteenth and
twenty-sixth years; and the breadth and préminence of the oc-
ciput are proportional. Mr. Combe gives the same result of his
examination of above 150 persons.* Gall says that in adults the
breadth of the cerebellum is from 4 to 5 inches; its thickness from
20 to 25 lines; and its length from 2 to 3 inches and some lines.


t A female infant who cut four teeth at the end of the first fortnight, walked
and had hair reaching to the middle of her back soon after the seventh month,
menstruated and had stiff brown hair on the pubes and every corporeal mark of
puberty at the ninth month, died in her twelfth year, without having shown
the least sexual instinct. (Gemeinsame Zeitschrift fir Geburtskunde.) Gall
saw a similar case, and others may be found in Buffon (Gail, 1. c. 4to. vol, iii.
p. 95.3 8vo. t.iii, p. 260.) Gall found the cerebellum had not grown propor-
tionally, —‘‘ had but a very insignificant developement.”

S Just as desire was ascribed to the testes and ovaria, it has been fancied that
the strong and disagreeable flavour of the flesh (and indeed many other of their
qualities) of entire animals depends upon the absorption of semen. But Haller
remarks that the flavour is as disagreeable in castrated animals, if the operation
has been performed late. (El. Phys. t. vii. p. 546.)

t See Gall’s endless facts, 1. c. 8vo. t. iii, See also 4to, vol. iii.

“ Gall, l. c. 4to. vol. iii. p. 91.3; 8vo. t, ili, p. 254.

* On the Functions of the Cerebellum, by Drs. Gall, Vimont, and Broussais,
translated from the French by George Combe: also, Answers to the Objections urged
against Phrenology by Drs. Roget, Rudolphi, Prichard, and Tiedemann, by G.
Combe and A. Combe, p.171. Edinb. 1838.—


CEREBELLUM. 1009


«With the exception of some extraordinary cases,” writes Gall,
« we have never observed the same proportion between the cere-
bellum and the cerebrum in subjects under sixteen or twenty
years of age as in adults. It is easy to establish the truth of this
remark by comparing the skulls of young boys and young girls
with those of men and women. What a difference already be-
tween the skull of a boy of ten or twelve years of age (Plate 37.)
and that of a new-born infant (Plate 41.)! In the new-born infant
the whole base of the cranium is still contracted into a truncated
cone; the mastoid processes are still near each other; the occi-
pital protuberances are not yet prominent, they are actually flat.
In the second year, the mastoid processes are more widely sepa-
rated from each other; the occipital fossze have become deeper, and
resemble more the segment of a sphere. All these changes are
still more observable in the skull of the boy ten or twelve years
of age. The imperfect developement of the cerebellum is seen
also in the cranium of the young girl of six years (Plate 38.). In
turning the base of the cranium of a subject below puberty
towards us, we see at once that the distance from the one mastoid
process to the other (which distance shows the diameter of the
cerebellum) is much less than from the one parietal bone to the
other. In the adult, on the contrary, these two distances are in
general very nearly the same. Accordingly these facts have at
last led M. Chaussier to admit that the cerebellum does not de-
velope itself till towards the age of adolescence.”

In old age, the cerebellum shrinks, and, the internal table of the
occipital bone following, bony matter is deposited between the two
tables, and the bone at the fossz occipitales becomes much less
transparent, Gall possessed old crania in which the cerebellum
had returned to the dimensions of infancy, and the occipital fosse
had become shallow. When the cerebellum is precociously de-
veloped, desire is felt by the child, even though the genitals are
not above the ordinary size. Inflammation and irritation of the


Y lic. 4to. vol. iii. p. 93. sq.; 8vo. t. ill, p. 257. sq.

% « At Paris,” says Gall, (I. c, 4to. vol. iii. p. 95. sq.; 8vo. t. ili, p. 261.) “I saw
the son of amulatto, not quite three years of agé ; he threw himself not only upon
little girls, but upon women, and urged them boldly and perseveringly to gratify his
desires. The sexual organs were not prematurely developed, but merely of the di-
mensions usual at his age; yet he had more than momentary erections, as he was
surrounded by girls willing to indulge him from the piquant singularity of the


3U 4


1010 CEREBELLUM.


cerebellum are found by a multitude of dissections to have existed
when great excitement of the genitals occurred before death, and
organic disease and injuries of the cerebellum have as frequently
occasioned impotence.* Whereas parental love is generally
stronger in the females, desire is ordinarily stronger in the males of
all species ; and, in general, as the posterior extremities of the pos-
terior lobes of the cerebellum are usually larger in females, so the
cerebellum of the male is larger than that of the female,—the dis-
tance between the mastoid processes is wider, the back of the neck
and head fuller, indeed the whole is much thicker, and, if the
brains of the two sexes are placed in water, the larger cerebellum
of the male is very conspicuous. Bulls, stallions, and rams may
be distinguished from the female and castrated male by their thick
necks.


thing. He died of consumption before attaining his fourteenth year. His cere-
bellum was extraordinarily developed ; the rest of his head of the common di-
mensions. In every other respect, indeed, he was only an ill-educated spoiled
child.”

Again, “ In two boys, the one three, the other five years of age, both of whom
were fully capable of the sexual functions, I found the cerebellum,— the organ of
physical love, completely developed, while the rest of the brain was of the size
usual at their age. (1. c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 409.; 8vo, t. ii. p.434.) Ina case of pu-
berty at Paris, related by Dr. Breschet, in a boy three years of age, the judgment,
as usual, was not at all superior to that of other children, but the part of the head
stated by Gall tobe the residence of the organ of sexual love was so large that
Dr. Spurzheim thought few adults have it of equal size. (Med. Chirurg. Trans,
vol. xi.) I saw another such boy at St. Thomas’s Hospital, also 3 years of age;
named John Sparrow, and had a cast of his head taken which may be purchased
at Mr. Deville’s in the Strand. An account of himis given in the Med. Chirurg.
Trans, vol. xii., by Mr. South, who speaks with truth of the “enormous size of
the cerebellum.” (p. 80.) The occiput of a boy whom I saw at Dulwich (supra,
p. 1003.) was of the full adult dimensions. Mr. White says nothing of the oc-
ciput of the boy whom he describes (supra, p. 1003. ), but informs us that the cir-
cumference of his neck was 12} inches and of his head 20 inches.

a Diabetes is almost always attended by the destruction of sexual desire and
power, and even in an early stage, I examined the encephalon of a young man
who had been my patient in University College Hospital under these circum-
stances, and the cerebellum was to the cerebrum but as 1 to 11 in weight. In
a clinical lecture delivered in that hospital, I showed the cerebellum of a boy,
containing tubercles, in whom Mr. Bainbridge of Tooting informed me that erec-
tions took place continually before death. (See Lancet, May 20. 1827.)


CEREBELLUM. 101!


The sympathy of the cerebellum with the genitals is the reason
of the latter being regarded as the seat of desire. If they are
removed, desire is generally extinguished ; for the cerebellum is
not afterwards developed at puberty, and the back of the head
and neck remains small, perhaps smaller than in the female. If
one testicle only is removed, Gall invariably observed, in ex-
periments on rabbits, that the opposite half of the cerebellum”
shrinks, or its substance is in some way altered; and he made the
same remark in cases of the removal or injury of one testis in the
human subject, or of disease of one ovarium, Gall’s experiments
have been repeated with the same results by Dr. Vimont.¢ I
saw aman who fell in Spain upon his back against a bank, striking
his neck and loins, and was stunned. Soon after the testes be-
came painful and then shrunk, and his breasts grew to the full
size of those of a woman. He lost all sexual desire and power.
The case was seen at hospitals and medical societies. But, from
the want of phrenological knowledge, no one there observed an
additional remarkable circumstance, which was the extraordinarily
small size of his occiput both in breadth and projection. On
my questioning the man about it, he declared his complete cer-
tainty that it had shrunk since the accident, because his hat, put
on as rustics wear it, would no longer remain properly on his head,
but always slipped down on his poll. Now the right testis had
shrunk very far more than the left; and the /eft breast was larger
than the right, as though each breast had sympathised with the
testis of the same side; and the /eft half of the occiput smaller
than the right.!


5 In the third volume of his large work, printed in 1818, and some years
before this in his lectures, Gall declared, from numerous observations, that the
fibres of the chorda spinalis, ascending from the genital parts till they reach the
cerebellum, must decussate exactly like the anterior pyramids. Some years after-
wards, M. Serres and M. Fleurens made the same remark, and contended for
priority, not mentioning Gall. It is remarkable how many discoveries of Gall’s
that were denied or disregarded, have been since made by others, and even fre-
quently contested by two parties, he and his labours being never once thought of.
‘¢ The greater part of authors,” says he, ‘who have treated of the same subjects
as myself, subsequently to me, practise this same kind of generosity towards me.”
(1c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 26.)

© ics volbiinp: 233°

4 T took care that a cast of his head and bosom should be placed in the mu-
seums of University College and the Phrenological Society, and read an ac-


1O1g CEREBELLUM.


Other experiments have just been made by Dr. Budge of Al-
tenkirchen also showing the decussation, and repeated so often
that mistake was impossible. He laid bare the brain and testes
in old cats, and, on irritating the right lobe of the cerebellum su-
perficially, the left testis moved ; but, on irritating the left lobe,
the right testis moved: and so much as to rise to nearly a right
angle with the chord, and the testis became more and more tense:
deep irritation of the cerebellum had no effect. On the other
hand, pleasurable irritation of the genitals will excite desire; and,
judging from all the other facts, we should say from exciting the
cerebellum. f

In violent sexual excitement, the back of the neck is deeply
flushed, and hot. Some animals feel the sexual desire at certain
periods of the year only: and at this time the testes, and in some
instances the vesicule seminales and prostate gland, enlarge very
considerably; as in the male sparrow and frog. Gall found
the cerebellum of birds collected at this season, broader and
more turgid, and the corresponding prominences of the cranium
manifestly greater than in those collected at the beginning of
winter.

The facts adduced by Gall on these points in the third volume
of his quarto and octavo work, are extremely curious, and si-
milar ones, without end, may be found in works upon disease,
military surgery, and physiology, from ancient times down to
Magendie’s Journal for 1822 and 1827. It occasionally happens 8
that apoplexy or other disease of the cerebellum is not attended


count of him to the Phrenological Society. An account drawn up without the
advantage of phrenological knowledge contains not a word of the state of the
occiput or of the relative size of each breast and testis. (Lancet, Dee. 2. TSS7e)

© Muller’s Archiv. 1840.

f Desire is certainly appeased on the discharge of semen, but in all probability
by the fulness of excitement and not by the discharge: for all men know that,
however strong their desires for a day or more, these, if resisted, will subside just
as though the semen had been discharged.

* Gall himself gives an instance, 1. c, 8vo, t. iii. p. $65.sqq. We must remem-
ber what Gall says upon the possibility of other effects from injury of the cere-
bellum (supra, p. 427. sq.). ‘ The same part may have its general vital function
and its particular animal function,” — “the cerebellum may participate in the
vital function of the medulla oblongata and spinalis, may give rise to disturbed
motion when injured, and yet have its own particular animal functions.”


LATE PUBERTY. 1o13


by affections of the genitals: and it would be worth inquiring
what is the exact seat of the lesion in such instances, since in
Dr. Budge’s experiments» the surface required to be irritated
before the genitals sympathised ;— a fact agreeing with my re-
marks at page 306. sq. supra.

As puberty sometimes occurs extraordinarily soon, so does it
sometimes, though more rarely, extraordinarily late. Professor
Wilson knew a young man whose penis and testes at twenty-
six were no larger than in boys of eight; at this time, however,
they began to evolve, he had erections and emissions, fell in love,
and in two years, viz., when twenty-eight, they were as large as
in other men, and he married and became a father.i Some
women do not menstruate till between twenty and thirty.k Some
children do not speak till several years old. Gall remarks that
precocity or tardiness may in the same way be the lot of any ce-
rebral faculty and its organ, just as of every organ throughout
the rest of the body. Gessner, one of the best and most amiable


h These experiments should impress every person with the reliance to be
placed upon Gall, Headvances nothing lightly ; and his genius, indefatigableness,
forbearance, and truth, will be acknowledged more and more daily. Not to be
well acquainted with his writings is a disgrace to every medical man of education,
and a lossto every man. I never open them without finding something new or
something that I had not so fully felt the force of before, — just as happens when-
ever I open Shakspeare: and Gall, no less than Shakspeare, should always lie
upon one’s table.

Burdach, without condescending to mention Gall’s name, felt himself obliged
to write the following passage. ‘* The cerebellum is the part with which gene-
ration has close relations. When the procreating faculty is strong, the cerebellum
and muscles of the back of the neck are very much developed. The back of the
neck is very narrow in castrated men and brutes. Abstractions of blood from the
occiput are more proper than from any other part to restrain immoderate desires,
A wound at this part is often followed by impotence; suppuration or atrophy of
the cerebellum by wasting of the testicles ; and inflammation of it often occasions
priapism, Serres has demonstrated by a number of cases that an effusion of
blood at the cerebellum causes erections, sometimes accompanied by emissions,
and sometimes continuing after death, Masturbation produces pains chiefly at
the back of the neck, Venereal excesses often induce hemorrhages, suppur-
ations, indurations, and false membranes in the cerebellum, When hemorrhage
occurs during coition, it is usually in the cerebellum.” (§ 564.)

i Lectures on the Male Urinary and Genital Organs, p. 424,

k Promiscuous connection generally prevents conception or lessens the dispo-
sition to it, while continued; yet has no effect upon menstruation.


1014 GIANTS AND DWARFS.


poets of Switzerland, was declared by his preceptors incapable
of any attainment when ten years of age. One of the most cele-
brated physicians of Berlin could neither combine his ideas nor
speak at thirteen.! In fact, the natural growth and other changes
of any organ or any number of organs may occur before or after
the usual period.

Not only do instances of early puberty and full growth fre-
quently occur, but likewise of deficient and exuberant growth.

Dwarfs are generally born of the same size as other children,
but after a few years suddenly cease to grow. They are said to
be commonly ill-shapen, to have large heads, and to be stupid
or malicious ™, and old age comes upon them very early. Three
foreign dwarfs exhibited about twenty years since in London,
two men and one woman, had certainly large heads and flat noses,
but in other respects were well made. The tallest of the three
seemed a sulky creature, but the woman was very ingenious and
obliging, and Simon Paap — the least of the three, appeared very
amiable. He was 28 inches high, and 26 years old. They were
not related to each other, and the relations of all were of the
common size. Their countenances were those of persons more
advanced.

The smallest dwarf on record was only 16 inches high, when
37 years of age." I saw a female dwarf, named Crachami, said
to be ten years old, who was well formed, but had the features
of a baby, was only 193 inches in height, and 5 lbs. in weight.°
Her voice was that of an infant. To hear her speak, and see her
walk, sit, and behave like a child several years old, was one of the
most striking things I ever witnessed. ?


1 Gall, l.c. 4to. vol. i. p. 17. sq.; 8vo. t. i. p. 194. sq.

m «Tt will not be easy to produce me an instance of any one giant or of any
one dwarf perfectly sound in heart and mind, i.e. in the same degree with a
thousand other individuals who are regularly constituted. Great mental weak-
ness is the usual portion of giants, gross stupidity that of dwarfs.” (lLavater,
Physiognomy. )

" Haller, Elementa Physiologie, t. xii. lib. 30.

° See Literary Gazette, May 1. 1834.

®? Among John Hunter’s papers is a memorandum of a female at Norwich, 34
inches high, ‘ She cohabited with a great fellow she called her husband and
became pregnant. She went her full time, but, as might have been expected, from
the smallness of the pelvis, the labour was difficult and it was necessary to open


PREMATURE SENILI'Y. 1015


The tallest person authentically recorded has never exceeded
9 feet, according to Haller. A young man from Huntingdon-
shire, also exhibited in London a few years back, was of re-
markable height. Although only 17 years of age, he was nearly
8 feet. He had a sister of great height, and many of his family
were very tall. He was, as is usual, born of the ordinary size,
but soon began to grow rapidly. He appeared amiable, and as
acute as most youths of his age and rank.

Giants and dwarfs happily seldom reach their fortieth year, and
have not a very active cerebellum or organs of generation. As the
period of growth is so short in dwarfs, and the period of child-
hood so short in those who reach puberty early, it is to be ex-
pected that their old age will be premature, — that their stationary
period and decline will be likewise short.4 Giants do not, like


the child’s head: after which the delivery was effected. The child measured 22
inches ; so that if it could have stood upright in utero, it would have risen above
its mother’s head. The woman died four hours after delivery.” (Mr. South,
Translat. of Dr. Otto’s Compendium of Human and Comparative Pathological
Anatomy, p. 21. sq.)

4 In the year 1748, Mr. Dawkes, a surgeon at St. Ives, near Huntingdon,
published a small tract called Prodigiwm Willinghamense, or an Account of a
surprising Boy, who was buried at Willingham, near Cambridge, upon whom
he wrote the following epitaph. But whether it was ever engraved upon his
tombstone I have not learned.

‘ Stop Traveller, and wondering, know, here buried lie the remains of Thomas,
son of Thomas and Margaret Hall; who, not one year old, had the signs of
manhood; not three, was almost four feet high ; endued with uncommon strength,
a just proportion of parts, and a stupendous voice ; before six, he died as it were
of an advanced age.

¢ He was born in this village, Oct. 31. MDCCXLI. and in the same, de-
parted this life, Sept. 3. MDCCXLVII.’

Mr. Dawkes viewed him after he was dead, and says the corpse had the aspect
of a venerable old man,

See also a description of him in the Phil. Trans. 1744-45.

This perfectly authentic case removes all doubts respecting the boy at Salamis,
mentioned by Pliny (Hist. Nat. lib. vii. c. xvii.) as being four feet high, and
having reached puberty when only three years old; and respecting the man
seen by Craterus, the brother of Antigonus (Phlegon, De Mirab, c. PKA.)
who in seven years was an infant, a youth, an adult, a father, an old man, and a
corpse.

Hopkins Hopkins, weighing never more than 18 lbs, and latterly but 12, died


1016 YOUTH.


dwarfs, I believe, die from premature old age, but from mere
exhaustion.

The Laplanders are one of the shortest races. Buffon says
that their height is but 4 feet, and that their tallest men do not
exceed 44 feet.


The intellect acquires a great increase of strength towards
the 20th year, as many must have noticed in themselves: and
the developement of the forehead is proportional. The last
molar tooth, called the wisdom tooth, is cut about this time at
the two extremities of each gum, and often occasions great an-
noyance. The enamel of the teeth is worn away sufficiently for
the bone to appear as a yellow line on the summit of the in-
cisors, especially of the internal, at the 18th year: and at the
20th, as brown spots upon the summit of the canine and of the
lower first molar, upon the outer point of the first upper, and upon
the second upper and lower.

Growth proceeds very rapidly at the beginning of youth, so as
to make up for the check which it had previously experienced ;
and perhaps four or five inches may be gained in one year.
During an acute disease, it is often found, on recovery, to have
proceeded very rapidly: and change of air appears sometimes
to accelerate it. Females generally attain their full growth
at about 18; males at 20 or 23. Five feet may be the mean
height of a woman: five and a half of a man. ‘The ordinary
weight of either is about 130 pounds. “The epiphyses of the
bones, hitherto distinct from their diaphyses, now become inti-


of pure old age at seventeen; and one of his sisters, but 12 years of age, and
weighing only 18 lbs. at the time of his death, had all the marks of old age,
( Gentleman’s Magazine, vol, xxiv. p. 191.)

At the Hospice de Maternité, a few years ago, a child is declared to have been
born all wrinkled, and with strong grey hair on its head and chin: it appeared in
good health, but its hands and feet were of double the usual length. ( Tuableties
Universelles. )

Tirrenus is said to have grown grey when five years of age (Strabo): a
Mr, Waldkirch, a German senator, to have been grey in one half of his body
almost as soon as born (Shenkius): and twins to have been born grey and
have remained so through life (Stadler, De Observationibus). (Dr. Speranza, in
Dr. Omedei’s Annali di Medicina, Feb. 1832. )


YOUTH. 1017


mately united and in a manner confounded with them.” Various
bones unite.

The frontal sinus begins to be produced, as well as the nasal
and maxillary sinus to obtain their due proportions. ‘The chest
and lungs expand; and grey, blue, or black spots are seen in the
lungs. Respiration grows more extensive and slower; and the
pulse descends to 80 or 75. The blood is rich in fibrin, bright,
and very abundant. The body has the charm of youth, if not of
beauty: for youth even without beauty isitself charming ; though
this charm must soon vanish, like the freshness of the newly
gathered fruit or flower or of the leaves of a plant, or the delicious
flavour of a newly killed animal.*

The revolution of puberty sometimes languishes for want of
power in the system; and far more frequently in females, in
whom the condition is called Chlorosis.s The want of strength


* Belzoni, when in Egypt, found the Turks dress their mutton immediately
after it was killed, before it had lost its natural warmth, “ and in this way it has a
particular flavour, quite agreeable to the taste.” (Narrative, §c. p. 49.)

* Burdach makes the following remarks, § 556.11. 5°.“ The sensibility of
the female is particularly affected. She has pain in the.lower part of the ab-
domen and back; a feeling of tension and pressure in the pelvis; of weight
throughout the body, especially in the loins and thighs ; lassitude, sleepiness, ill
temper, anxiety and restlessness, morbid sensibility, a disposition to shed tears
and then suddenly to have transports of immoderate joy. At a period when
conscience is in general as yet but little developed, the obscure and vague sen-
sations arising from a new direction impressed upon life may upset the character
and give rise to strange and even criminal desires. Thus we occasionally see
extraordinary disorders of sensibility:—a morbid sympathy, which causes con-
vulsions to occur at the sight of them in another ; extasy or external immobility
with internal exaltation; catalepsy or a transient loss of volition, with the power
in the muscles of yielding to mechanical impulses and of preserving, by a con-
tinued action, the situation in which they are put ; an unusual developement or
hallucinations of the senses, especially of smell and taste, which cause the most
repugnant things to be agreeable; lethargy or a long and complete suspension
of animal life ; somnambulism, an extreme susceptibility of animal magnetism and
magnetic clairvoyance, —a state in which, the spontaneous activity ef the soul
being suspended, the exaltation of general sensibility causes the latter to acquire
the lucidity of the sensorial actions and places it beyond the limits of space
and time assigned to all knowledge acquired by the senses. (Osiander, Ueber
die Entwickelungskrankeiten, t.i. p.6—60.)’’ The circumstances mentioned
are all admitted in this country except the susceptibility of mesmerism, But
the truth of it is equal to the truth of the rest. The ignorance of the British
medical profession on this subject, while our Continental neighbours are so well


1018 MALE AND FEMALE BRAIN.


may take place when it should begin or at any time during its
course; and even a considerable time after its establishment, the
genital functions sometimes fail and the whole body grows pale
and feeble. An almost specific remedy for this want of power
is iron in any form: and yet I every day see other remedies of no
specific power given instead, and often indeed slight degrees of
the disease and cases occurring at earlier or later periods than
usual altogether mistaken, and patients allowed to languish for a
year or two who might be cured with iron in a few weeks.

The female brain does not become so large as the male. Sir
William Hamilton found the average weight of the Scotch male
brain to be 3lbs. 8 oz. troy; and of the female, 3 lbs. 4 oz.:
one male brain in seven to weigh about 4 lbs.; only one female
brain in a hundred to weigh 4|bs.t Dr. Tiedemann allows that


acquainted with it; the clownish obtuseness and obstinacy displayed upon it by
many; and the ignoble fears and the unprincipled, contemptible, and selfish
truckling of some who are convinced of its truth to the prejudices of those whom
they ought to inform or disregard, no less than the vulgarity, malice, and bitter-
ness of others, are a disgrace to the age, which nevertheless we glory in as en-
lightened beyond the days of our ancestors and purified by our broad and deep
reception of humble and benevolent Christianity. At the same time, on so
wonderful a subject, neutrality of opinion is all that ought to be expected before
the phenomena are personally witnessed and honestly examined.

The sexual system of plants was known to the ancients, as appears in Hero-
dotus, Theophrastus, Aristotle, and Pliny; yet, notwithstanding Zaluzianski,
and a century after him Millington and Grew, had defended it in modern times,
Tournefort refused it a place in his system. This was all very well. But Pontedera,
after carefully examining it, pronounced it chimerical; and the very learned Dr.
Alston, the Professor of Botany in the University of Edinburgh, violently opposed
it! At present it may be mentioned without throwing people into a passion or
subjecting oneself to the imputation of being whimsical, crotchety, or mad: and
in fact to doubt it would excite a smile of compassion.

While I agree with Burdach as to facts, I reject his mysticism as Gall did,
who, while quoting him (I. c. 8vo. vol. vi. p. 369.), is obliged suddenly to desist,
saying, ‘‘ Here he begins raving so absurdly about the universal soul of the world
and about materiality transformed into spirituality, and spirituality transformed
into materiality, that I cannot discover any sense or continue the quotation.”
I have seen nothing like a transit of “ sensibility beyond the limits of time and
space assigned to all knowledge acquired by the senses,” nor have I seen any
thing like action of mind without matter; — any thing beyond new states of the
neryous system.

t Dr. Monro’s Anatomy of the Brain.


ADULT AGE. 1019


the European male adult brain weighs from 3 lbs. 2 02. to 4 Ibs.
6 oz. troy: the female from 2 Ibs. 8 oz. to 3lbs. 11 oz. ‘I never
found,” he says, “a female brain that weighed 4 Ibs.” The fe-
male brain weighs on an average from 4 to 8 ounces Jess than that
of the male; and this difference is already perceptible in a new-
born child." :

5. The Adult Period is properly the whole of life after youth.
But for convenience the term is often restricted to the period
between youth and old age. There might be less confusion, were
the term always allowed its full meaning, and the words virility,
or manhood and womanhood, given to the period between youth
and old age. Womanhood extends from about 18 to 40 or 45;
manhood from about 24 to 45 or 48.

At about 30 in the female and at about 35 in the male, every
part has generally obtained perfection of structure and conse-
quently of function. The solids have their utmost solidity con-
sistent with the perfection of function: the fluids their utmost
healthy richness: the strength is at its height, in brain, muscle, and
every other part. The cerebral and general corporeal character-
istics of the individual are finished, so that what distinguishes him
in mind, feature, and every thing else from all other individuals is
complete. The shoulders and hips have attained their greatest
breadth. Hair has appeared upon the scrotum and perineum of
the male, and upon the labia of the female; the odour of the
genitals has increased: earthy matter exists in the pineal gland,
and the brain has at length completed its size, though in some
males it may continue to grow till even beyond 40, and conse-
quently virility of intellect and feeling is established; the cha-
racter is more serious. The upper and lower bony plates of the
bodies of the pelvic vertebre and the transverse processes are ad-
herent about the 25th year: the coccygeal vertebre are disunited
till towards the end of virility. The frontal sinuses increase and
continue to increase till death. The yellow line of the incisors
widens, the exposed osseous substance wears down, and the crown
becomes shorter, so that, about the 30th year, the permanent
teeth are as much worn as the milk teeth were when they fell
out.x After 30in the female and 35 in the male,— the second half


u Phil. Trans, 1836, Pt. ii.
* Burdach, |. c. § 560.
ap.


1020 OLD AGE.


of this period, as some divide it, the freshness of youth vanishes,
but the solidity of character greatly increases ; the light form and
the activity of youth decline, and fat accumulates on the trunk
and especially on the abdomen, so that all but the spare have
some rotundity, —some degree of “fair round belly.”

The generative power increases with all the rest. Men and
brutes in their prime are more fruitful than in the early periods of
puberty, and their offspring larger and stronger. At the first birth
the full time is frequently not accomplished ; and the breasts
supply less and inferior milk: even the first eggs of birds are
small,

The air-cells of the lungs, no less than the villi of the intestines,
have become less numerous ; and, as the cells are now also larger,
the respiratory murmur, which in children is so loud that an equally
loud murmur at other ages through disease is termed puerile, has
much diminished. (See supra, p. 206.)

6. Old Age. At about 35 the lower eyelid grows rather loose,
and about 40 becomes wrinkled; and soon the skin beyond the
outer angle of the orbit gives the appearance called crow’s foot.
This is accompanied by a little falling off and greyness of the hairs
of the head, and stronger hints are given between the 45th and
48th year. The hair first grows decidedly grey in men generally
about the temples. In some the change proceeds quickly ; in
some very slowly. In some the hair becomes at length perfectly
white ; in some it does not become of more than an iron grey till
extreme old age; some soon after 20 years of age are grey, some
reach 70 or 80 with only a sprinkling of grey hairs; at various
ages some will have the hair of their head silvery and their
eyebrows of a jet black. The hair generally falls off a little first
at its lower part in front, and especially at the lateral portions ;
and, after a time, it becomes generally thinner every where ex~
cept at the back of the head, and especially on the top of the head,
which may become more or less bald. The baldness often is
first complete at the posterior part of the top. Some young
men are rather bald soon after 20; some few men of 80 have
still thick hair: those with low foreheads usually retain their
hair the longest. The skin of the hand grows loose, and age is
well distinguished to an observing eye by the hand throughout
life.

Between the 45th and 48th year, the memory of proper names


OLD AGE. 1021


becomes impaired; and then of common names: the sight then
becomes long, so that writing and books, if not held farther off
than was habitual, are indistinct, and this is usually more the case
with one eye than with the other. Sexual desire is less urgent, the
organs are less ready and their readiness is less lasting. At about
45 menstruation ceases; sometimes suddenly, sometimes by de-
grees ; sometimes it has alternations of excess in quantity and de-
ficiency in frequency, or becomes irregular in frequency,—dodging,
as women say, or in quantity, or in both. The change may be seven
years in taking place, and the woman tormented all the time with
affections of the head, smothering heats, faintnesses, and various
other annoyances.

As age advances, women sometimes have hair grow upon the
chin’; and birds, after ceasing to lay eggs, frequently lose the
feathers peculiar to their sex and acquire those characteristic of
the male’, as well as spurs, according tothe remark of Aristotle,
combs, and wattles. Mares will acquire the mane of the horse,
female giraffes the coat of the male. The doe will acquire the
horns of the stag and roebuck. An old woman’s voice always
grows gruff. I recollect hearing a convent of old nuns in Bologna
at vespers and should have mistaken them by their voices for old
men, had I not been assured that the unseen useless devotees were
all old women.

After passing the period of the cessation of the catamenia,
women often become fixed in good health, being troubled no
longer with uterine disturbances of their system; and, though
they steadily decline, the invasion of age may be very gradual, and
their health better than for very many years before. In truth
they become more bold and bustling, like men; while old men
are less energetic, and perhaps called old women.


y ¢ See J. Burlin, De Feminis ex Suppressione Mensium barbatis. Altorf. 1664.
4to.”

2 Blumenbach, Comment. de Nisus Formativi Aberrationibus. Gott. 1813. 4to.
p-8. This change sometimes arises from ovarian disease. (Phil. Trans. 1827.)
Sir Everard Home mentions a duck which, when 8 years old, not only ceased
laying and acquired the male plumage, but repelled all drakes, and did its best to
tread ducks. (Phil. Trans. 1797, p.174.) Here the properties of the cerebellum
even had changed. ‘The ovaria of hens will occasionally grow narrow and bend on
themselves, like a vas deferens: and the larynx so change that the old creature
crows like a young cock.


a


1022 OLD AGE.


The progress of old age* may be very slow, indeed impercep-
tible, except in the countenance, hand, and hair, and in a number of
little things appreciable by the individual himself and those who
act with him or have opportunities of close observation, till about
60 years of age; after this, the brain rarely executes any thing
original. In instances of decided genius, the full glow is so
remarkable, that a falling off of intellect and feeling is readily
discernible and the difference of the mind may at an early period
be perceived. The power of intellect is now exerted on things
formerly learnt, and chiefly through the facilities given by habit.
The elderly man no longer likes new lights in science, nor im-
provements in institutions and methods. If he is a physician, he
scorns new-fangled remedies and new revolutionary discoveries
in physiology and pathology, and tells of the number of follies
he has seen prevail and pass away in his time®: he acquires more
confidence daily in nature’s power of curing disease, being left
daily more below the point of present knowledge, practising
more and more feebly and uselessly, but more greedy than ever
of fees, as though he was more informed and did more for his
patients than ever. His feelings grow blunt except his ap-
petite for food and money: remembering his former pleasures,
and being insusceptible now of what he once was, he praises the
past only and condemns the present state of things, — “ laudator
temporis actt.’¢

The solids grow drier and more rigid; shrink in bulk, and be-
come rarer in texture : and they are less excitable, and less fit for


a «J, Bern Fischer, Tract. de Senio ejusque Morbis. Ed,2. Erf. 1760. 8vo.

Benj. Rush, Med. Inquiries and Observations, vol. ii. Philad. 1793. 8vo.
p. 295. sq.

Burg. W. Seiler, Anatom. c. h. Senilis Specimen. Erlang. 1799. 8vo.

Const. Anast, Philites, De Decremento, seu de Marasmo Senili. Hal. 1808.”

> Those men in the prime of life, who do the same, must in this particular
be considered in premature mental senility. and those students who suffer their
teachers so to spoil their minds may be compared to children enfeebled by the
emanations of the old women with whom unfortunately they sleep.
p. 958.)

© Bishop Watson, who gained immense applause for his Apology for the Bible
and his Chemical Essays, when told twenty years afterwards of the discoveries of
Sir Humphry Davy, always sneered at the ‘“‘new-fangled doctrines,” and professed


himself contented with chemistry as it was in his younger days. (See Tait’s Ma-
gaxine for example.)


(Supra,


OLD AGE. 1023


function. Their colour alters, and, since such gross changes are
manifest to us, no doubt most delicate changes in texture and
composition, beyond the powers of analysis and optical aids hi-
therto employed, also occur, even before the grosser are discern-
ible; such as even in animals living in fluids and in leaves still full of
juices determine the death or separation of individual parts. The
intimate composition and organisation of different animals and
plants must be differently modified altogether and be capable of
different degrees of duration, so as to break up at definite periods
in each species, variety, and individual, when no extrinsic cause
puts an end to life before the arrival of the inevitable term. The
original composition of the being involved powers of certain
changes in composition and of organisation, and these involved
others; all these peculiar conditions comprising, of necessity,
in their nature, peculiar powers of function. But the succes-
sive changes at length cease to be improvements; they are
inferior to each other and such as give less aptitude for func-
tion ; and intimate composition and organisation at length become
incapable not only of function, but of farther continuance, and the
series of possible changes is exhausted.

In different organs the original composition, and thereby mi-
nute powers are differently limited: some arise early, some late ;
some arrive at perfection soon, some late; some have few
changes, some many; some exist only for a short time, their local
old age, literally speaking, being arrived at speedily, some for a
great length of time: so that while some parts flourish till general
old age comes upon the whole system of them, others arise, flourish,
and decay, long before, and some even in the earliest periods of
life. :
As age proceeds, separate adjoining parts are disposed to coa-
lesce ; the serra of sutures and at length the sutures themselves
vanish. Transformations to harder structures occur ;—muscular
parts may become tendinous, fibrous membranes cartilaginous,
and cartilages bones: and bone is often deposited in various
parts of the cellular membrane, and under serous membranes and
the lining membrane of the heart and arteries. Thus, before senile
decline in power, composition, and in minute structure arrests
function, there arises a disposition to painless disease of structure,
such as induration and opacity, slowly unfitting parts for use. The
arteries, capillaries, or the valves of the heart, for instance, may

Oikeo


1024 OLD AGE.


ossify : the lens become opake. As if to co-operate with the decline
of the organs of sense, the avenues to the senses become over-
shadowed by hairs: the eyebrows, the hairs around the opening
of the meatus auditorius, and those of the nostrils, grow very thick
and long. ‘The portion of the cornea nearest the sclerotic grows
opake, forming a white ring, called arcus senilis.

The pulse becomes slower, and at length irregular, and then it
generally ceases to grow slower‘; and from the thickening and
induration of the arterial coats it is larger, and apparently firmer.
The arteries, before extreme old age invades, are heavier. They
contain less blood, and the whole amount of blood and other fluids
is less, and less blood penetrates into the smallest vessels; but
the venous blood becomes more abundant, and, from the debility,
venous congestion is common. The blood has less fibrin; and the
serum is less coagulable, from containing less albumen.

The temperature is not so well maintained. The vivacity of
colour declines in all the organs, and they become pale, or of a
dirty hue: a pale white yields to yellow or grey; a bright, to a
dingy, red: —all evidences of excessively minute changes in
composition, while neither the chemist might discover change of
composition, nor the microscopist change of organisation.

Nutrition is imperfect and altered. Not only do all the parts,
even the bones, shrink and grow lighter and drier“, but fractures
will not unite nor wounds heal so quickly as before ; ecchymosis,


4 The sap moves much more slowly in old plants.

€ See Blumenbach’s osteological work upon the remarkable wasting of the
bones of old men, p. 36. sq.

“ Joach. H. Gernet, De Siccitatis Senilis Effectibus, Lips. 1753. 4to.”

f Throughout life a deviation from uniformity of action, and even without
deviation the least call for more exertion than usual, is followed by unpleasant
results, whether as regards the functions of the brain or of any other part, if
the powers are feeble, either by nature or through unfavourable circumstances :
and it then is proved that the appearance of power depended solely upon the
habitual uniformity of its exertion. Dyspeptic persons should remember this
in regard to their diet and the delicate in regard to all efforts: and people of
mental mediocrity should submit to the evidence of this test before they indulge
in the conceit that they are fit for greater things than they have ever done.

The converse also is true. Where there is great power or great predisposi-
tion to action, the action or phenomenon occurs without evident exciting causes.
When hooping cough exists, numberless circumstances may excite a fit, but the
force of the predisposition will excite fits from time to time of itself. Where a


DECREPITUDE. 1025


as well as gangrene, is readily induced: and the bones, teeth, and
blood-vessels grow brittle and fragile. The very villi of the in-
testines lessen. The absorbent vessels shrink and are less active ;
—effusions, so readily induced by the debility of the blood-ves-
sels, are not quickly taken up. The absorbent ganglia grow hard
and dry.

The teeth, at 70, have half their crown worn down, and the
exposed cavity is filled with a new osseous deposit, producing a
brown or reddish yellow spot on the top; they are no longer liable
to caries; they die and fall out in succession. The emptied
alveoli shrink and fill with an osseous substance; their border is
absorbed and its absorption begins even before the teeth fall out.
The jaws consequently lose in depth: whence the hard palate
is no longer arched, and the foramen of the chin lies close to the
upper edge of the lower jaw. The lower jaw bone grows also
shorter and its ascending branch lower and more oblique: so that
the angle is more obtuse, the articular process lower than the
coronoid, and the joint on a level with the upper gum; the ex-
ternal surface of the lower jaw below the chin is no longer perpen-
dicular, but oblique; the two jaws scarcely touch except where
the molares lie; and the lower jaw projects beyond the upper.&

From the diminution of the number of blood-vessels, parts,
which before could be injected red, can now no longer be co-
loured, and parts attached by them readily separate; thus the
dura mater is easily detached from the cranium. Articulation,
mastication, and deglutition, like all other muscular actions, be-
come weaker. ‘The air-cells of the lungs become still less nu-
merous and larger, probably from the thinning and absorption of
their walls, for these two changes produce the same effect in the
corpora cavernosa of the penis; and the lungs grow lighter", but
this is partly owing to their resembling every other part in con-
taining less blood. The body gradually loses in its stature.

7. Atfrom 70 to 75 in the female, and from 75 to 80 in the male,
the age of Decrepitude begins. ‘“ Omnia in pejus ruere.’” The
blood-vessels and absorbents have so diminished in number ; the


cerebral organ of feeling is strong, it impels to violent action from time to time
without any unusual externa! exciting causes being applied to it.
& See Burdach, § 587. n See suprd, p, 206.


3 &


1026 ; DECREPITUDE.


canals in every dimension; the brain, chords, nerves, ganglia,
muscles, tendons, bones, and every apparatus of sense in size
and proportionate weight; and the fluids correspondently in their
richness and quantity, that an old person is lifted with ease, and
any one not aware of the circumstance will be greatly struck with
the lightness of an old woman whom he takes in his arms or of
an old hen in a poultry yard. “ The brain, after having remained
stationary for LO or 20 years, begins to decline and lose its
fulness and turgescence, and, in the same proportion, its activity.
But all the cerebral parts do not waste equally ; the anterior
inferior shrink sooner than the others; whence the faculties de-
pendent upon them, the memory of names among others, are the
first weakened. Successively all the cerebral parts change more
or less; the man loses the power of combining a large number of
ideas, of seizing the relations of objects and the connection of
cause and effect. New impressions slide, as it were, off the
exhausted brain, and the old man remembering no longer the
occurrences of the previous day, takes delight in diffused and
everlastingly repeated recitals of the adventures of his youth: his
state grows worse and worse, till nothing is at last left but inert
cerebral fibres, insensibility, and dementia.” +


i Gall, 1. c. 4to, vol. ii. p. 406. sq.; 8vo. t. ii. p. 431. sq.

It is now universally admitted that the soft parts model the hard. Thus the
interior of the skull has the shape and dimensions of the respective parts of the
brain which it incloses; and even the blood-vessels imprint it. Now, ‘‘at
the approach of old age all the nervous system begins to lose its fulness, and
consequently its activity. ‘Throughout the body, the nerves shrink, the cerebra]
convolutions grow narrow and flat ; what were their prominences become flat and
depressed ; they separate from each other; their interspaces widen: in short, the
whole brain lessens.” (Gall, ]. c. 4to. vol. iii. p. 28.; 8vo. t. iii. p. 47. sq.) The
skull is necessarily influenced by these changes. ‘‘ The internal plate follows
the shrinking brain: the bony substance, while it is depositing, must still mould
itself upon the brain ;” and thus ‘the capacity of the skull lessens proportionally
with the brain,” (4to, vol. iii, p. 29.; Svo. t. iii. p. 50.) The skull grows lighter,
like every other part: but at the same time thicker and more spongy.* or ge-


* When Gall first declared this, he was pronounced “ very bold for uttering
such absurdities before enlightened anatomists and doctors.”? (4to. vol. iii. p. 27.
sq.; 8vo. t. iii, p.48.) But he multiplied his observations in cemeteries, mu-
seums, and dissecting-rooms, upon skulls proved by the jaws to be old. At length
he found that Voightel ( Handbuch der Practischen Anatomie, p. 274.) said the same


DECREPITUDE. 1027


Not only do the genitals shrink very considerably, so that
in this respect the sexes differ less and less; but the aspect of
the face and the whole frame becomes so similar in the sexes,
that the face and hand, and indeed the trunk of the two, might
readily be undistinguishable, to a common observer, as in in-
fancy: while old women’s chins grow a little hairy, old men’s
beards grow very smooth, and the feebleness of his mind causes
an old man to be said to have become “ quite an old woman.”
The face is ash coloured and wrinkled: the skin of the hands
loose, and so transparent that the tendons and other parts
below it are visible. From the blunted condition of the senses,
the apathy of the brain, and the weakness of the muscles,
cleanliness is not regarded as before; and an old person, if not
carefully attended, is very dirty. The hands and legs tremble
in exercise; he walks slowly, and to run is impossible, so that he
is readily run over in the streets; he stops from time to time ;
requires the aid of a stick, and at length the support of an atten-
dant also: he is too weak to hold up his head or his trunk. The
voice grows tremulous and shrill; his


nerally the head does not grew smaller ; but, while the internal table shrinks, the
diploe increases and maintains the dimensions of the external. The frontal sinus
necessarily enlarges; and the superior internal layer of the orbitar plate even
separates from the inferior. In spite of these facts, Gall found no one allow that
the brain lessened in old age.

In some cases, little diploe is deposited, so that the skull grows thinner, the
external table follows the internal, and the head lessens and grows much lighter.
In extreme old age, the excess of diploe is sometimes at length absorbed again in
certain parts, and the external table wastes ; so that the thinnest parts become
transparent and not thicker than paper, and the least pressure may produce de-
pression.

Gall adds that the variable thickness of the skull in old age prevents any certain
inference respecting the state of the brain. (4to. vol. ili, p. 31.; 8vo, t. ii, p. 54.)


thing: and that Walter, who had fiercely contradicted him, described (Museum
Anatomicum, vol. ii. p.36.), the head of aman above 60 years of age, every bone
of which was thick, light and not very firm; and the head of a woman above
80, with bones thick and spongy, and so light that it weighed altogether but 144
ounces. Bichat mentions this fact as ordinary, saying that ‘ the cranium acquires
a great and constantly increasing thickness by age, while other bones diminish.”
(Anatomie Descriptive, p. 58.)


1028 DECREPI'UDE.


«‘ Big manly voice,
Turning again towards childish treble, pipes
And whistles in its sound.”


The decay and helplessness of one part coincideswith that of others,
so that it is powerless when the failure of others would render its
power useless. The intellect becomes incapable of understanding
any thing new; the feelings are so blunted that spouse and children
are lost without great suffering. Much of the time is now spent
in sleep. Emaciation increases, and at last we are


«‘ Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.”


In this miserable state of wreck, the power of the brain called mind,
like the power of all other organs, and every organ, are reduced to
the lowest point compatible with life, and, without Divine assurance
to the contrary, must indicate a final extinction, since a gradual
expansion of intellectual and high moral faculties might be ex-
pected the nearer our entrance into a higher state of existence,
and not a steadily increasing decline into childishness, incapacity,
and absolute fatuity — dementia senilis, as it is technically called, in
which no evidence can be appreciated, no views conceived ; and
the longer life is pushed,—the nearer to another world the indi-

vidual arrives, the more fatuitous does he grow,—the more and
more below the brute creation. Though few live long enough to
die thus fatuitous, it must be remembered that the faculties of the
old are always more and more impaired and employed upon old
experience without the power of advancing, and that, among those
who perish in the vigour of their minds, they who are not cut off
suddenly, nay even they who become very acute before death,
generally become delirious or unintelligent ultimately before they
expire.


k Lord Bacon, in his Historia Vite et Mortis, contrasting youth and old age,
says that, whereas in youth were pudor et verecundia, in the old man obduruit ;
in youth benignitas et misericordia, in the old man occalwit; in youth there is
emulatio laudabilis, in the old man invidia maligna ; in youth religion and devotion,
in the old man defervescentia in pietate, from his charity having cooled, his long con-
verse with misfortune, and his difficulty of believing ; in youth liberality, bene-
ficence, and philanthropy, in the old man avaritia et sibi sapere et consulere ; in
youth confidence and hope, in the old man diffidentia et plurima habere pro sus-
pectis ; in youth obligingness and deference, in the old man morositas et fastidium ;
in youth sincerity and openness, in the old man caztio et animus tectus. Old
men in garrulitatem proficiunt et contestationem, for which reason the poets turned


DECREPITUDE. 1029


When things are at this pass, the power of life at length rapidly
declines. No condition of living bodies, animal or vegetable, can


old Tithonus into a grasshopper.— People thoroughly excellent by cerebral organ-
isation remain very excellent in old age; but my experience assures me that the
majority of men in many points of their character even yet are unprincipled
and wicked, or weak, either by nature or from their organisation being of a
middle character and therefore dependent upon external influences for its work-
ing and thus having yielded to the evil influences which unfortunately are still
the most powerful. The bad by nature will be bad to the last; but for the middle
class of minds a virtuous and rational previcus life and an habitual just view of
ourselves and of the whole of this world are the best preservative against the faults
of old age. To expect any further solid reformation in the old age of vicious or
contemptible persons, than what the enfeebled force of the feelings necessarily
comprises, is hopeless. As far as the adage is true, such as the boy was such is
the man, it is true that such as the adult man was such is the old man; for habit has
established its sway. While we are in the vigour of life, therefore, we ought to
habituate ourselves to the most scrupulous integrity in even the minutest matters,
to benevolence even in manner to our fellow creatures and all the brute crea-
tion, to humility and an honest appreciation of ourselves and others, and to a
rational view of the sources of true happiness, — being indifferent to titles and
posts of honour, except so far as they are the reward and indicative of sterling
merit in the individual possessing them, and convinced that these are far less va-
luable than the deserving them,—despising popularity unless the result of intrin-
sic desert only, and valuing the poorest person of talent or integrity, — indifferent
to censure and abuse when our reason and conscience tell us that they are un-
deserved, —despising all waste of time in personalities and vulgarity and the
littlenesses of coteries and knots of persons such as exist in all bodies of men,
even the scientific and religious, — convinced that happiness consists in the
possession of, or in honest industry to procure if we are not posssessed of them,
the means of subsistence and competency and a certain amount of leisure for
intellectual, refined, and disinterested pursuits, in the study of the know-
ledge of nature, in improving our feelings, in doing good to individuals, but
especially in improving the condition of society, adding, if we can, to the
means of art and to the general stock of knowledge, so that in old age we shall
from habit be delighted to know that others in the full vigour of life are en-
larging the bounds of art and science and increasing the happiness and dignity
of the species, instead of stupidly thinking that all was perfect when we were
young, and from habit be amiable and rational, looking at our decline and
waiting for our death, as ordinations of nature, with placidity and resignation
and hopes for the happiness of those who are to carry on the world after us.
Such old persons I have known, still affectionately loving their family and friends,
and the contemplation of them is delightful.

While the wretched state of civilisation which prevailed in all antiquity still
prevails, even in the most civilised countries: while the arrangements of society
cause the majority to live in excessive toil, with deficient food, and endless unwhole-


1030 DECREPITUDE,


last beyond a definite time ; and, when it is not preparatory to a
fresh developement, so that on its declining a new modification


some and demoralising circumstances, and a bad education or none: while too
many who have all the means of health and happiness have false notions of the
sources of happiness, and are imperfectly educated, delighting in what is trumpery
instead of what is intellectual, noble, and worthy of a rational being’s desire: while
morality is founded, not upon the principle that that is virtuous which produces the
greatest happiness of the greatest number (see supra, p. 357. sqq-), and that vicious
which produces more misery than happiness to the greater number*, (not to sup-
pose these the results of virtue and vice would be to insult the Creator, ) happiness
being by nature ‘our being’s end, and aim,” so that we should be virtuous for
the same high and godlike reason that a benevolent creator must be virtuous, —
because he feels it right in itself; but founded over the greater part of the earth
upon superstitious and often revolting fancies and selfish hopes and fears, the
evidence of the grounds of which not one in ten thousand ever thought of
weighing or has the information and intelligence to weigh properly, (and many
a one who founds or pretends to found his morality on a basis of this kind is
shocked or hypocritically pretends, in the midst of conduct which proves him a
stranger to nobleness and virtue, to be shocked with the very best men who are
virtuous for other reasons than he himself, as though God does not “ prefer


« Before all temples the upright heart and pure,”)


‘and waste their time in disputing upon their fancies of tradition and mystery,
whereas they could all agree as to what is virtuous thought and action, and in
acting accordingly: while all improvements of institutions is opposed, although
fresh arrangements must be demanded in different stages of society, according to
the analogy existing in all parts of nature, and just as organisation changes
at different periods of the developement of animals:—while such is the state of
things, all must appear vanity to those who thoroughly mingle with the world and
join in its unintellectual, empty, and selfish pursuits. The sensual and showy
Hebrew king, with his strong understanding, pronounced at last all to be vanity :
and the vain and mean modern with his gigantic and rich mind pronounced
human life to be not “aliud quam cumulus et accessio peccatorum et «#rum-
narum.” But men witha better cerebral organisation, leading virtuous, bene-
ficent, and intellectual lives, keeping themselves unspotted from the world, and
mixing with it so as scarcely to be a part of it, find much happiness and satis-
faction, and hope that a far higher point of civilisation will one day be obtained,
in which health will be insured and solid happiness established, and those who
would be happy but for the wickedness and folly of others and the infirmities of
our bodies will have then happiness far less alloyed by these causes.


* On this subject, see an excellent pamphlet entitled Observations on the Found-
ation of Morals, suggested by Professor Whewell’s Sermons on the same Subject.
By Eugenius. Longman and Co. 1838.


DEATH. 1031


of composition, organisation, and properties, takes place, its ces-
sation is necessarily death.! The termination is occasionally
very slow; but not unfrequently rather sudden. Whenever
strength is low, whether after starvation, excessive evacuation,
continued irritation, or under the influence of a noxious agent,
the highest hopes of recovery are often blasted by a sudden
cessation of life when improvement had reached a certain point
and no alteration for the worse had taken place for some time.
The extreme debility of old age often ends in the same sudden
way. ‘The explanation probably is that, where the powers are so
low, the slightest causes of exhaustion or difficulty tell, — causes
sometimes inappreciable : but the act of turning in bed, the change
of being raised, nay the loss of tension from a discharge of solid,
fluid, or gas from the alimentary canal, has been known sufficient :
and so might a slight and unnoticed emotion of the mind.  Pos-
sibly excessive debility may be subject to sudden droopings inde-
pendently of sudden calls upon the powers.

Just as we saw that various changes occur, co-operating with
decay in lessening the functions of individual parts, so death in old
age usually occurs before the system is completely decayed.™
The tendency to structural disease is greater and greater as age
advances": and, when age is much advanced, any acute affec-


1« G. Gottl. Richter, De morte sine morbo. Gotting. 1736. 4to. *

J. Oosterdyk Schacht, Tr. qua senile fatum inevitabili necessitate ew hum,
corp. mechanismo sequi demonstratur. Ultraj. 1729. 4to.

Matt. Van Geuns, De morte corporea et causis moriendi. LB. 1761. Ato.
reprinted in Sandifort’s Thesawrus, vol. iil.

C. G. Ontyd, De morte et varia moriendi ratione. Lugd. Bat. 1791. 8vo.

Curt. Sprengel, Instit. Medic. t.i. Amst. 1809. 8vo. p. 289. sq.

See the successive progress of the phenomena of death observed by the indi-
vidual himself, a man of middle age, dying of dysentery, in Moritz’s Magaz. zur
Efrahrungs- Seelen-Kunde, vol. i. ‘Pt. i. p. 63. sq.”

m The circumstance of brutes ill treating and bringing death upon any one of
their companions who is diseased, wounded, or nearly worn out with years; and
of parasitic animals often swarming in bodies enfeebled from disease, are analogous
facts ; illustrating the Eastern saying, “ from him that hath little shall that little
be taken.”

" There is a great tendency, in this climate at least, to an atonic sub-inflam-
matory state of the mucous membranes exposed to the air; so that the eyes are
gummy and watery, the nose very moist, and there is a cough and expectoration
—senile catarrh, whence most old people have short breath, cough, and “ pituita
molesta.”*


1032 LONGEVITY.


tion, though not violent, is often sufficient rapidly to exhaust the
system; so that a very old person’s life is one of the greatest
uncertainty.

«It is scarcely possible to define the natural period of life, or,
as it may be termed, the more frequent and regular limit of ad-
vanced old age.° But, by an accurate examination of numerous
bills of mortality, I have ascertained a remarkable fact — that a
pretty large proportion of Europeans reach their eighty-fourth
year, while, on the contrary, few exceed it.”

The ordinary limit of life is from 70 to 84 years. But there is
great diversity in the period of old age and natural exhaustion.
Some are hale and hearty at 70. Some are feeble and decayed
at 65.

Our countryman Parr married when 120 years of age, retained
his sexual power till 142, and died at 152 from plethora, induced
by a change in his diet.P_ Harvey, who dissected him, found no
decay of any organ4, and, had not Parr become an inmate of the
Earl of Arundel’s family in London, he probably would have lived
many years longer. His soft parts were juicy and flexible, his
cartilages unossified; nor was there diseased ossification or ob-


°« Among other well-known treatises on this subject, consult J. Gesner, De
termino vite. Tigur. 1748. 4to. reprinted in the Excerptum Ttalice et Helvetice
litterat. 1759. t. iv.”

p At 105 he did penance in a white sheet for an illicit amour, which physio-
logical fact John Taylor the poet, in 1635, immortalised in the following delicate
rhymes : —

« Fair Catherine Milton was this beauty bright,
Fair like an angel, but in weight too light,
Whose fervent feature did inflame so far
The ardent fervor of old Thomas Parr,

That for love’s satisfaction ’*twas thought meet

He should be purged by standing in a sheet ;

Which aged he one hundred and five year,

In Aldersbury Bury’s church did wear.

Should all that so offend such penance do,

Oh! what a price would linen rise unto,

All would be turned to sheets, our shirt and s ;
Our table linen, very porter’s frock,

Would hardly ’scape transforming.”


—_s
.


“Eccentric Mirror, vol.


9 Phil. Trans. vol. iii. 1699.


LONGEVITY. 1033


struction any where. A Pole, near Polozk, married for the third
time at 93, and got children; in 1796 he was well and 163 years
old. His eldest grandson was 95, and his youngest son was 62.
A Norwegian named John Surrington died at 160, his eldest son
being 103, and his youngest only 9. Our countryman Jenkins,
who lived 169 years, and swam well when 100, is, perhaps, the
greatest authentic instance of longevity."

Longevity, like every other quality, frequently runs in families.
It is usually much disposed to by early rising and matrimony s:
early rising implying freedom from nocturnal excesses, and ma-
trimony giving more advantage from steadiness and domestic joys
than disadvantage from anxiety and domestic troubles.

After the age of 45, more married men survive than bachelors :
of 100 married men, 27°2 reach 70 years of age, but only 5°7
bachelors. M. Benoisten thinks that at 20 the life of a married
man is worth 9 years more than that of a bachelor. The ad-
vantage is not quite so great on the side of married women over
spinsters.¢

The natural as well as actual duration of life varies in different
countries. Buffon writes that in the American Indians the
hair never becomes grey nor the skin wrinkled, and that many
Mexicans, especially females, reach their hundredth year and
preserve their muscular force till death. The Laplanders and
the people of the northern coasts of Tartary, he also remarks,
though living under ground during winter, and in the midst of
smoke during summer for the purpose of keeping off the gnats, are
seldom sick, and live to an extreme old age, the old being scarcely
distinguishable from the young.


* Bacon, Hufeland ( Macrobiotik), Neuman (Leipzig), Mr. Easton of Salisbury
in a work on longevity, and Dr. Pritchard, have collected many examples of ex-
treme longevity.

A Scotchman named Kintingern and a Hungarian named Czartan are said to
have died at nearly 180. (Burdach, § 623.)

John Rovin and his wife are said to have died in 1794 at 172 and 164; a
mulatto at Fredericktown, North America, in 1797 at 180; Peter Torton in
1724 at 185; St. Mongah or Kentigen in 1781 at 185. (Dr. Pritchard’s Re-
searches into the Physical History of Mankind. 1836. vol.i. pp. 121—125.)

S See an original and beautiful Accownt of the State of the Body and Mind in
Old Age, in the Med. Inquiries and Observations (vol, ii.) of that interesting writer
Dr. Rush.

t Bulletin Médicale Belge.


1034 REJUVENESCENCE.


Life is often protracted very long after the teeth have fallen
out and the hair has turned grey from age.

Sometimes the reverse happens :—old age comes upon the body
at large, while some parts scarcely change. Thus I have known
a person of 90 see well: one of 80 have an excellent head of hair,
and not at all grey; or with all his teeth, and in perfect condition.
Hair turned grey, however, grows as well as hair of its previous
colour: and young persons sometimes have all their hair grey, or
portions of it grey in the midst of hair of good colour. Men-
struation has continued regular till the 70th year’; and women
have lain in at 54. Starke mentions a woman who ceased to
menstruate at 46, but began again at 59, and then produced
and suckled a healthy child, and died at 84.9 In 1830, a woman
of 94 was living at Florence who had menstruated from her 15th
year uninterruptedly, except for 8 months when 53 years old.”

Dr. Rush gives a striking illustration of the weakness of impres-
sions made in advanced life, while those of earlier date are well
remembered, in the instance of a German woman who had learned
the language of the Americans when 40 years old and, though
still living in America, had forgotten every word of it at 80,

“put talked German as fluently as ever. Bishop Watson’s father
married and had a family very late, and when extremely aged
would twenty times a day ask the name of the lad at college,
though he would “repeat, without a blunder, hundreds of lines
out of classic authors.”* My own memory reaches back to two
years of age: a celebrated maiden authoress tells me she can re-
member to a rather earlier period.

The system sometimes makes an effort at renovation in extreme
old age, there being an original power of one more change than is
ordinary. IL myself have known several old persons cut new teeth,


u Phil. Trans. 1713.
xX Edinb. Annual Register, vol. ix.
Archiv fiir die Geburtshiilfe, vol. iv. p. 185.

2 Annali Universali, 1830, p. 595. Her brother died at 106; her paternal grand-
father at 109 and maternal at 89. She married at 15; menstruated for the first
time in the 3d month, and became pregnant in the 4th, after her marriage ; and
had 3 children in 5 years. Three chickens, 5 or 6 lbs. of ‘roast meat, and 20
oranges or peaches, were just enough for her breakfast. She had violent headachs,
which were repressed by shaving the head, but always returned when the hair
was 2 inches long.

a Anecdotes of the Life and Writings of Bishop Watson, &c.


-<


REJUVENESCENCE. 1035


and the Philosophical Transactions, the German Ephemerides», Van
Swieten’s Commentaries, and other works, record many similar
facts, —even that of a complete third set. Dr. Rush mentions an
old man in Pennsylvania who at 68 lost his sight and remained
perfectly blind for years, though otherwise in complete health ;
at 80, he regained his sight spontaneously without any visible
change in the eyes, and could see as well as ever in his life at 84,
when the account was written. Dr. Mason Good saw a lady who
at an advanced age cut several new teeth, and threw away her
spectacles after using them for twenty years, and read the smallest
print of newspapers; and another who, with her new teeth, com-
pletely recovered her hearing, although she had for many years
been so deaf as to be obliged to feel the tongue of her hand-bell
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the bell rang or not. In
the Philosophical Transactions a physician mentions that his father
cut two new teeth, which afterwards dropped out together with
the rest, when in two years fresh ones appeared, and he at length
had an entire new set, and his grey hair turned black. The grey
hairs of some very old people have become brown or black.4


> One man 118 years old cut.a complete front set with excruciating pain, and was
seen at Clives two years afterwards, in 1666. (Ephem. dec.ii. ann. 3. Deon)

© John Hunter saw such an instance. (Nat. Hist. of the Teeth.) This was in
a female, as I believe is more frequently the case.

* See examples in Sir John Sinclair’s Code of Health and Longevity, and the
Dictionn. des Sciences Médicales, art. Cas rares.


I need scarcely observe that the height and the age of men at present are the
same as they were in ancient times. It is a common custom to magnify the past.
Homer, who flourished almost three thousand years ago, makes his heroes hurl
stones in battle which


ov dbo y dvdpe péporev
Oiot viv Bporoi eict. (Iliad, lib. v.)


Yet the giant who was the terror of the Israelites did not probably exceed nine
feet in height, and it was to David who slew him and flourished but a little more
than a century later than Homer’s heroes that Barzillai thus excused himself for
not visiting the royal palace at Jerusalem: —‘“ I am this day fourscore years
old; and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat
or what I drink ? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing
women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the
king?” (2 Samuel, xix. 35.) Moses lived five hundred years earlier than David,
and if most biblical scholars are correct in ascribing the 90th psalm to him, he
writes, — “The days of our years are threescore and ten: and if by reason of


3 Y


1036 MORTALITY.


Baldness has ceased after 30 years in one person’, and in
another at 70.f I attended a middle-aged lady for pompholyx
diutinus whose hair had turned grey, but it became of a chestnut
colour during my attendance, although the disease was severe
and almost uncontrollable.

Precocity of any part has no tendency to enlargement of its bulk
or powers beyond those of ordinary persons. The affair is merely
one of time. The last precocious boy mentioned at p. 1010. was
3 feet 2 inches in height when 3 years old, and attained 5 feet at
the end of his 6th year: but was not taller at 22, when his appear-
ance was in all parts like that of other men of his age. Precocity
of general intellect often wears children out; and such should
never be stimulated to learn, but kept back, as the excitement of
their brain drains the rest of the body of its powers, and the brain
itself perhaps falls into disease, — palsy, apoplexy, fatuity, &c.
To allow a single precocious faculty, as that of music, full play
is by no means so injurious. But young prodigies are unnatural,
and not to be admired. Precocity of any organ or function may
be followed by proportionally early decay or not: just as the part
may have a natural tendency to flourish a short or a long period,
independently of the time at which its full developement may take
place.


strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow : for it
is soon cut off, and we fly away.” But Bauer contends that this psalm belongs
rather to the age of David and contains internal evidence that it could not have
been written by Moses. *

€ Schurich, De Calvo post 30 Annorum Decursum comato. Misc. Acad. N.
Curios. dec. iii, ann. 7. and 8. p.191. Otto, 1]. ¢.

f Observat. sur des Cheveux et deux Dents revenus @ un Homme de 70 ans ;
Mém. de Paris, 1703. Otto, 1. c.

& Mr. South’s notes to his translation of Dr. Otto’s Compendium of Pathological
Anatomy, p. 25.


* Theology of the Old Testament, p. 68. Extracted and translated from the
Theologie des Alten Testaments of Georg Lorenz Bauer, Professor of Oriental
Languages and of Logic at Altdorf. London, 1838. 8vo. published by Fox,
Paternoster Row. :

On the ground ofa tradition of the Rabbis that God created Adam 900 cubits
high, but cut him down after he sinned, the Academician Henrion contends
that Adam was 123 feet 9 inches high, and Eve 118 feet 9 inches 9 lines, and
that men grew less and less and would have now been microscopic but for a
merciful interposition.


MORTALITY. 1037


Mortality, after from the 11th to the 16th year, according to
the country, — after the 14th as the average,—the year of its
minimum since birth (supra, p. 1002.), increases rapidly, from the
15th to the 17th, so that the amount of persons among whom
is one death diminishes by at least one whole number annually.
After the 17th year, the increase of mortality is not so great.
For, in the 56 years after the 14th —that is up to the 70th, the
amount of persons among whom one dies lessens 2:39 annually :
while in the subsequent 40 years up to 110, it lessens but 0°31
annually. During the first 14 of the 56 years, the diminution
of mortality is such that the number of persons among whom
one dies increases annually by almost 10°25: but, in the first
6 of these 14 years, the diminution is not so great as in the
next 8; being, on the average, an increase of only 8:81 in the
number of those among whom one dies annually in the first 6
years, and in the next 8 years 12°88. Thus life proceeds most
rapidly, changes its proportions most suddenly, and is the most
subject to fluctuations, before puberty; continues in a kind of
mean state during the procreative period and the beginning of
old age ; and proceeds the most slowly, with the smallest changes
and fewest fluctuations, in old age.

The climacteric diseases, as they are called, have no influence:
for the period of the first teething is less fatal than those pre-
ceding it. During the second teething, —in the 7th and Sth year,
the mortality lessens considerably. At the period of puberty,
that is the period dating from the 15th year, the mortality indeed
increases, but it still is very much less than at the 20th and
from that to the 30th year. At the period of the cessation of the
sexual functions there is no greater increase of mortality than
in the preceding years, nor is the mortality greater than in the
following years.»

From some fancies about numbers adopted from the Chaldeans
by Pythagoras and spread by his authority in Greece, certain years
of life were thought less healthy than others and termed climac-
teric. They were chiefly those to which the number seven ap-
plied, multiplied by an odd number; and that which was seven
multiplied by the highest odd number,—nine, was considered the
grand climacteric—63. It is clear, however, that no reliance can


h Burdach, § 628.
4 <8?


1038 MORYALITY.


be placed upon such assertions. In the first place, persons differ
as to the year of their constitutional changes of puberty, cessation
of menstruation, and all others, not only one but more years. In
the next place a private practice is almost too limited for ob-
servations of this kind; and absolutely insufficient unless ac-
curate statistical accounts of every patient in that practice are
kept. Iam not aware that those who have written in favour of
climacteric years of decline have ever thought of taking such
pains. Burdach, however, has brought the matter to the test of
extensive statistical tables, including the mortality of every year
of life up to 109; and they show not the faintest trace of a cli-
macteric year. But it is worthy of remark that there is a greater
healthiness in the even years, and a greater mortality in the odd.
It is thought that the odd days of a disease are those in which an
aggravation of the symptoms and either favourable change or
or death, —the crisis,'take place the most frequently, both in men
and brutes.

Mortality is less among females than males, whether the latter
labour or pass useless lives, as in most monasteries, after puberty
as well as before, to extreme old age; and pregnancy, parturition,
suckling, and the cessation of the catamenia, have no influence on
their mortality.

The statements made with respect to the relative mortality of
different ages will probably hold good under all circumstances ;
but the absolute mortality of them must depend upon the circum-
stances in which persons are placed. Malaria or vegetable or
rather phyto-septic miasma is the greatest scourge of the earth,
and accordingly, when it is naturally the most abundant and when
art has done the least to control it, there is enormous mortality.
The average life of all ranks in the peninsula of India falls one
eighth below what it is in Europei; and the 60th year is seldom
attained there.‘

In the British islands are the greatest means of health, and ac-
cordingly ina million of persons 18,200 die here annually ; whereas
in European Turkey, 33,000; in Greece and Italy, 33,300; in the
Low Countries, 26,500; in France, 25,600; in Prussia, Austria,
Switzerland, Portugal, Spain, 25,000; iu Denmark, Poland, Ger-


' Dr. J. Johnson, On the Influence of Tropical Climates.
* Oriental Field Sports, vol.i. p. 236.


MORTALITY. 1039


many, Flanders, European Russia, 22,000 and some odd hundreds ;
in Sweden and Norway, 21,300.

The accumulation of human effluvia in the air also shortens
life. In the first Annual Report of the Registrar General, lately
published, Mr. Farr shows how much greater the mortality of the
great towns of England is than that of the counties. In London
and 24 other towns the population was 3,553,000 ; and he took
rural districts containing a population of 3,500,000 for com-
parison. The deaths in the towns during 6 months amounted to
47,953; in the rural districts to 29,693. Among 1000 deaths
above the age of 70 in England and Wales, 99 occurred in London,
78 in Birmingham, 68 in Leeds, 60 in Liverpool, only 53 in Man-
chester: but 202 in Durham, 208 in Devonshire, and 210 in
North Lancanshire, Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Northum-
berland. Our country is well drained; but the poor districts of
our towns are close and filthy. The influence of poverty is shown
by the fact, that in London, where the greatest number of people
are crowded together, but where poverty is not so great as among
the wretched weavers at Manchester, and the poor of other places,
not only the number of persons who live to be 70 is nearly double
that of Manchester, but the mortality among infants less than the
average of all England and Wales.


1 The following is the table of the causes of death: —


Epidemic, endemic, and contagious


diseases - - - 12,766 6,045
Sporadic Diseases,

Of the nervous system - wes LOD 3,607
— respiratory organs - ~ 12,619 7,847
— organs of circulation’ - - 590 309
— digestive organs - - | 3,476 1,832
— urinary organs - . 219 161
— organs of generation - - 460 265
— organs of locomotion - ~- 262 154
— integumentary system - 62 55

Of uncertain seat = - 4,396 3,730

Age 2 - 2,994 3,102

Violent deaths = - - 1,370 929

Not specified ; - - 1,104 1,657

Total - = 47,958 29,693


3M 3S


1040 MORTALITY,


Better draining, ventilation, public, domestic, and personal
cleanliness, will effect a great reduction of this mortality, both by
preventing diseases and by lessening their intensity and rendering
the restorative powers of the body and of art the more efficient
in remedying them. Improvements will gradually lessen the
unhealthiness of many occupations; and advances in mechanical
contrivance will lessen the necessity for so much human labour.
More wholesome and abundant food will be supplied. The total
abstinence from alcoholic drinks and other narcotic substitutes
will greatly augment health and lengthen life. Plenty of whole-
some food and fresh air are the best strengtheners, and rest when
we are fatigued is the best restorer. When, in addition, a rational
view of happiness prevails, so that men see the folly of wearing
themselves out and subjecting themselves to incessant annoyance
for worldly distinction and display or the possession of useless
riches, but prefer plain competency with time for the pursuit of
truth and refinement, benevolence, and healthy recreation ™, life
will be far less shortened and will be a blessing, rather than what
it too often is,—a curse, though in spite of themselves most men
instinctively cling to it.s

Few attain the senile ev@avacia — death without disease. The
greater part, we have seen, perish long before, and those who


™ The great advantage of a temperate and sedate life, with cleanliness, and ab-
stinence from laborious and unhealthy occupations, is shown by the superior value
of life among Quakers, This is so much above the value of other lives that they
have Assurance Societies for themselves. While among infants under 5 years of
age, 1 in 23 die among others, only 1 in 43 dies among the Quakers; between 5
and 10 years of age, 1 dies in 15} among others, but only 1 in 224 among the
Quakers ; and so on till 70 and upwards, when the mortality is equal. (Cham-
bers’s Edinburgh Journal, No. 302.)

" The mortality has long been diminishing in most of the countries and towns
of Europe, and has been greatly reduced in every establishment in which ven-
tilation, &c. &c, have been improved. See Edinburgh New Philos. Journ. April,
1834, Also Dr, A. Combe’s excellent Treatise on the Physiological and Moral
Management of Infancy. 1840. ch. 2. ; and Dr. John Wilson’s Statistical Reports
on the Health of Seamen and Marines for from 1830 to 1836, printed by order of
the House of Commons, 1840,

To the disgrace of human nature be it known that, while the whole mortality
at New York and Philadelphia is 1 in from 33 to 39, the mortality among the
slaves is 1 in 18; and that, while at Baltimore the whole mortality is 1 in 44, the


mortality amovg the free negroes is 1 in 36, and among the slave negroes, 1
In €e


DEATH. 1041


are nearly exhausted by old age generally perish of some disease
a little before their time.

The cessation of life may be without suffering or agony. It
may be instantaneous without any warning, or instantaneous but
with warning ; it may occur as merely an increasing weakness,
and be felt as a gentle sinking into sleep; though the previous
condition be one of suffering, the brain often at last becomes
comatose, and death strikes without the patient’s knowledge ; in
other cases the brain remains intelligent, and death is slow and
difficult. Here we have the agony of death: horrid dyspneea ;
gasping; dreadful faintness ; sweating ; lividity of the face; and
restlessness and convulsions; and life does not cease till the
unhappy being is suffocated by the want of purification of the
blood in the lungs. There may be a calm, and the excitement
again appear. Intelligence too, after suspension, may return,
and repeatedly, before it is extinct for ever.

An earthy cadaverous smell, something like that of mouldering
bones, is sometimes very perceptible in disease before death. It
may exist for several days, and I think I have known it recovered
from. That the emanations undergo a change not hitherto re-
cognised is certain from a fact, which I have ascertained in the
case of Elizabeth Okey, who has no sense of smell, viz. that a
very unusual idiosyncrasy is possible, through which emanations
from persons in a dangerous condition of health produce the most
oppressive and distressing feelings; and, should the individual
endowed with the idiosyncracy be at the time in a morbid con-
dition of mind, may cause a delirious phantom to be imagined.
This idiosyncrasy is thus a test of what could otherwise not be
appreciated : just as the idiosyncrasy of hay catarrh or asthma is
a test without which we should not know a peculiar property of
the emanations from the flower of grass.

As the powers decline, when death is not instantaneous, the
individual lies upon his back and slips down more and more ;
speaks more faintly and with pauses ; the mucus rattles from time
to time in the throat at expiration?, as the patient cannot remove


© See also Garmann, De Presagio Mortis ab Odore. Ephem, Nat. Cur. dec. 1.
ann. 1670. obs. 144.

P In cases of prostration of strength the mucous tracheal rattle of expiration is
rarely recovered from when once it has begun: that of inspiration is not a fatal
sign.


3 Y 4


1042 DEATH.


it. Occasionally the countenance is that of a corpse for hours
before death; or longer.

The extremities, nose and ears, and the breath, grow cold; the
eyes lose their brilliancy, and are partly turned upwards and in-
wards, and half covered by the lid; the face becomes pale and
pinched and the eyes hollow ; the voice falters ; the pulse grows
smaller and smaller, then slower, at length it intermits, and this
more and more, and longer; every expiration rattles; and the
breathing grows slower and intermits, and its intermissions be-
come more frequent and long, till at last it ends for ever in one
expiration; the pulse ceases in arteries4 nearer and nearer to the
heart, and the heart generally gives at least one beat after the last
expiration, and is felt no more.

The varieties in the bodily condition of dying persons depend
entirely upon the part which dies first and its rapidity in dying.
If the heart suddenly stops, death is instantaneous, the brain
becomes unconscious, and respiration stops; if the portion of
the encephalo-spinal organ upon which respiration depends is
suddenly compressed by blood or stupefied in any other way,
or if its communication with parts below is severed, death is

‘instantaneous ; if the lungs are suddenly prevented in a direct
manner from continuing their functions, the encephalo-spinal
organ is presently stupefied and the heart very soon ceases to
act. When death does not begin by the heart, the action of
this usually continues at least one beat after respiration.’ But


9 Under the microscope the quantity of blood is seen to grow smaller and
smaller in the arteries, till the minutest contain none, and the capillaries very little ;
and at last it is at rest in the arteries though it still oscillates for a time in the
veins. Dr. Kaltenbrunner has observed more blood to remain in the capillaries of
the viscera than of the surface. The lungs, having a contractile power of their
own, withdraw themselves from the thoracic walls after death, by which a space is
left, and this occasions the blood to flow abundantly towards the lungs: so that
Dr. Carson found, if air was let into the pleure at death, that the capillaries con-
tained so much the more blood and the arteries also were turgid. (See supra,
p,» 212.)

" Upon the differences of the commencement of death, see Bichat’s Recherches
Physiologiques sur la Vie et sur la Mort.

* In brutes, the right side of the heart is seen to beat longer than the left; for
the right must, while the left beats, have from this circumstance, and afterwards
for some moments from the contraction of the systemic arteries and capillaries,
a supply of blood to stimulate it and will beat: but the cessation of respiration


DEATH. 1043


when the power of the encephalo-spinal organ over the thorax
is lost slowly ; or the lungs are slowly, by effusion, &c., prevented
from continuing their function, we have a slow and agonising death.
With this exception, and that of pain or distressing disease ex-
isting in any part at the time of death, or of an unhappy condition
of the mind, death is by no means distressing ; and all that the
person requires is to be let alone and allowed, as if sleepy, to die
in peace. When, however, persons appear insensible, it is certain
that frequently they are cognisant of their existence and of what is
passing: for I have known them requested to give a sign that
they were still alive by moving a finger, or by interrupting their
breath when to move a finger was impossible; and they have
done so, although believed by many to have been long senseless.
There may, therefore, be suffering when we might not suspect it.

As the sun shines upon the just and the unjust, and health
and strength and domestic happiness and worldly prosperity and
honours are given to the wicked and to the undeserving as well
as to the deserving, so the corporeal agony of death is just as
often the lot of the good as of the bad. Jn regard to the bad, who
have caused misery to others, I confess myself astonished to see
the calmness and happiness with which they often meet their fate :
and it is absolutely shocking to see the effects sometimes produced
upon the most atrocious felons by priests, who console them
up to such a pitch that the guilty wretches, who have plunged
whole families into misery and would probably do the same again
if liberated, not only die very happy, but are anxious for the hour
of execution to arrive that they may enter into the presence and
joy of the Creator of the universe, convoyed by a flock of angels,
and pass their existence to all eternity with him and the spirits
of the blessed ; and actually thank God for having committed their
crimes since these have turned out so good a thing for them.

If the natural character is very strong, the state of mind at the
approach of death will depend upon it. Lord Bacon has collected
examples of remarkable conduct at death. Some have died
jesting ; some uttering imprecations; some cheating; some lying ;
some acting the hypocrite; some quietly resigning themselves


will arrest the blood in the lungs and prevent a supply to the left side of the heart,
which therefore will stop though the right ventricle contract.


1044 DEATH.


to nothingness, some to a future state, some to uncertainty.
The greater part die thinking and acting according to the in-
fluence exerted upon them by education and example in their
previous life and by those about them at the close.

The desire to live is in some so intense that they are miserable
at the close of life ; and some have actually thrown themselves
out of bed in distraction, resolved not to die, and exclaiming, “I
will not die.” But for the most part very old people, whether their
lives have been good or bad, are resigned: think they have lived
long enough, and look forward, perhaps impatiently, to their end.
Many are well aware of their approaching endt; and some (even
children) calculate the day and hour of its occurrence to anicety :


t Cavendish, the discoverer of the composition of water, lived alone at Clapham,
where my family also resided ; and, when he felt his end very near, desired his
valet to leave the room and return in a certain time. The man, on his return at
the time ordered, found him dead. Dr. Cullen, when dying, faintly articulated
to one of his friends, “ I wish I had the power of writing or speaking, for then
I would describe to you how pleasant a thing it is to die.” Sometimes the
faculties of the insane or fatuitous return just before death ; sometimes the in-
tellect of the sane is greatly heightened, sometimes the superior moral feelings.
‘Consult on this point, Osiander, iiber die Entwickelungskreiten, t.i. p.123. The
occasional brightening of the mind before death till it could almost prophesy
has been noticed from the most ancient times. Homer represents the dying
Patroclus foretelling the fate of Hector, and the dying Hector denouncing no
less certainly the death of Achilles. (Jlad, xvi. 852., xxii. 358.) Shakspeare
makes Hotspur (Henry IV. Pt.i. Act v. sc. 4.) say,


*¢O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: ”


and the dying John of Gaunt (Richard IT, Act ii, se, 1.) exclaim,


“ Methinks, I am a prophet new inspir’d,
And thus, expiring, do foretell of him,”


Socrates, who, though so good and great, was clearly a monomaniac, (sce Dr,
Lélut’s Démon de Socrate. Paris, 1836.) when near his death, fancied he could
prophesy.

He (Plato, AMOAOTIA) and other ancients and moderns have fallen into the
error of mistaking the close of nature, which they knew produced occasionally an
increase of penetration and elevation of the moral sentiments for the proximity
of death under all circumstances, even by violence or accident while persons are
inhealth, For references to authors on this subject, see Bishop Newton’s Disser-
tations on the Prophecies, vol. i. diss. iv.


DEATH. 1045


whether from an inward feeling through idiosyncrasy, which I be-
lieve occasionally to exist ; or from the impression of the mind
influencing the period of the event.

Long before the system is worn out by age, any part may die.
If the part is not necessary to life, or the portion which dies is
small, it may be separated by the absorption of the living part
around, and the system continue to live in health as before.
Even small portions of the lungs have thus died and been sepa-
rated, and the patient has recovered.

In regard to premature death, the defect of air, food, warmth ;
defect of repose; slow excessive loss of matter from the system:
continued over excitement of any one organ or of the whole sys-
tem; sudden excess of stimulants ; sudden loss of a quantity of
the fluids, which if slow would be borne; the sudden withdrawal
of pressure from important parts: derangement of condition from
the influence of noxious agencies: continued excess of food, or
temperature: unhappy states, continued or sudden, of the cere-
bral feelings, nay a sudden excess of happiness,— will all destroy
the conditions which are indispensable to life. The functions of
the encephalo-spinal system may be impaired to the point of not
inspiring, or the heart may become unable to beat, and so general
death be occasioned ultimately by these organs, though they may
be suffering only in common with the whole system ;—all parts
equally suffering, and the vitality of all being equally impaired. A
part unimportant to life, as a finger or alimb, may be entirely lost
without disturbance to the system; and yet a diseased condition
of it, or a sudden mechanical shock to it if it be a limb, may de-
range the system even to loss of life.

Death does not take place in all parts at once. The intellectual
and moral feelings of the brain, even the power of swallowing,
may cease, and yet life still exist. Respiration may have ceased,
and the heart may beat for a short time. The heart may have
ceased to beat, and yet the motion of the fluids continue in the
minute vessels. Dr. Speranza mentions a young man who had
died at 20 years of age of encephalitis, whose face continued warm,
and his body covered with drops of sweat, which were renewed,
if wiped off, for three hours ; and at the end of 24 hours, though the
body was livid, there was still sweat. Richerand also mentions
such a fact. The temperature, if it has fallen from the death
having been sudden, may rise again for a time, as though the


1046 DEATH.


minute vessels had a little recovered themselves." The uterus
has been felt to contract strongly a quarter of an hour after death
in labour.x The hairs and nails have been known to grow after
death. Absorption also may continue for some hours. Dr.
Magendie found the lacteals fill again, after being emptied by
pressure, two hours after death. Voluntary muscles will obey
mechanical irritation for a time ; and galvanism will produce con-
tractions. The contraction of the arteries after death was men-
tioned supra, p.185. The intestines may move for some time
after life has ceased.y

After death the body becomes cold. But the rapidity of its
cooling depends upon the surrounding temperature, and the quan-
tity of fluid in it: for, if there is much blood or even dropsical
fluids, the period is much lengthened. The drier the body, the
sooner does it cool. — The countenance while the corpse is fresh
has generally a heavenly serenity.* Sometimes the features are


" Bush declares that a blow after death has caused it to rise temporarily in a
rabbit and dog. (Experimenta quedam de Morte.)

* Dict. des Sc. Méd. t. xix. p. 338. Gemeinsame Zeitschrift fiir Geburtskunde,
iii. 3.

Y This is seen in slaughtered brutes. Neither the semen nor ovum loses its
vital qualities immediately. Spallanzani fecundated all the eggs of toads,
eight and even twelve hours after they had been killed ; and those of two
other dead toads, kept in a glacier to prevent putrefaction till the semen was
applied at the’ end of 24 hours. (Expér. pour servir aU’ Histoire de la Géné-
ration, p.155. sq. Généve, 1785.) He found the semen of males which had
been killed 3 and even 5% hours still prolific. (Jd. p. 147.) Jacobi pro-
duced impregnation with the roe of a male carp four days after its death. The
semen of toads was as efficient in the bands of Spallanzani six hours after se-
paration from the body and retention in a glass tube stopped with sealing wax, as
when fresh furnished; not quite so good at the end of 7 hours; and good for
nothing at the end of 9. (l.c. p. 148.) Preserved under a layer of oil or wax,
or bottled for use and corked by the philosopher, it lost its virtue as much as in
the open air. (p. 384.)

I may here mention a fact showing the independence of the life of parts that
might have been thought to exist indissolubly with another, An ovum has con-
tinued to grow sometimes after the death of the embryo (Meckel, Beytrage, t.1.
p- 61.): and has even cicatriced and been discharged containing the usual quan-
tity of liquor amnii at six months after the embryo had escaped from it at three.
(Lobstein. Burdach, § 461.)


‘“* He who hath bent him o’er the dead
Ere the first day of death is fled,


THE CORPSE. 1047


much changed for a short time after death, and subsequently
assume their usual appearance.

Every part shrinks, and becomes more rigid than during life,
both from the escape of much moisture from the body, and from
a tonic contraction. The contraction observed by Dr. Parry in
regard to the arteries (see supra, p. 186.) holds good in regard
also to the lymphatics, cellular membrane, and ligaments. The fat,
from being very soft during life, has, in losing its temperature, ne-
cessarily become solid, and the blood has more or less coagulated.
But the rigidity of the whole body, though increased by these cir-
cumstances, is independent of them, and is owing chiefly to a ri-
gidity of the muscles which comes on from 10 minutes to 7 hours
after death, and usually lasts several days. This commonly
begins in the muscles of the lower jaw and nape of the neck, and
almost at the same time in the trunk, and proceeds first to the
upper and then to the lower extremities: and it declines in the
same order. It begins later, is weaker, and of shorter duration, in
children than in adults ; and this in proportion as they are younger,
so that a foetus of 7 months does not exhibit the phenomena.
The greater the strength of the person at the time of death,
the more marked it is. The muscles are no longer excitable by
stimuli; and become denser and firmer than before, so that a


Before decay’s effacing fingers
Have swept those lines where beauty lingers,
And mark’d the mild angelic air,
The rapture of repose that’s there,
The fix’d yet tender traits that streak
The languor of the placid cheek,
And, but for that sad shrouded eye
That fires not — wins not— weeps not now,
And but for that chill changeless brow,
Where cold obstruction’s apathy
Appals the gazing mourner’s heart,
As if to him it could impart
- The doom he dreads yet dwells upon, —
Yes, but for these and these alone,
Some moments, aye, one treacherous hour,
He still might doubt the tyrant’s power :
So fair, so calm, so softly seal’d,
The fair last look by death reveal’d.”’ ( Giaour,)


4 Sommers, Recherches de Physiologie et de Chimie Pathologiques.


1048 THE CORPSE.


muscle, which while contractile by stimulus soon after death would
tear by a weight of 2 ounces, will 24 hours after death support
2 pounds. This rigidity, if once overcome by force, after it has
fully taken place, never returns. I mentioned at page 482., that
it depends upon a mere consolidation of the muscles, unfitting
them for contraction from any exciting cause. It appears attended
by aslight shortening, since the lower jaw ascends a little, the
fingers become a little bent, the thumb approaches the root of the
little finger, and, if the stiffness is great, the fore-arm is perhaps
slightly bent. I have already stated (d.) that, when death occurs
under circumstances which prevent the coagulation of the blood,
(see supra, p. 291.) this rigidity of the muscles is said to be equally
prevented; and that, therefore, it is probably a chemical change
only. When sufficient time has elapsed for the changes of de-
composition to begin, it ceases; while it lasts, there is no sign of
putrefaction. Burdach asks, in objection, why this rigidity does
not take place after asphyxia by various gases, and after death
from hemorrhage, or from frost, nor in embryos at all? The
answer is, 1. That when the nature of the causes of death prevents
it, they prevent also the coagulation of the blood. Now, if the
coagulation is a chemical change, as I contended at page 152., we
may presume that this muscular rigidity or condensation is a che-
mical change. 2. The more soft and weak the muscles, whether from
early age or the exhausted state of the body before death, in which
cases this phenomenon is less observable, the poorer must be their
composition: the greater the vigour of the muscle, in which case
the rigidity is more striking, the more perfect must be their com-
position : and the same is precisely the case with the coagulation
of the blood. Burdach classes the rigidity among those phe-
nomena of a tendency to condensation and independence that
occur at death, and finishes with the words, ‘in this respect we
may, with Sommers, compare the cadaveric rigidity to the coagu-
lation of the blood.” Yet he regards it as “a last manifestation
of living muscular force,” having some analogy to spasm; in the
same line, however, allowing that it occurs when the sensibility
of the muscles is extinct, and having previously allowed that “ it
cannot be the result of simple contractility,” “ and differs from
the continued action of contractility.” As this rigidity occurs
only when the muscle is no longer susceptible of the influence of
stimuli and is dead and will not yield to a weight which would


-THE CORPSE. 1049


tear it while it was susceptible, there must be a great condens-
ation, and this cannot but be a chemical change.

The corpse is pale at all the superior parts, even though these
had been inflamed or congested during life. After a time, all the
lower parts to which the blood gravitates grow livid: internally,
the blood is found accumulated in the lowest parts.» The eyes
are open; the mouth, bladder, and rectum are half open from the
loss of muscular power: the muscles are all rather soft and easily
torn; the penis and breasts hang relaxed. Pressure flattens every
part which experiences it, so that the nates, loins, and back are
particularly flattened. The fulness of the body subsides: and the
eyes, temples, and cheeks are hollow: the cornea is filmy, opake,
and flat, and at length flaccid: the nose pointed: and the ears and
lips are thin.

The eyes, mouth, nostrils, and all exposed parts, grow dry from
evaporation.

From the impediment to the progress of the blood through the
lungs being experienced first by the veins, from the force of the
heart being always most operative on the arteries, and from the
great contractile power possessed by the arteries, little blood is
found in these and the left side of the heart, but a large quantity
in the veins and the right auricle and ventricle. This longer supply
of blood to the right side of the heart is the reason that the right
acts longer than the left. (Supra, p. 1043. note ™.) The venous
blood of the cave and right auricle is usually fluid ; that in the left
auricle and ventricle and in the arteries usually coagulated.

The blood gradually transudes through the vessels; so that
wherever a vein at an inferior or dependent part runs, a broad
red band is seen, and it is not well defined, but irregular at its
margins from the irregular escape of blood. ‘Transudation also
takes place of the bile, and of every other fluid; even of one
artificially introduced. The blood grows thicker and darker as
time elapses. The humours of the eye become turbid; and the
cornea and the serous membranes lose their transparency. °¢


b The posterior part of the lungs in the supine corpse is therefore of a dark
red and solid with blood.

© Lenhossek says that the natural transparency of the pericardium and perito-
neum in a child born with its trunk unclosed, as well as the transparency of the
cornea, lessened during life, if syncope or suffocation occurred; and returned
with returning animation, (Medicinische Jahrbucher, vi. 2. p. 67.)


1050 THE CORPSE,


A truly cadaverous odour is soon perceived, “so that if these
collective marks are present,” says Blumenbach, ‘there can
scarcely be room for the complaint of Pliny that we ought not to
feel assured of the fate of a man, though we see him lie dead.” *
But we ought never to treat a person as dead till marks of putre-
faction appear, for many have been interred alive ; and I am per-
suaded that many have died because deprived of their previous
covering and put into a room without a fire in winter, from the
belief that they were dead. The odour should be that of putre-
faction, not that merely earthy smell which may be perceptible
before death. There should also be visible marks of putrefaction.
However late putrefaction may be in commencing, we ought to
wait. Ifa body is dead, and the temperature not extremely low,
and no antiseptic measures be adopted, putrefaction sooner or
later begins.

When the condition called life ceases, the compounds of ve-
getables and animals, being ternary and quaternary, are not held
firmly together; they yield to the tendency of matter to form
binary compounds, and decomposition and fresh composition take
place.

The first odour of a dead body is that of fresh meat. This
soon yields to a peculiar foetid smell, which attracts flies to the
body and induces them to lay their eggs in what is about to be-
come fit nourishment for their young.

The signs of putrefaction are the putrid smell; a greenish
tinge, first visible in the abdomen, and at length a redness and
almost blackness of the surface; a swelling of the abdomen and
at length of the whole body from the disengagement of gases and
the liquefaction of the solids ; a general softening, and at length
a pulpiness; the issue of frothy foetid red fluid from the nose
and mouth; and at length of fluid from all parts of the softened
body.

The smell becomes so intense as to extend to a great distance,
and to remain long in the clothes of those who are exposed to it
and in the hands of those who touch the body. The more porous


4 « ©, Himly, Commentatio (which gained the Royal Prize) Mortis, Historiam,
Causas, et Signa, sistens. Gotting. 1794. 4to.

Sil. Anschel, Thanatologia, s. in Mortis Natwram, Causas, Species, Genera, et
Diagnosin Disquisitiones, Gotting. 1795. 8vo.”


THE CORPSE. 1051


and fiocculent substances, as in the case of infectious efluvia, are
those which retain it longest.

The gases are afforded at first by the fluids, and most abundantly
by the blood; as the body liquefies, the fresh fluid of course
affords it in still greater abundance. The chief products are
water, ammonia, carbonic acid, sulphuretted, phosphuretted, and
carburetted hydrogen gases: nitrogen is exhaled copiously, also
in a pure state.

The parts in which the ‘cellular membrane is the most loose
swell, after the abdomen, the earliest; as the eyelids and pudendum:
the gases are found not only in all canals and cavities, but even
in the substance of the viscera; so that the whole body becomes
lighter and swims in water, though up to this time it had sunk;
and even individual organs, as the liver and heart, will float. The
fluids are driven onwards by the gases, especially the blood, so
that congestions of blood take place in the head, heart, liver, ge-
nitals; and, if the canal or cavity is open, as the respiratory, ali-
mentary, urinary, and genital passages, their contents are forced
out. The production of gases may proceed so copiously that noise
perhaps attends its escape, and the motion may be such in the
blood-vessels that these perhaps pulsate from time to time. The
congestion thus produced, and the redness of membranes and other
parts from the softened condition allowing the blood and the fluid
resulting from the softening and liquefaction of the solids to per-
vade them, resemble the states seen immediately after death from
congestion and inflammatory disease so perfectly, that no in-
ference of the existence of such previous diseases can be drawn
from such appearances, if the temperature is high and any great
time has elapsed subsequently to death.

The blood at the same time grows very dark; and every organ
loses its natural hue, and becomes dirty looking or yellow or green,
or more or less dark than before: then red and ultimately very
dark.

The whole mass of solids liquefies more and more, and fluid
runs out copiously through openings which take place in all situ-
ations. Various insects, at first dipterous and at length coleopte-
rous, swarm upon the body and devour it, as long as it is moist.


© Dr. John Davy’s paper on this point is very important. Med. Chir, Trans.
vol, x.


vs


1052 THE CORPSE.


Great evaporation goes on, and nothing but the bones, with the
dried and greatly reduced soft solids, —skin, muscles, fat, and vis-
cera, adhering to them and in a manner carbonised, after a time
yemains. Apertures and channels made by insects are seen in the
body: and, when there is no more nourishment for insects, vege-
table parasites take their place, champignons at first, and sub-
sequently lichens, flourishing upon it. At length the dark coloured,
light mass grows friable and falls to pieces; nothing but earthy
salts and carbon are found ; and ultimately


‘‘— not a pinch of dust remains of Cheops.”f


Churchyards, therefore, ultimately have scarcely a sensible
augmentation of their soil.

Bodies, like vegetable matter in the fire when reduced to a
mere cinder, sometimes retain their form, but crumble to powder
on the least touch. This was the case with the body of Alexander
the Great when his tomb was opened before Augustus.

Some parts putrefy sooner than others. The brain softens im-
mediately, and exposure to the air occasions it to soften rapidly
while we are examining it. The softer and moister the solids,
ceteris paribus, the sooner do they putrefy.

These changes take place in various times, and with various
modifications, under different circumstances.

The weaker the system, or any portion of it, before death,
the more rapid are they. After putrid diseases, and diseases in


f Don Juan, I. 219.

& Phosphorescence occasionally precedes the foetid state of putrefaction ; pro-
bably from the abundant disengagement of phosphorus in some form or other,
and perhaps sometimes from the production of phosphorescent animalcules. Fish
just beginning to putrefy exhibit phosphorescence oftenest and most strikingly.
The body of a herring will emit light, a day or two after death, before putrefaction
has decidedly commenced. Fabricius ab Aquapendente tells of three Roman
youths at Padua, who in 1562 bought a lamb, and what they could not eat on
Easter Sunday shone on the Monday in the dark like so many candles, Some
kid’s flesh in contact with it and the fingers and other parts of the bodies of per-
sons who touched it also became luminous. Bartholin mentions a woman at
Montpellier, in 1641, who bought a piece of meat and put it in her bed-room,
when in the night it illuminated the place with a whitish light, which was emitted
from spots as though gems of unequal splendor were scattered over it, When
the meat began to putrefy, the light vanished, and as some religious people
fancied, “in the form of a cross.” Dr. Graves states that the subjects in his
dissecting room were for one or two nights covered all over with a phospho-


THE CORPSE. 1053


which the natural composition is impaired, as after that condition
which is in some measure analogous to putrescency, — softening —
a state sometimes local sometimes general, scurvy, and death by
some poisons, putrefaction advances very rapidly. The feetor of
a body softened before death clings very strongly to the clothes and
hands of others. When a part has been exhausted by inflammation
and has much congestion in it, the decomposition is rapid. The
more juicy the body, the greater is the rapidity. A warm tem-
perature, especially one from 60° to 90°, and plenty of air, at least
of oxygen, greatly promote putrefaction; and the absence of
moisture, air, and a certain temperature, absolutely prevent de-
composition. Strong electric shocks are said to make dead flesh
putrefy the more quickly.

If moisture is withdrawn, by placing the body in a powdery
medium, putrefaction is impeded and a dried mummy of not more
than a few pounds in weight is produced. Such mummies are
found in the sand of Egypt and Arabia, and occasionally in
English vaults. Ihave seen them from St. Saviour’s and St.
Bride’s in London. If all moisture is rapidly abstracted, no pu-
trefaction can occur. Gay-Lussac preserved meat fresh for many
months by placing it under a receiver with chloride of calcium.
He found no decomposition possible while air was excluded: and,
on the other hand, putrefaction proceeds more rapidly in oxygen,
and the more a body is reduced to pieces and thus brought into
more extensive contact with the air. Consequently decompo-
sition proceeds much more slowly under ground than in the open
air; and bones have been found in stone coffins where they
must have lain above a thousand years. The soft parts of bodies
interred a few feet disappear in about six years, and the greater
part of the bones in twelve.


rescent effulgence, and that in his nocturnal “resurrectionary expeditions” to
graves he was frequently struck with the luminous appearance of old coffin boards.
(London Med, and Surg. Journ. No.153.) Freezing arrests it; but thawing
restores it, A boiling heat puts an end to it for ever. Exsiccation stops it. <A
vacuum, carbonic acid gas, hydrogen, sulphuretted hydrogen, and nitrous gas,
strong acids, alcalies, alcohol, ether, arrest it: but the fresh air in the first five cases,
and dilution in the last, restores it. The wood of dead vegetables frequently ex-
hibits phosphorescence at a medium temperature; as well as potatoes, the root
of valerian and tormentilla, and yarious putrefying mushrooms. See Tiedemann’s
Physiology, cece. sq.
le ae


1054 THE CORPSE.


In northern regions the carcases of animals lie unchanged upon
the snow. The mammoths found in perpetual frost have withstood
all decomposition for many thousands of years.

A high temperature equally prevents it; for dead bodies
on burning deserts remain unchanged. Both extremes are
partly alike ; the one dissipates, the other congeals, the moisture
which is indispensable to putrefaction. A temporary very high
temperature, without dissipating moisture, so changes the proxi-
mate principles that decay is retarded. Meat that would spoil
is kept sweet by cooking: after a time, however, decomposition
takes place, unless it is completely protected from the air. Meat
heated to 212°, and, without the least subsequent exposure, kept
from the air, may be preserved for years, even in moisture and a
temperature favourable to putrefaction.

Certain substances forming by their chemical action with the
animal matter new compounds which, not being ternary and qua-
ternary compounds, are not liable to putrefactive decomposition,
will preserve animal matter from decomposition for a longer or
shorter time. The new compound, however, will at last rot.
Common salt, nitrate of potass, creosote, alum, sugar, acids,
alcohol, &c., have strong antiseptic powers.

I have had a coagulum of blood dry, solid, and perfectly sweet,
now for six years, which I originally soaked in creosote; and a
saturated solution of alum injected into the right carotid is em-
ployed to preserve human bodies sweet for dissection and recog-
nition. The process of embalming consists in removing the more
easily putrefying of the viscera, introducing bituminous and
aromatic substances, and excluding the air. Egyptian bodies have
thus been preserved above three thousand years.

The acid and fatty substances putrefy less rapidly than urea,
fibrin, and analogous principles. If animal matter is kept under
water, the fibrinous, albuminous, and gelatinous parts, which have
any stearine or elaine among them, become changed to a fatty or
soapy substance called adipocire. While the oxygen of the water
is absorbed, its hydrogen unites with the nitrogen of the animal
matter, and the ammonia produced, not being carried away, unites
with margaric acid which is generated in the absorption of oxygen
by the elaine or stearine, into a sort of white soap — adipocire.

When vegetable substances, fluids or soft solids, decompose,
they grow warm and agitated, — ferment: alcohol is first pro-
duced, — the fermentation is first vinous: then acetic acid is pro-


MORTALITY. 1055


duced,— the acetous fermentation occurs; and ultimately they
putrefy. Vegetable substances are composed chiefly of oxygen
and a larger proportion of carbon and hydrogen. In the vinous
fermentation, the proportion of these elements which constitutes
their sugar is disturbed: some of the carbon and more of the
oxygen escape in the form of carbonic acid gas, and the pre-
dominance of hydrogen with the reduced carbon and still more
reduced oxygen produces alcohol. Changes constantly go on in
this vinous fluid, — a compound of alcohol, mucus, water and
odorous and sapid substances; so that every year a wine has
fresh sensible qualities. These changes at length are no improve-
ment, but a deterioration: and at length the carbon lessens, and
the hydrogen still more; so that the oxygen predominates and
acetic acid is produced. Some vegetable substances, as gum,
starch, and extract, turn sour at once without becoming alcoholic.
Putrefaction requires the presence of oxygen and hydrogen in
the proportion that forms water, and likewise of nitrogen; and, as
plants are so destitute of the latter, their gluten and starch only
putrefy. Nor will all parts which contain nitrogen putrefy with
the same readiness; those probably whose texture is the looses
undergo the change with the greatest facility.

Those in which charcoal and hydrogen prevail, as the oils,
resins, and alcohol, do not putrefy.


Dr. Caspar calculates that there are 960,000,000 human beings
on the earth"; and that the average deaths are 29,000,000 an-


nh Ona calculation about 12 years ago that there were upwards of eight hun-
dred millions of human beings, they were classed, according to their profession of
belief, or that of the majority of their nation, as,

A. Monotheists.


1. Jews - - - 7,000,000

2. Christians - - - 232,000,000

3. Mahometans - - = 122,120,000

4, Disciples of Zoroaster and Confucius, Nanclists 10,380,000
371,500,000

B. Polytheists,

J. Bramins - ” - 120,000,000

2. Buddhists - * - 240,000,000

3. Fetich worshippers - ~ - 128,000,000
488,000,000


323


1056 PLANTS AND BRUTES.


nually, 80,000 daily, nearly 3,300 hourly, and 53 every minute.
It is thought that 25 boys and 26 girls, —51 children, are born
every minute.

In general, in our latitudes, more persons die at the end of
winter or beginning of spring and fewer at the end of summer or
beginning of autumn than at other periods : and more die in winter
than in summer. The same holds in regard to even still-born child-
ren. Ingeneral the month of the greatest mortality is February,
and the month of the least is August,—the one often the coldest,
and the other often the warmest, month. The more extreme the
cold in spring, and the heat in autumn, the greater the mortality ;
and vice versd. A very cold winter is exceedingly fatal.i

The youngest individuals die mostly in January; those from 2 to 3
years of age, mostly in March; those from 8 to 12 years of age,
mostlyin April; and those from 12to 16 years of age, mostlyin May.
The fatal effects of cold are thus more rapid in those whose energy
is the least. After 16 years of age, the vital energy would seem to
resist the inclemency of season less and less: among persons from 16
to 20 years of age, the greatest ‘mortality is in April; among those
from 20 to 25, in March ; among those from 25 to 30, in February ;
and among those above 40, in January. The smallest mortality oc-
curs in Belgium among the youngest in July ; among those from 2
to 8 years of age, in August ; and among those from 8 to 20 years
of age, in October; and among the older, in July. Hence Moser
infers that even healthy influences produce their good sooner in
the younger than those who are more grown; and that the proper
inference is not that evil influences, but all external influences,
act sooner accordingly as the vital energy is less.k

The season of greatest mortality must depend upon local cir-
cumstances as well as upon the general laws of the seasons.

The greater number, or nearly so, of deaths occur after mid-
night at the first of the morning, —the time of the greatest number
of births and of attacks of asthma, gout, &c.


Gruithesen declares that some infusoria have, from the first, their permanent
shape and dimensions; and Nitsch that among the cercaria all the individuals of


1 Dr. W. Heberden, K Burdach, § 619,


PLANTS AND BRUTES: 1057


one generation are of the same size, without ever growing or propagating. (Betirage
sur Physiognosie, p. 303.)

A fungus (Bovista giganteum) acquires the size of a gourd in a single night.
It has 47,000,000,000 cells, each equal to ith of an inch in diameter ; so that
4,000,000,000 cells must have been developed every hour, or above 66,000,000
every minute. (Dr. Lindley’s Introduction to Botany, p. 7.)

Plants were observed by M. Meyer, superintendent of the Botanical Garden
at KGnigsberg, to grow twice as much in the day as in the night.


Some brutes undergo extraordinary metamorphoses after birth. An insect is,
on first leaving its egg-shell, a maggot (/arva) ; then it becomes a grub (nympha
or pupa, &c.); and lastly a fly (imago). The frog is at first a tadpole, has no ~
extremities, but, like a fish, tail and gills, Dr, Edwards has proved that, by
excluding tadpoles from the light, they will grow to double or treble the size that
tadpoles usually attain, but are not metamorphosed to frogs. He thinks that the
proteus anguinus, which, like tadpoles, has lungs and gills, is but the first stage
of an animal which is prevented from becoming perfect by inhabiting the subterra-
neous waters of Carniola, The larve of tritons always eat up each other’s tran-
sitory organs, — tails and branchi: and almost always the smallest and youngest
among them; so that, although one will live solitarily for three months, it is never
developed without companions. The larve of frogs and toads, after having eaten
their external case (supra, p. 842.), and of some insects, often turn cannibals in the
same cowardly manner. (Goeze. Rusconi. Burdach, § 460.)

The influence of food upon the changes of animals is great. Aphidivorous
flies are larve for eight or ten days, pupx for about a fortnight, and perfect
insects about nearly as long; in the whole not living more than six weeks.
But a pupa deprived of food underwent no change, and lived a pupa for twélve
months, (Kirby and Spence, vol. i, p. 404.)

The infusory animal called cercaria ephemera lives scarcely beyond 6 hours,
being born at noon and perishing before sunrise. The elephant will live between
1 and 2 centuries; and the whale 3 or 4centuries: so small a creature as a parrot
is said to live best part of a century; and such small fish as carp a century, and
the pike between 2 and 3 centuries.


Some champignons live a day or a few days only. Decandolle considers,
from the examination of the tree, and from tradition, that an ash may live 335
years, a cypress 350, a cheirostemom 400, an ivy 450, a maple 500, a larch 576,
a chestnut 630, an olive tree 700, a plane 720, a cedar 800, a linden 1100, an oak
1500, a yew 2000, the baobab of Africa 5000, and a Virginian cypress 6000.
(Physiologie Vegetale, t. iil. p. 1007.)


The masses of inanimate matter are larger than than the animate; and, ex-
cepting some colossal creatures, vegetables, generally, than animals, Most trees
are of great size, and are far more voluminous than any animal, The cocoa-
nut palm grows to the height of 80 feet, living a century, and producing the
greater part of its time at least a hundred cocoa-nuts annually. The fruit of
the Banana or plantain is often a foot in circumference, and 7 or 8 inches in


oe os


1058 PLANTS AND BRUTES,


length ; and is produced in branches usually containing from 170 to 180 fruit,
and each branch weighing from 66 to 88 lbs. avoirdupois. Animals may be
of microscopic minuteness, and few vegetables are so small as many of them.
Ehrenberg has discovered the fossil remains of infusoria. They form extensive
strata of polishing slate in Bohemia. Lach is about the three or four hundredth
part of an inch. A cubic line contains about 23,000,000; a cubic inch about
41,000,000,000. There are 187,000,000 in a grain of the slate ; or the siliceous
coat of one animalcule is the 187,000,000th of a grain. It is to be remembered
too that Ehrenberg (Organisation Systematik und Geographisches Verhaltniss der
Infusions thierchen. Berlin, 1840.) has proved animalcules to have a complicated
organisation, But size is only relative, and we may conceive such animalcules
possible of a size a million times smaller, or even the whole earth, with all the
things it has upon it in ‘their present relative proportion, not exceeding in its
size one of these animalcules,

Before birds and mammals existed, fish and reptiles were of more numerous
species than at present, and generally of enormous size. The hyleosaurus
measured 30 feet ; the iguanodon and the megalosaurus from 70 to 80. Among
quadrupeds, the megatherium of Paraguay and the mastodon of the Ohio and the
Trowadi, were immense. The plesiosaurus was something of both a fish and a
crocodile ; and the pterodactyle, something of fish, reptile, bird, and quadruped.


ee


1059


: CHAP. XXXVII.


DIVERSITIES OF MANKIND.


AccorDING to the growth of each part and of the various por-
tions of each part, we have the infinite differences of bulk, form,
and proportion that characterise each of us: and according to
more minute discrepancies of change are our infinite varieties of
texture, composition, and properties: so that it is barely possible
for two beings ever to have been perfectly alike, even when
at their full growth, in appearance, anatomical structure, chemical
composition, or vital properties —


facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen.


Animals or vegetables are of the same species if they have
sprung from the same originals, orresemble each other as much as
those which are descended from the same originals, or, resem-
bling each other less than this but far more than others, propagate
as readily in perpetuity together. There are 56,000 species of
plants known, — about half the number probably'in existence,
according to Decandolle: and 51,700 of animals.

Animals or plants which agree together as far as this, and yet
differ decidedly, constitute a variety of their species: and, when
an individual of a variety has a difference from others of his va-
riety of an unusual kind, this is a peculiarity. The differences of
variety and the peculiarities may be of extremely various intensity.
The infinite diversities which occur daily, proportioned to each
other infinitely in different individuals, require no description ; for
perfect similarity would strike us as almost a miracle, and the
strong mutual resemblance of two individuals always calls forth
expressions of surprise.

According to the general composition of individuals, whatever
their variety or peculiarity, as shown in their native sensible qua-


1060 TEMPERAMENTS.


lities of hue of skin and hair, firmness or laxity of flesh, &c. &c.,
susceptibility of excitement, &c., the ancients divided the quali-
ties of frame into temperaments.® —

*“« So various are the differences of degree and combination in
_ the temperaments?, that their divisions and orders may be mul-
tiplied almost without end. We shall content ourselves with the
four orders commonly received*:—The sanguineous,— excited
most readily, but slightly: The choleric,—excited readily and
violently: The melancholic, — excited slowly, but more perma-
nently: And the phlegmatic, — excited the most slowly of all, and
indeed with difficulty.

“ This division, although built by Galen upon an absurd found-
ation derived from an imaginary depravation of the elements of
the blood, appears, if made to stand alone, both natural and in-
telligible,”


« « From the endless variety and modification of the conditions belonging to
these four principles,” (fluids, solids, vital and mental powers) “ it may be easily
understood what great latitude must be given to the notion of health.

* For, since, as Celsus long ago observed, almost every one has some part
weaker than the rest, Galen may in this sense assert with truth that no one enjoys
perfect health,*

« And even among those who, in common language, we say are in good
health, this is variously modified in each individual. (W.F. Ad. Gerresheim,
De Sanitate cuivis Homini propria, Lugd. Bat. 1764. 4to.)

** Upon this endless modification is founded the difference of temperaments ;
or, in other words, of the mode and aptitude of the living solid in each individual
to be affected by stimuli, especially the mental ; and again, of the mental stimuli,
to be excited with greater or less facility.”

> « Lavater, Physiognomische Fragmente, t.iv. p. 343.

W. Ant. Ficker, Comm. de Temperamentis Hominwm quatenus ex Fabrica et
Structura Corporis pendent, Gotting. 1791, 4to.

J. N. Hallé, Mém. de la Soc. Médicale @ Emulat. t. iii. p. 342.

To the numerous arguments by which the moderns have overthrown the doc-
trine of the ancients, and proved that the temperament depends on the living
solids rather than on the nature of the blood, J may add the celebrated example
of the Hungarian sister twins, who, at the beginning of the last century, were
born united at the lower part of the back, and attained their twenty-second year
in this state. They were, as is well known, of very different temperaments,
although dissection discovered that their sanguiferous systems anastomosed so
considerably that the blood of both must have been the same,”’

* * Kant, 1, c. p. 257, sq.”


* The same is of course as true of the brain and cerebral functions; and no
one perhaps is perfectly happy in himself.


, TEMPERAMENTS. 1061


The sanguineous temperament is denoted by a full habit, rather
soft fibre, a delicate skin, with large veins, a fresh complexion ;
often red or yellow, and, occasionally, darkish hair; great sensibi-
lity, a quick pulse, free secretions, and a cheerful disposition.

The melancholic, on the contrary, often by a spare habit, by
a firm fibre, a thick, dark, hairy skin, black hair and eyes, and a
dark complexion: a slow pulse, little sensibility, sparing secre-
tions, and a gloomy cast of character; great perseverance in all
pursuits, and constancy of passion.

The choleric lies between the two, and is marked by a softer
fibre, a more irritable habit, a less dark and hairy skin, a more
florid countenance, a quicker and stronger pulse, and a more ir-
ritable mind than the melancholic.

The phlegmatie is characterised by a lax and weak habit, a
pale smooth skin generally destitute of hair, very light hair upon
the head, a slow weak pulse, small blood-vessels, languid secre-
tions, and dulness of mind and feeling.¢

The cheerfulness of the sanguineous temperament, and the
gloom and constancy of the melancholic, are subject to great ex-
ceptions, as they depend much upon the developement of certain
parts of the brain.°

The temperaments may be mingled in greater or less number,
(sanguineo-melancholic, &c. &c.) and in various proportions, so
that, though we often see a temperament single and decided, we
sometimes find it difficult to determine what the temperament is.
Some talk of the nervous temperament, meaning that in which
the excitability is great.


4 See Dr. James Gregory’s Conspectus Med. Theoretic, cap, xxii.

© Upon the independence of the character upon the temperament, see Gall,
l.c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 245. sqq.; Svo. t. ii. p. 142. sqq.

f «© Besides the variety of temperaments, circumstances to which every indi-
vidual is exposed increase, by influencing the nwmber, as well as the energy and
vigour, of the functions, the latitude in which the term health must be re-
ceived. In regard to age, the health of a new-born infant is different from that
of an adult; in regard to sex, it differs in a marriageable virgin and an old
woman past child-bearing, and during menstruation and suckling; in regard to
mode of life, it is different in the barbarous tribes of North America and in
effeminate Sybarites. Moreover, in every person, custom (whose great power
has obtained for it the title of second nature) has an extraordinary influence
(Galen, De Consuetudine. G, E, Stahl, De Consuetudinis Eficacia generali in
Actibus vitalibus, Hal. 1700, 4to. H. Cullen, De Consuetudine. Edinb. 1780.


1062 RELATIVE DEVELOPEMENT OF REGIONS.


A new view of temperaments, to use the author’s expression,
has been published by Dr. Thomas, of Paris.s He arranges
them according to the predominance of the head, chest, or ab-
domen,—the mental, circulatory, or digestive organs: so that
we have,—1. The cranial or encephalic temperament: 2. The
thoracic: 3. The abdominal: with their combinations,—4. The
encephalo-thoracic: 5. The encephalo-abdominal: 6. The thora-
cico-abdominal ; and, lastly, 7. The mixed, in which all three are
equally blended. Men of genius or enterprise are of the first,
Hercules may represent the second, Bacchus the third, and the
Apollo Belvidere the last.

According to the relative bulk of the three regions, will be the
relative energy of the mental, muscular, or abdominal functions.

The idea is exceedingly ingenious, and capable of extensive
application"; but evidently does not interfere with the established
view of temperaments. For every individual is, throughout his
frame, of the sanguineous, or melancholic, &c., and at the same
time has a particular proportion of each of the three regions to
each other.

_ The author is wrong in terming these diversities temperaments,
as they are not diversities of composition (tempero, I mix or pro-
portion ingredients or constituents) but of relative developement
of the three great divisions of the body.


Mankind have been classed according to their external ap-
pearance and to their structure: and the generally approved
division of the chief varieties or races of mankind is that by
Blumenbach.' He makes five varieties: — The Caucasian, Mon-
golian, Ethiopian, American, and Malay. The following are the
characteristics of each.

1. Tue Caucasian. The skin white; the cheeks red,— almost
a peculiarity of this variety ; the hair of a nut-brown, running on
the one hand into yellow and on the other into black, soft, long,
and undulating.‘ .
a oe ee ee ee ee ee es


8vo. C. Natorp, De Vi Consuetudinis. Gott. 1808. 4to.) over every function
v. c, sleep, diet, &c.”

® Physiologie des Tempéramens ow Constitutions, par F’, Thomas, M.D. Paris,
1826.

n See the Phrenological Journal, Oct. 1827,

' De Generis Humani Varietate nativa, sect. iv.

* See supra, p. 272. sq.


>


OE


yw


CAUCASIAN AND MONGOLIAN RACES. 1063


The head extremely symmetrical, rather globular; the fore-
head moderately expanded; the cheek-bones narrow, not pro-
minent, directed downward from the malar process of the supe-
rior maxillary bone; the alveolar edge round; the front teeth of
each jaw placed perpendicularly.

The face oval and pretty straight; its parts moderately dis-
tinct; the nose narrow and slightly aquiline, or at least its dor-
sum rather prominent; the mouth small; the lips, especially the
lower, gently turned out; the chin full and round: —§in short, the
countenance of that style which we consider the most beautiful.

This comprehends all Europeans except the Laplanders and
the rest of the Finnish race; the western Asiatics as far the
Obi, the Caspian, and the Ganges; and the people of the North
of Africa.

Dr. Morton! subdivides it into the 1. Caucasian; 2. Germanic;
3. Celtic; 4. Arabian; 5. Lybian; 6. Egyptian, or Nilotic; 7. The
Indostanic families.

2. Tut MoncotiAn. The skin of an olive colour; the hair
black, stiff, straight, and sparing.

The head almost square; the cheek bones prominent out-
wards; the space between the eyebrows, together with the bones
of the nose, placed nearly in the same horizontal plane with the
malar bones; the superciliary arches scarcely perceptible; the
osseous nostrils narrow ; the fossa maxillaris shallow; the alveolar
edge arched obtusely forwards ; the chin somewhat projecting.

The face broad and flattened, and its parts consequently less
distinct; the space between the eyebrows very broad as well as
flat; the cheeks not only projecting outward, but nearly glo-
bular; the aperture of the eyelids narrow —linear; the nose
small and flat.

This comprehends the remaining Asiatics, except the Malays
of the extremity of the Transgangetic peninsula; the Finnish
races of the North of Europe, -—— Laplanders, &c.; and the Esqui-
maux diffused over the most northern parts of America, from
Behring’s Strait to the farthest habitable spot of Greenland.

Dr. Morton subdivides it into, 8. The Mongol Tartar; 9. The


! Crania Americana ; or a Comparative View of the Skulls of various Aboriginal
Nations of North and South America ; to which is prefived an Essay on the Varieties
of the Human Species. Illustrated by 78 plates and a coloured map, by S. G.
Morton, M.D. Professor of Anatomy in Pennsylvania College, Philadelphia.


1064 ETHIOPIAN AND AMERICAN RACES.


Turkish; 10. The Chinese; 11. The Indo-Chinese; 12. The
Polar, families.

3. ErnropiAN. The skin black; the hair black and crisp.

The head narrow, compressed laterally; the forehead arched;
the malar bones projecting forwards; the osseous nares large;
the malar fossa behind the infra-orbitar foramen deep; the jaws
lengthened forwards ; the alveolar edge narrow, elongated, more
elliptical; the upper front teeth obliquely prominent; the lower
jaw large and strong; the cranium usually thick and heavy.

The face narrow and projecting at its lower part; the eyes
prominent; the nose thick and confused with the projecting
cheeks ; the lips, especially the upper, thick; the chin somewhat
receding. .

The legs in many instances bowed.

This comprehends the inhabitants of Africa; with the excep-
tion of those in the northern parts, already included in the Cau-
casian variety. :

‘Dr. Morton dividesit into, 17. The Negro; 18. The Caffrarian ;
19. The Hottentot ; 20. The Oceanic Negro; 21. The Australian ;
22. The Alforian families, most numerous in New Guinea, the
Moluccas, and Magindano.

4. Tue American. The skin of a copper colour™; the hair
black, stiff, straight, and sparing. ;

The forehead short; the cheek-bones broad, but more arched
and rounded than in the Mongolian variety, not, as in it, angular
and projecting outwards; the orbits generally deep ; the forehead
and vertex frequently deformed by art; the cranium usually light.

The face broad, with prominent cheeks, not flattened, but
with every part distinctly marked if viewed in profile; the eyes
deep; the nose rather flat, but still prominent.

This comprehends all the Americans excepting the Esquimaux.

Dr. Morton divides it into, 15. The American; 16. The Toltecan,
families. The Toltecan family bears evidence of centuries of
demi-civilisation. The American family embraces all the barbarous
nations of the New World, except the Polar tribes or Mongol
Americans. The Esquimaux and especially the Greenlanders
are generally regarded as a partially mixed race, among whom the


™ Dr. M‘Culloch considers that the colour is more that of cinnamon; and
Dr. Morton that the American would more properly be termed the brown race.


MALAY RACE. 1065


physical characters of the Mongolian predominates, while their
language presents obvious analogies to that of the Chippewyans,
who border on them to the south.

5. Tue Matay. The skin tawny; the hair black, soft, curled,
thick, and abundant.

The head rather narrow; the forehead slightly arched; the
parietal bones prominent; the cheek-bones not prominent; the
upper jaw rather projecting.

The face promin€nt at its lower part; not so narrow as in the
Ethiopian variety, but the features, viewed in profile, more distinct ;
the nose full, broad, bottled at its point; the mouth large.

This comprehends the inhabitants of the Pacific Ocean, of
the Marian, Philippine, Molucca, and Sunda Isles, and of the
peninsula of Malacca.

Dr. Morton divides it into, 13. The Malay; 14. The Polyne-
sian (South Sea Island), families.

In the primitive periods of the world, the boundaries between the
habitations of these races were more’distinct. Those between the
Caucasian and Mongolian are vague. In Dr. Morton’s map, the
line adopted runs from the Ganges in a north-western direction
to the Caspian Sea, and thence to the River Obiin Russia. “ At
a comparatively late period, however, several Mongolian nations
have established themselves in Europe, as- the Samoyedes, Lap-
landers, &c.” The Ethiopian line is drawn north of the Senegal
River, obliquely east and south to the frontier coast of Abyssinia,
and thence to Cape Guardafui, thus embracing the Atlas Moun-
tains. “ Of the latter little is known; but many Negro nations in-
habit to the north of them, at the same time that the Arab tribes
have penetrated far beyond them to the south, and in some places
have formed a mixed race with the natives.”

General Remarks. The colour of the hair thus appears some-
what connected with that of the skin, and the colour of the iris
is closely connected with that of the hair, Light hair is common
with a white and thin skin only, and a dark thick skin is usually
accompanied by black hair; if the skin happens to be variegated,
the hair also is variegated; with the cream-white skin of the
albino», we find the hair of a peculiar yellowish white tint; and,


0 Human albinos are men of preternaturally white skin, yellowish white hair,
and red eyes. They spring up among all races and families of men; and they


1066 ALBINOS.


where the skin is marked by reddish freckles, the hair is red.
When the hair is light, the iris is usually blue; when dark, it is
of a brownish black; if the hair loses the light shade of infancy,
the iris likewise grows darker, and when the hair turns grey in
advanced life, the iris loses much of its former colour; the
albino has no more colouring matter in his chorioid or iris than
in his skin, and they therefore allow the redness of their blood
to appear, the latter being of a pale rose-colour and semi-pel-
lucid, the former, from its greater vascularity, causing the pupil
to be intensely red; those animals only whose skin is subject to


are not accounted for except when descended from albinos; for this variety
of body may be hereditary no less than it is connate and irremediable by art,
although colouring matter has been deposited in the hair and eyes, and pro-
bably in the skin, of some albinos as they grew. It is known to be common to
some mammalia and birds, but has never been observed by Blumenbach in cold-
blooded animals. (1. c. §78.) A white rabbit is an instance ofan albino. An al-
bino is a monster by defect; an animal destitute of colouring matter in the skin,
eyes, and nearly so in the hair. The absence of the pigmentum nigrum renders
the eyes extremely sensible to light, whence such persons prefer going out in the
evening. In Wafer’s well-known and amusing account of those he found in the
isthmus of Darien, he says, ‘* They see not well in the sun, poring in the clearest
day ; their eyes being weak, and running with water if the sun shine towards
them; so that in the day time they care not to go abroad, unless it be a cloudy
dark day. Besides they are a weak people in comparison of the others, and not
very fit for hunting and other laborious exercises, nor do they delight in such,
but notwithstanding their being thus sluggish and dull in the day time, yet when
moonshiny nights come, they are all life and activity, running abroad and into the
woods, skipping about like wild bucks; and turning as fast by moonlight, even
in the gloom and shade of the woods, as the other Indians by day, being as nimble
> (Dampier’s Voyages. )

There are imperfect albinos ; or rather instances of less defect than constitutes


as they, though not so strong and lusty.’


an albino. For, as there are among us persons with faintly coloured rete mucosum
and hair and faintly blue eyes, whom very little more defect of colouring matter
would make albinos: —so among Negroes occur individuals with the general
Negro conformation, who have dead-white skins, but reddish and sometimes
reddish brown or even blue and usually weak eyes; sometimes skin like that of
Europeans, but reddish and weak, or faintly blue, eyes, and occasionally black eyes,
so that sometimes there is an approach to the character of the white varieties,
with more or less of the albino character. Sometimes there is only a mulatto skin
and red hair, — an approach to the European without any albino mark.
The skin of these Negroes cracks and even bleeds from the action of the sun.


Blumenbach was the first who conjectured the true nature of the peculiarities
of the albino.


RACES OF MANKIND. 1067


varieties, vary in the colour of the iris ; and if the hair and skin
happen to be variegated, the iris is observed likewise variegated.

The Caucasian head, nearly round, is the mean of the rest ;
while the Mongolian, almost square, forms one extreme, having
the American intermediate, and the Ethiopian the other ex-
treme, having the Malay intermediate, between it and the Cau-
casian.

The Caucasian yariety of face is also the mean, while the Mon-
golian and American, extended laterally, form one extreme, and
the Ethiopian and Malay, extended inferiorly, constitute the
other. In the first of each extreme, viz. the Mongolian and
Ethiopian, the features are distinct ; while in the second, viz. the
American and Malay, they are somewhat blended.

Although this division of mankind is well founded and ex-
tremely useful, it is liable, like every artificial division of natural
objects, to many exceptions. Individuals belonging to one
variety are not unfrequently observed with some of the charac-
teristics of another?; the characteristics of two varieties are


© The hair is frequently of different shades in different parts.

John Hunter remarked that the iris in brutes agrees principally with the
colour of the eyelashes.

However various the colour of the hair in horses, the iris, he also observes, is
always of the same. But then the hair is always of the same at the birth, and the
skin does not participate in its subsequent changes, being as dark in white as in
black horses. In cream-coloured horses, indeed, there is an exception, — the
iris agrees with the hair, but then the foals are originally cream-coloured and the
skin is cream-coloured. (J. Hunter, On the Colour of the Pigmentum of the Eye in
different Animals, |. c. p. 247.)

P « Sooty blackness is not peculiar to the Ethiopian, but is occasionally found
in other varieties of men very different and remote from each other, in the Bra-
zilians, Californians, Indians, and some South Sea Islanders ; and among the
latter, the New Caledonians form an insensible transition with the chestnut-
coloured inhabitants of Tongatabu from the tawny Otaheitans to the black New
Hollanders.’” (Blumenbach, I. c, § 43.)

«* Although the Americans thus possess a pervading and characteristic com-
plexion, there are occasional and very remarkable diversities, including all tints
from.a decided white to an unequivocally black skin.” (Dr. Morton.)

«‘ Some tribes of Ethiopians have long hair (Bruce on the Gallas; African
Institution on the people of Bornu); on the contrary, some copper-coloured
people have the crisp hair of the Ethiopian (the inhabitants of the Duke of York’s
Island, near New Ireland; vide Hunter, Historical Account of the Proceedings
at Port Jackson), Again, the hair of the New Hollanders, specimens of which
I have now before me, is so perfectly intermediate between the crisp hair of the


4A


1068 RACES OF MANKIND.


often intimately blended in the same individual (indeed all the
four varieties run into each other by insensible degrees)4; and


Ethiopian and the curly hair of the islanders of the Pacific Ocean, that there has
been much diversity of opinion, from the first Dutch to the latest English tra-
vellers, to which of the two varieties it should be referred. As to the varieties
of colour existing among nations whose hair is usually black, we have sufficient
authority for asserting that numerous instances of red hair occur in all the three
last varieties.” (Blumenbach, 1. c. § 52.)

« The Caffres and the people of Congo have hair not unlike that of Europeans.
Even the Foulahs, one of the Negro tribes of Guinea, have, according to
Mr. Park, soft, silky hair: on the other hand, the inhabitants of many other
countries resemble the Africans in their hair, as the savages of New Guinea, Van
Diemen’s Land, and Mallicollo. And in the same island some of the people are
found with crisp and woolly, others with straight hair, as in the New Hebrides.
In New Holland there are tribes of each character, though resembling in other
particulars.” (J. C. Prichard, M.D., Researches into the Physical History of Man,
Ed. 1. p. 83.)

In some of the group of the New Hebrides, as Tanna, Annaton, Immer, &c.,
the people twist their locks of hair with the fibre ofa plant so as to make their hair
hang straight over the shoulders. Mr. George Bennett informs me that he has
seen woolly hair in these islands, rendered straight by this mode ; but naturally
straight hair in New South Wales only.

«“‘ Many tribes of the Negro race approach very near to the form of Euro-
peans. ‘The Jaloffs of Guinea, according to Park, are all very black, but they
have not the characteristic features of the Negro, —the flat nose and thick lips:
and Dampier assures us that the natives of Natal in Africa have very good limbs,
are oval-visaged, that their noses are neither flat nor high, but very well propor-
tioned, that their teeth are white, and their aspect altogether graceful. The same
author (Dampier’s Voyages) informs us that their skin is black, and their hair
crisped. Norare others of this diversity more constant. In the native race of
Americans, some tribes are found, who differ not in the characters in question
from Europeans. ‘ Under the 54° 10’ of north latitude,’ says Humboldt, < at
Cloak-bay, in the midst of copper-coloured Indians, with small long eyes, there
is a tribe with large eyes, European features, and a skin less dark than that of
our peasantry.” Humboldt’s Essay on New Spain, translated.’’ (Dr. Prichard,
l.c. p. 62. note b.)

“ The features of the inhabitants of the Friendly Islands are very various,
insomuch that it is scarcely possible to fix on any general likeness by which to


i « The Tartars of the Caucasian variety pass by means of the Kirghises and
neighbouring people into the Mongoles, in the same manner as these by means
of the people of Thibet into the Indians, by means of the Esquimaux into the


Americans, and by means of the Philippine Islanders even in some measure
into the Malays.” (Blumenbach, lc. § 86.)


RACES OF MANKIND. 1069


instances continually occur of deviation in one or more particulars
from the appearances characteristic of any variety"; so that the
assemblage rather than individual marks must frequently be
employed to determine the variety.

It appears that the affinities of the languages of the various
races of mankind do not alter with this arrangement according
to external appearance ; — that people are united by affinities of
some kind or other in regard to language who belong to different
varieties of form, and vice versd.§

Particular Remarks. The Caucasian race is pre-eminent in
all those mental and corporeal particulars which distinguish man
from brutes. It is to the two sexes of this variety that Milton’s
lines apply, —

«‘ For contemplation, he and valour, formed ;
For softness she, and sweet attractive grace.” *


The cranium is very capacious, the area of the face bears to
its area but a proportion of one to four, and projects little or not
at all at the lower parts: the intellectual faculties of its indi-
viduals are susceptible of the highest cultivation, while the senses
of smelling, hearing, and seeing are much less acute than in dark
nations. Philosophy and the fine arts flourish in it as in their
proper soil.

The Ethiopian race when instructed by the Caucasian has
produced instances of mental advancement great indeed, but
inferior to what the latter is capable of attaining. ‘There
scarcely ever,” says Hume, “ was a civilized nation of that com-


characterise them, unless it be a fulness at the point of the nose, which is very
common. But on the other hand we met with hundreds of truly European
faces, and many genuine Roman noses among them.” (Cook’s last Voyage.
Vol. I. 330.)

«¢ Similar examples,” remarks Blumenbach on this passage (I. ¢. § 55. note)
<¢are observed among Ethiopian and American nations; and, vice versd, the
resemblance of individual Europeans to Ethiopians and Mongoles is very fre-
quent and has become even proverbial.”

r See note. p. 1067.

s See Dr. Prichard’s Abstract of a Comparative Review of Philological and
Physical Researches as applied to the history of the human species in the Report
of the First and Second Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science. London, 18338.

t Paradise Lost, book iv. 297.

4A 2


1070 ETHIOPIAN.


plexion, nor even an individual, eminent either in action or spe-
culation. No ingenious manufactures amongst them, no arts,
no sciences. On the other hand, the most rude and barbarous of
the whites, such as the ancient Germans, the present Tartars,
have still something eminent about them, in their valour, form
of government, or some other particulars.”* Blumenbach, how-
ever, possesses English, Dutch, and Latin poetry written by
different Negroes, and informs us that, among other examples of
distinguished Negroes, a native of Guinea, eminent for his inte-
grity, talents, and learning, took the degree of Doctor in Philo-
sophy at the University of Wittemberg, and that Lislet of the Isle
of France was chosen a corresponding member of the French
Academy of Sciences. ‘ Provinces of Europe,” says he, “ might
be named, in which it would be no easy matter to discover such
good writers, poets, philosophers, and correspondents of the
French Academy ; and, on the other hand, there is no savage
people which have distinguished themselves by such examples of
perfectibility, and even capacity for scientific cultivation, and,
consequently, that none can approach more nearly than the Negro
to the polished nations of the globe.”* This mental inferiority
is attended of course by a corresponding inferiority of the brain.
The circumference, diameters, and vertical arch of the cranium
being smaller than in the European y, and the forehead particu-
larly being narrower and falling back in a more arched form,
the brain in general, and particularly those parts which are the
organs of intellect properly so called, must be of inferior size.
The orbits, on the contrary, and the olfactory and gustatory, or,
rather, masticatory, organs being more amply evolved, the area
of the face bears a greater proportion to the area of the skull, —
as 1:2 to 4; the proportion is greater in the orang-outang, and
inthe carnivora nearly equal.” The senses here situated, as well
as that of hearing, are astonishingly acute, though not only in
this, but also in the three following varieties, and the correspond-
ing nerves, at least the first, fifth, and facial, of great size.a


" Hume, Lssays. Part 1. Essay 21. note M,

* Beytriige sur Naturgeschichte, th.i. p. 98.

¥ Sommerring, De basi cranii et originibus nervorum cranio egredientium.
* Cuvier, Légons d’ Anatomie Comparée.

a Soemmerring, 1. c,


The native Americans pursue their enemies through the desert by the sense of


ETHIOPIAN. 1071


The ossi nasi lie so flatly as to form scarcely any ridge; the
face, as we have formerly seen, projects considerably at its lower
part»; the lower jaw is not only long but extremely strong; the


smell, and have distinct terms for the odour of a European, a Negro, and an
American Indian. (Humboldt, Political Essay on New Spain. Translated. vol. i.
p. 245. Haller, El. Phys.) The Kalmuks have extraordinary smell, sight, and
hearing: and perhaps careful examination would prove that their taste, if not
touch, is very acute. They scent fires and camps at a great distance, and have
only to be near the habitation of a brute to know whether it is there or not.
They lie flat on the earth with their ear to the ground, and at a still more ex-
traordinary distance learn the noise of cavalry in march, the place occupied by a
suspected enemy, by a herd ef brutes, or even a solitary one. ‘ The greater part
of Kalmuks can discover upon the plain steppe the smallest objects — the dust
caused by a drove of cattle, or a body of cavalry, notwithstanding the difficulties
which occur during the summer, the peculiar undulation of the surface of the
ground, and the vapours which arise from it in a pure atmosphere, during the
great heat of these countries. In the expedition which Oubachi, vice-khan of
the Torgots, made against the people dwelling below Kouban, the Kalmuk
army would certainly have missed the enemy had it not been for a Kalmuk
of the common class, who, whilst he was feeding the horses, discovered from a
moderately elevated position at the distance of 30 versts, the smoke and dust
of the enemy’s army. He pointed it out immediately to those not less accustomed
than himself, whilst Colonel Kidimski, even by the assistance of a telescope, could
perceive nothing.” (Dr. Prichard, Researches, &c. Ed. 3. vol. i. p. 264. sq.)
Negroes in the Antilles can distinguish blacks from whites in pursuit by the same
sense. The body of every man has doubtless a peculiar odour, though the in-
ferior races only enjoy the sense of smell sufficiently acute to make very nice dis-
tinctionsin regard to it. In them, too, the odour is much stronger. I recollect
walking one night, many years ago, with a physician to the house of a poor man
in the suburbs of London. The wife came to the door with a candle in her
hand, and, opening a dark room on one side of the passage, begged me to walk
into it while she lighted the physician to her husband. My nose was presently
struck by a very strong smell, something like that of the outsides of bacon,
indeed exactly that’of some specimens of creosote. At the return of the light I
perceived three or four little mulattos asleep in a sort of bed, and after leaving
the house the physician informed me that the woman’s husband was a black.

b Camper (Dissertation Physique sur les Differences réelles, que présentent les
Traits du Visage chez les Hommes de différens Pays et différens Ages) gives the fol-
lowing proportions of the facial angle :


£uropean a s & 80 or 90
Chinese “ Bs 2 75
Negro a - . 70
Orang-outang - - a 58
Monkey - _ 2 42


to72 ETHIOPIAN.


chin not only not prominent but even receding, and the space
between it and the lower teeth is small, while that between the
upper teeth and the nose is large; the meatus auditorius is nearer
the occiput, — more remote from the front teeth than in the Eu-
ropean; the foramen magnum occipitale lying farther back, (but
this is now denied by Dr. Prichard¢), the occiput is nearly
in a line with the spine; the body is slender, especially in
the loins and pelvis, whose cavity likewise is small; the length
of the fore-arms and fingers bears a large proportion to that
of the os humeri; the os femoris and tibia are more convex, and
the edge of the latter, according to a remark of the late Mr. Fyfe
of Edinburgh to me, very sharp; the calves are placed high; the
os calcis, instead of forming an arch, is on a line with the other
bones of the foot, which is of great breadth; the toes are long;
the penis large and frequently destitute of frenum. Mr. White,
from whom many of these remarks are derived, describes the
testes and scrotum as small. Dr. Billmann of Cassell has ob-
served that the stomach is shorter, and more globular at its cardiac
extremity; and the observation is confimed by Soemmerring, who
finds that of the ape still shorter’; the skin is thicker *, and,
finally, the term of life generally shorter, that in Europeans.
Nearly all these facts demonstrate rather a less distance of the
Ethiopian than of the European from the brute creation. But-with


.


Mr. White of Manchester (Essay on the regular Gradation) states them rather
differently :


: European - - - 80 to 90
Asiatic - - - 75 80
American - - . 10). 98
African - - - 60 70
Orang-outang—- - - 50 60
Monkey - - - 49, 50


Cuvier gives 75° for the facial angle of the young orang-outang,
Art. i.

© lic. vol. i. p. 290. Ed. 3. 1836.

“ Mem, of the Bavarian Acad. of Sciences, vol. viii. p. 77. sqq.

“ The temperature of the Negro has been said to be two degrees cooler than
that of Europeans: and the voluptuous therefore to prefer a Negress in summer,
a fair Circassian in spring and autumn, and an European brunette in winter,


M. Douvier, however, asserts that the temperature of Negroes is higher than that
of whites. (Journ, de Chimie, 1832, p. 97.)


lc. viii.


ETHIOPIAN BRAIN AND SKULL. 1073
7


an inferiority to the Caucasians so slight if compared with his
immense superiority over the most intelligent brutes, so insensibly
running into the Caucasian and all the other varieties in point of
intellect, so liable to innumerable diversities of conformation
though he does bear some resemblance to brutes, and so certainly
bearing no more resemblance to them in some points nor so much
in others as many tribes of other varieties, the poor Negro might
justly class those of us who philosophically view him as merely a
better sort of monkey, or who desire to traffic in his blood, not
only below himself but below apes in intellect, and below tigers
in feeling and propensity.


“ Indica tigris agit rabida sum tigride pacem
Perpetuam. Svzevis inter se convenit ursis.” f


Professor Tiedemann says that the average weight of European
brains is from 3 lbs. 2 0z. to 4 Ibs. 6 oz. troy: but the average of
four Negro brains, from which he drew his conclusion, will be
found to be only 3 Ibs. 5 oz. 1 dr., or 3.0z. above the lowest Euro-
pean average ; and the highest Negro brain falls 5 oz. short of the
highest average European, and no less than 10 oz. short of Cuvier’s
brain, which weighed 4 lbs. 11 oz. 4 dr. 30 grs. Dupuytren’s
weighed 4 lbs. 10 02.

If we take the average of the length of the brains of the four
Negroes, it will be found to be 5 inches 11 lines: but that of seven
European males, which he examined for comparison, 6 inches
21 lines. The average greatest breadth 4 inches 8 lines in the
former: 5 inches 1+ line in the latter. The average height is
2 inches 114 in three of the four Negroes: 3 inches 4 lines in the
Europeans. He adds that “ the anterior portion of the hemi-
spheres is somewhat narrower than is usually the case with
Europeans.”

The average capacity of 41 Negro skulls in his tables will be
found to be 37 oz. 1dr. 20 grs., or, if those which were female
are subtracted, 37 oz. 6 dr. 18 grs.: that of 77 European skulls
of every nation, in his own tables, 41 oz. 2dr. 30grs.¢ Dr.
Morton, however, after examination of 29 skulls of unmixed
Negroes, 9 of them native Africans, states the mean internal ca-


f Juvenal. Sat. xv. 163.
§ Phil. Trans. 1836, Pt. ii.
AA 4


1074 ETHIOPIAN BRAIN AND SKULL,


pacity of Caucasian skulls to be 87 cubic inches: and of the
Negro to be only 78." The most capacious European skull was
109: the least 75. The most capacious Negro skull, 98: the
least 65.

In the face of his own results, Dr. Tiedemann declares that the
opinion of Camper, Soemmerring, Lawrence, Virey, Cuvier, &c.,
— that the Negro has a smaller skull and brain than the Euro-
pean, is “7/ founded and entirely refuted by my researches!” he
declares that the weight and the size of the Negro brain is as great
as those of the European! ‘“ Here, then, on Tiedemann’s own
showing,” says Dr. Andrew Combe, who has pointed out these
contradictionsi, ‘ we have, first, an inferiority in the dimensions
of the Negro brain, and a greater narrowness of its anterior lobe ;
and secondly, a marked inferiority in the capacity of the Negro
skull to the extent of about ;/,; and yet he very strangely infers
that both are equal to those of the European: and the Royal So-
ciety, and half our scientific men and journals, adopt and propa-
gate both facts and inferences as literally correct and of vast im-
importance! Ifthe phrenologists had perpetrated such a series
of blunders, Sir William Hamilton and his allies would have
shouted in triumph over their stupidity.” But science has other
cause to blame the medical members of the Council of the
Royal Society for disgracing the Transactions with Professor
Tiedemann’s paper ; the principal purpose of which was to prove
that neither anatomy nor physiology can justify our placing even
the Negro beneath the European in a moral and intellectual point
of view. They ought to have known that, had he shown the
Ethiopian brain to be as large as the European, he would not
thereby have shown that the Ethiopian intellect was equal to the
Zuropean. There is no fact better established in nature than
that the different parts of the brain, like different parts of the
nervous system at large, have different functions: and that some


h Crania Americana,

i Remarks on the Fallacy of Professor Tiedemann’s Comparison of the Negro
Brain and Intellect with those of the European, in G,and A. Combe’s Translation of
Gall on the Functions of the Cerebellum, and Answers to the Objections urged against
Phrenology by Drs. Roget, Rudolphi, Beclard, and Tiedemann. Edinb. 1838.—
a work in which the ignorance of phrenology, the inconsistencies, and feebleness
of these anti-phrenologists is admirably exposed; also Phren. Trans. No, lii.

K p. 525.


ETHIOPIAN BRAIN AND SKULL. 1075


parts are destined for intellectual and some for moral functions
or feelings. As the size and weight of the brain must depend
upon the size and weight of both these, it is evident that two
brains may be of equal size, and yet the one be very large
in portions devoted to intellect and small in those devoted to
the feelings: while another is poor in the intellectual portions and
large in those devoted to the feelings: and a brain may be large
or small in regard to certain intellectual or moral powers only.
If the medical members of the Council did not know these
things, their ignorance rendered them unworthy of their seats.
— “ Sic parvis componere magna’”—they, and Professor Tiede-
mann, remind us of Cassini and Miraldi who were calculating the
paths of comets on the most imaginary and unfounded hypotheses
long after Halley had constructed tables, on the principles of
Newton, in which the motions of all comets that ever have or
could appear might be easily deduced. They stand surrounded by
myriads of phrenological facts and see them no more than the wild
animals see the geology of the tracts which they inhabit.!


1 Itis amusing to observe poor Dr, Tiedemann advancing to phrenology.
Not many years ago it was thought wicked by many and absurd by others to
consider the brain as the organ of the mind. When Sir Joseph Banks ruled
the Royal Society, his parasite, Sir Everard Home, so influenced the fellows,
that at Sir Joseph’s Sunday assemblies I have heard it stated that no facts
showed the brain to have more than the foot to do with the mind. Then, as to
the idea of size haying any relation with power, that is scoffed at still. But
Dr. Tiedemann in his paper says, “ The brain of men who have distinguished
themselves by their great talents is often very large.” ‘* The brain of men en-
dowed with but feeble intellectual powers is, on the contrary, often very small,
particularly in congenital idiotism. The brain of an idiot 50 years old weighed
but 1lb. 8 oz. 4dr.: and that of another at 40 years of age weighed but 1 Ib.
11 oz. 4 dr.” —* It is remarkable that the brain of a man 82 years old was very
small, and weighed but 3 lbs. 20z. 3 dr.: and the brain of a woman above 80
years old weighed but 2lbs. 90z. 1dr. I have generally found the cavity of
the skull smaller in old men than in middle-aged persons. It appears to me
therefore probable, that the brain really decreases in old age, only more remark-
ably in some persons than in others.” Thisis pretty well. But he now becomes
bolder. There is undoubtedly a very close connection between the absolute
size of the brain and the intellectual powers and functions of the mind. This is
evident from the remarkable smallness of the brain in cases of congenital idiotism,
few such exceeding in weight the brain of a new-born child.” “ The brain of
very talented men is remarkable on the other hand, for its size! ”

Dr. Tiedemann proceeds, ‘* Tyson” (The Anatomy of a Pygmy) “was the first


1076 ETHIOPIANS.


‘¢'The unconscious admiration which that traveller detected
himself in bestowing on the native beauties, affords,” says the


who dissected the brains of an orang-outang, and of a Jocko or Chimpanzee, and
says he found no difference between them and the human brain. His own words
are, ‘ The brain is reputed the more immediate seat of the soul itself; one would
be apt to think that since there is so great a disparity between the soul of a man
and a brute, the organ likewise in which it is placed should be very different too :
though by comparing the brain of our Pygmie with that of a man and ex-
amining with the greatest exactness each part in both, it was very surprising to
me to find so great a resemblance of the one to the other, that nothing could be
more. Buffon, relying on Tyson’s researches says, ‘Le cerveau de l’orang-outang
est absolument de la méme forme et de la méme proportion, et il ne pense pas ;
y-a-t-il une preuve plus evidente, que la matiére seule, quoique parfaitement
organisée, ne peut produire ni la pensée ni la parole, qui en est le signe, a moins
quelle ne soit animée par un principe superieur.’” Dr, Tiedemann then sub-
joins that his dissections prove the brain of the orang-outang as well as that of
monkeys to differ from the human brain in being absolutely and relatively
smaller and lighter, shorter, narrower and lower ; smaller’comparatively with the
size of the nerves ; the hemispheres smaller relatively to the chorda spinalis and
oblongata, cerebellum and corpora quadrigemina, thalami, and corpora striata ;
and in having fewer gyri and sulci. He does not remind his readers that Gall
‘had represented the brain of an orang-outang in his Atlas, and written these
words above 20 years before: —‘ Buffon allowed himself to believe, through
the false observations of Tyson, that the brain of the orang-outang is iden-
tical with the human. However, Tyson contradicted himself; for, while in one
passage he declares the cranial bones of the orang-outang to resemble exactly
those of men, he in another part points out a great difference with respect to the
frontal and the orbits.” ‘‘ The dimensions of its brain are at the utmost those
of a new-born child. Besides, its difference from the human in its shape and
convolutions are such as must strike the humblest observer,”’ (4to. vol. ii. p. 368.
1812.) ‘ Inthe first place, the difference of their volume isas 5 to 1, their convo-
lutions differ considerably in number and structure ; the anterior lobes, especially,
are contracted into a cone, flattened above, hollow below; and the difference is
still more remarkable in other simiz.” (8vo. t. vi. p. 278.; see supra, p. 34.) Was
Dr. Tiedemann ignorant of this? I am convinced he was not ; for the passage is
in the volume of Gall which contained 118 pages of powerful exposure of the
errors and injustice that exist in Dr. T.’s anatomy of the brain and the writings
of two of his French supporters, He must have presumed upon a large share of
ignorance in the Royal Society when he transmitted to it a paper so replete with
error, and written as if Gall’s discoveries had never been made. He thus con-
tinues.
* Desmoulins (Journal de Physique, 1820.) is of opinion that the brain de-
creases in size in old people. From this circumstance he explains the diminu-
tion of the functions of the nervous system and intellectual powers. The truth


MALAYS, MONGOLIANS, AND AMERICANS. 1077


writer of a critique of Major Denham’s Travels in Africa™, “ one
more example of this truth, — that, however much Europeans
may have doubted whether Negroes were men, there has never
been a difference of opinion as to whether Negresses were
women.”

The skin of the Negro has a peculiar velvet-like softness, and is
lubricated by an oily secretion.

The Malays have but little hair upon the chin, and possess a
great developement of the sides of the head above the ears.

The Mongolians are remarkably square and robust; their
shoulders high; their extremities short and thick.

The Americans have small hands and feet, and are nearly des-
titute of beard. Shorter in the forehead than the Mongolians,
they have not so great intellectual distinction.

The greatest difference between the Toltecan and American
family is in the intellectual faculties. “In the arts and sciences
of the former are seen the evidences of an advanced civilisation.
From the Rio Gila in California, to the south-eastern extremity
of Peru, their architectural remains are every where encountered
to surprise the traveller and confound the antiquary ; among these
are pyramids, temples, grottoes, bas-reliefs, and arabesques ; while
their roads, aqueducts and fortifications, and the sites of their
mining operations, sufficiently attest their attainments in the
practical arts of life.” ‘The desert of Atacama divides the


of this assertion has not yet been determined.” (p. 502.) Gall is not worthy to be
quoted on this point! <I have generally found the cavity of the skull smallerin
old men than in middle-aged persons. It appears to me therefore probable that
the brain really decreases in old age.” (p. 502.) Why Gall had said many years
before, from extensive research,—‘‘as age advances the brain lessens, wastes,
shrinks.” (8vo. t.ii. p. 158.) At about 60, “the brain begins to decline,” and “ the
anterior inferior parts diminish sooner than the others.” (p. 431. ; also t.iii. p. 48.)
‘¢ In extreme old age the brain atrophies and senile dementia takes place.” (t. iii.
peo) = All the cerebral mass lessens towards old age, but not equally so in
all parts at the same time.” (p.149.) See 4to. vol. ii. p. 256. sq, 407. sq. 1812.

Dr. T. asserts that “the brain arrives, on an average, at its full size towards the
7th or 8th year!” ‘ Galland Spurzheim are of opinion that the brain continues to
grow till the 14th year.” Why Gall says “ the brain of most men has hardly ar-
rived at its full growth before 30 years: often not before 40,” (4to. vol. iii, p. 17.;
Svo. t. iii. p. 31.)

m Westminster Review. 1826,


1078 AMERICANS.


kingdom of Peru from that of Chili, and is nearly 100 miles in
length: a river abounding in salt runs through it. This desert
was the favourite sepulchre of the Peruvian nations for successive
ages. ‘The climate, salt and sand, dry up the bodies; and the re-
mains of whole generations of the former inhabitants of Peru may
now be examined, after the lapse perhaps of thousands of years.”
At a cemetery of ancient Peruvians, for example, near Arica, the
surface is covered with sand an inch or two deep, under which is a
stratum of salt 3 or 4 inches in thickness that spreads all over the
hill. The bodies are in a squatting posture, with the knees drawn
up, and the hands applied to the sides: and all « enveloped ina
coarse but close fabric with red stripes, which has withstood, won-
derfully, the destroying effects of ages, for these interments were
made before the conquest.” “Dr. Morton has been enabled to ex-
amine nearly 100 Peruvian crania, and concludes that that country
has been, at different times, peopled by two nations of differently
formed crania, one of which is perhaps extinct, or at least exists
only as blended by adventitious circumstances, in very remote and
scattered tribes of the present Indian race.” “Of these two
families, that which was antecedent to the appearance of the
Incas is designated as the ancient Peruvian, of which the remains
have been found only in Peru, and especially in that division of
it now called Bolivia. Their tombs, according to Mr. Pentland,
abound on the shores and islands of the great Lake Titika, in
the inter-alpine valley of the Desaguadera, and in the elevated
valleys of the Peruvian Andes, between the latitudes of 14° and
19° 30° South.” “ Our knowledge of their physical appearance is
derived solely from their tombs.” The extinct group in Peru was
succeeded by the Incas or modern Peruvians, who date their « pos-
session of Peru from about the eleventh century of our era; and,
as this period corresponds with the epoch of the migration from
Mexico of the Toltecas,—the most civilised nation of ancient
Mexico, Dr. Morton concurs in the opinion expressed by other
authors, that the modern Peruvians were of a common origin
with the ancient Mexicans.” “ The modern Peruvians differ little
in person from the Indians around them, being of the middling
stature, well limbed, and with small feet and hands. Their faces
are round: their eyes small, black, and rather distant from each
other; their noses are small, their mouth somewhat large, and
their teeth remarkably fine. Their complexion is a dark brown;


~


AMERICANS. 1079


>


and their hair long, black, and rather coarse.” ‘Their civilisation
and comparative refinement were blended with some remains of
the ferocity of the savage. ‘‘ Matrimonial engagements were
entered into with very little ceremony or forethought, and they
were as rudely set aside at the option of the parties. Polygamy
was lawful but not prevalent.” ‘Incontinence, sensuality, and
child-murder, were common. ‘Their diet was chiefly vegetables.
The people were indolent, filthy, and negligent in their persons.
The hair of their mummies, in many instances, is charged with de-
siccated vermin. ‘Their religious system was marked by great sim-
plicity, and was divested of those bloody rites which were common
withthe Aztecs of Mexico. They believed in one God, whom
they called Viracocha, in the immortality of the soul, and in re-
wards and punishments in the next life. They worshipped both
the sun and the moon, in whose honour they erected temples
and formed idols. They consecrated virgins in the same manner
as practised in modern convents. Their funeral rites were barba-
rous and cruel: when their chief men died, they burned a number
of human victims, women, boys, servants, to attend on the de-
parted in the next world. They were conquered by Pizarro with
a force which consisted of 62 horsemen and 202 foot soldiers.”
«‘ The skull in these people is remarkable for its small size, and
for its quadrangular form. The occiput is greatly compressed,
sometimes absolutely vertical ; the sides are swelled out, and the
forehead is somewhat elevated, but very retreating. The skulls
are remarkable for their irregularity.” Among 23 adult skulls
of the pure Inca family, “the mean of the internal capacity is
73 cubic inches, which is probably lower than that of any other
people now existing, not excepting the Hindoos.” “The mean
of the anterior chamber is 32; of the posterior 42; of the coronal
region, 12 cubic inches. The highest measure of the coronal
regionis 205; and the smallest 9°25 cubic inches. The mean facial
angle is 75 degrees. The heads of 9 Peruvian children appear to
be nearly, if not quite, as large as those of children of other
nations at the same age.”

The small size of the brain of this family, compared with that
of the Europeans who invaded them, is in accordance with the
ease with which it was overcome and retained in subjection.
‘‘ The deficiency in the posterior region of the brain, in which the
organs of the domestic affections are situated, corresponds with


1080 AMERICANS.


their feeble conjugal attachment and indifference to the lives of
their children.” The diameter between the organs of the sense
of construction is 4*5 inches, and between those of poetry 5:1.
« These organs give a talent for art and are considerable. The
same measurements inthe Naumkeagh, the” group “which occupied
New England, and whose skulls are still dug up near Boston and
Salem, and which never made any attainments in the arts, are
4°] and 4 inches, respectively. Dr. Robertson, in his History of
America, mentions that the modern Peruvian” group “was distin-
guished for its extraordinary powers of concealment and secrecy:
the breadth between the two organs of cunning, is 5*6 inches,
which is large: the longitudinal diameter only 6-1.” The organ of
courage is very deficient.

“The barbarous nations possess a larger brain than the Tol-
tecans ; while, on the other hand, the 'Toltecans possess a greater
relative capacity of the anterior chamber of the skull, in the
proportion of 42:3 to 41°8. Again, the coronal region, though
absolutely greater in the barbarous tribes, is rather larger in pro-
portion in the demi-civilised tribes: and the facial angle is much
the same in both, and may be assumed, for the race, at 75 de-
grees.” Dr. Morton, whose labours were prosecuted without any
view of supporting phrenology, confesses, in his Preface, “I am
free to acknowledge that there is a singular harmony between
the mental character of the Indian, and his eranial develope-
ments, as explained by phrenology.”

Dr. Morton considers, ‘* 1. That the American race differs essen-
tially from all others, not excepting the Mongolians: nor do the
feeble analogies of language, and the more obvious ones, in civil and
religious institutions and the arts, denote any thing beyond casual
or colonial communication with the Asiatic nations; and even
these analogies may perhaps be accounted for, as Humboldt has
suggested, in the mere coincidence arising from similar wants and
impulses in nations inhabiting similar latitudes. 2. That the
American nations except the Polar tribes are of one race and
species, but of two great families, which resemble each other in
physical but differ in intellectual character. $. That the cranial
remains discovered in the mounds from Peru to Wisconsin belong
to the same race, and probably to the Toltecan family.

“The American family itself contains several subordinate groups.
1, The Appalachian branch includes all the nations of North


AMERICANS. 1081


America, except the Mexicans, together with the tribes north of
the River Amazon and east of the Andes. 2 The Brazilian
branch is spread over a great part of South America east of the
Andes, viz. between the Rivers Amazon and La Plata, and be-
tween the Andes and the Atlantic, thus including the whole of
Brazil and Paraguay north of the 35th degree of S. latitude. In
character, these nations are warlike, cruel, and unforgiving.
They turn with aversion from the restraints of civilised life, and
have made but trifling progress in mental cultivation or the useful
arts. In character, the Brazilian nations scarcely differ from the
Appalachian ; none of the American tribes are less susceptible of
cultivation than these ; and what they are taught by compulsion,
in the missions, seldom exceeds the humblest elements of know-
ledge. 3. The Patagonian branch includes the nations south of
the La Plata, to the Straits of Magellan, and the mountain tribes of
Chili. They are for the most part distinguished for their tall
stature, their fine forms, and their indomitable courage; of all
which traits the Auracanians possess a conspicuous share. 4. The
Fuegian branch, which roves over a sterile waste, computed to
be as large as one half of Ireland. Forster computes their whole
number at only 2000 persons. ‘Their physical aspect is altogether
repulsive, and their domestic usages tend to heighten the defects
of nature. The expression of the face is vacant, and their mental
operations are to the last degree slow and stupid.”

Not only have the five races their distinctive characteristics,
but the different nations comprehended in each variety have each
their peculiarities, both mental and cerporeal ; among the Cauca-
sians for example, the Germans, French, Spaniards, and English
are extremely different from each other. Nay, the provinces of
the same country differ, and the families of the same province, and,
in fact, every individual has his own peculiar countenance, figure,
constitution, form of body, and mental character. Each no doubt
is as different from others in various points of his microscopic
anatomy, his minute composition, and his minute delicacies of
function and properties, as in countenance. Any one may have
some extraordinary conformation, perhaps amounting to monstro-
sity, or some extraordinary property,— a real monstrosity in his
physiology, such as susceptibility of deleterious influence from
something which is innocuous to most others: or susceptibility of
peculiar influence from some agents which affect most people


1082 MALFORMATIONS,


in another manner. Innate disposition to certain organic or
functional disease, independent of external agency, comes under
the same head.


The degrees of native peculiarity of formation have different
names. Hereditary changes, not consistent with soundness, that
take place after an organ has existed for a shorter or longer time
sound, are termed unhesitatingly diseases. But, if a part has an
unusual anatomical character from birth, it is said to be mal-
formed. Throughout nature, there is a great tendency to vary
the means of all purposes. What is accomplished with one animal
in one way, is accomplished differently with another: the varieties
of nature’s means for the same end are infinite. The same tendency
to variety is observable in the structure of the same species and
varieties of animals. In the human subject we are seldom dis-
appointed in expecting the natural structure of the spine, great
vessels, or important viscera; but it is not very uncommon to
find the brachial artery dividing near the axilla, the obturatrix
arising from the epigastric, the palmaris or plantaris muscle
wanting, the biceps having an additional slip from the os humeri,
or the latissimus dorsi one from the angle of the scapula, or the
spleen accompanied by one or more little ones. These merit the
name of varieties only ; and in the arrangement of minute blood-
vessels, the length of bony processes, and other little insignificant
matters, there exists so much uncertainty that it would be dif-
ficult to say which is the natural structure. In truth, were we all
alike, there would be the confusion of indistinguishableness.
The existence of small moles can hardly be deemed even a va-
riety ; large ones may be considered such. Deviations of a more
striking and uncommon character are called dusus nature. Such
are the absence of colouring matter in the hairs and in the cutis and
iris in Albinoes (supra, p. 1066.) ; spots and patches of white in the
skin of piebald Negroes ; and of brown and black, often seen with
tufts of hair, in truth, very large hairy moles, in whites ; a different
colour of the whole or of a portion of one iris, of the eyelashes of
one eye, or of some of the hair of the head ; the cuticle of the por-
cupine family (supra, p. 270.); the course of the vena porte to the
inferior cava, without) distribution in the liver (supra, p. 96.); the


MALFORMATIONS. 1083


:
malformations of the heart in the morbus ceeruleus (supra, p. 241.) ;
the situation of the heart on the right side", and the general trans-
position of the thoracic and abdominal viscera®; oval irides ;
irides entirely deficient under the centre of the pupil ; a bifid
uvula, the two parts sometimes very distant, and the soft palate
deficient above; a bifid glans penis, with two frana; gill-like
openings in the side of the neck at birth?; the termination of
the urethra behind the glans, or in the vagina; a double uterus

deficient vagina; deficiency of tendinous parietes of the abdomen,
so that a connate ventral hernia exists; a supernumerary, whole
or partial, thumb or toe: an instance of each of which, and more
than one of several, I have myself seen with the exception of
the unusual course of the vena porte, and of the branchial open-
ings in the neck. If the deviation among visible parts is still
more considerable, and, indeed, though it be much less than those
of invisible parts, but, by being obvious, greatly disfigures, it is
termed a monstrosity. Such was the deficiency of the upper
extremities from below the shoulders in Miss Biffin, whom most
frequenters of English fairs must have seen, and of the arms and
legs in Mare Catozze4, the Venetian, whose hands were attached
to his shoulders, and his feet to his hips or thighs; absence of
the radius and ulna on one side, between the os humeri and hand,
or of one or more metacarpal bones; absence of the front of the
bladder and abdominal parietes, so that the ureters terminate and
discharge urine externally ; or of the phalanges ; or an additional
fore-arm and hand, or even head; are not so rare but that I have
seen them also, and in the living subject. I have seen an additional ©


* I saw an instance of this in the museum at Edinburgh; it occurred also at
the Hotel Dieu, (Winslow, Mém. del’ Acad. 1743.) See three cases in Shen-
kius, p. 310.

° Sir Astley Cooper has lately made a beautiful preparation from an old
woman whose abdominal and thoracic viscera were all so transposed.

‘p Eleven such cases are published by Mr. Ascherson at Berlin, See Dr. J.
Johnson’s Med. Chir. Review, April, 1834.

9 Eccentric Mirror, vol. ii,

* I think there was shown me an additional head at the side of the other ina
human foetus, both at Edinburgh and Vienna, and once I witnessed this in a
living calf, In the Hunterian Museum are the two skulls of a child that was the
son of a native farmer in the East Indies and lived to be four years old, The
additional one was placed upside down upon the top of the other, Each contained


4B


1084 MALFORMATIONS.


head in museums. Zacchias saw a globular head upon the clavicle
without the intervention ofa neck.s Extreme hairiness of the skin,
such as described at p.275., is a monstrosity; the absence of gastroc-
nemii is a lusus nature.t Similar aberrations from nature’s usual
plans out of the animal kingdom were designated ostenta, portenta,
prodigia’, from the notion of their being ominous ; whence the
opinion of Cicero is highly probable that these aberrations in the
forms of human beings are called monstra from the superstition of
their pointing out something that will happen ; not, as Licetus*
contends, because they are shown as sights. Whatever may have
been the reason of the appellation, it clearly implies something
visible, obvious to all; which circumstance is the reason that
mere degree of deviation does not constitute a monster, and that
visible disfigurement is requisite to the idea; whence the defini-
tion of the most learned Zacchias,— ‘an animal formed enor-
mously different from the goodness and simplicity of figure belong-
ing to its species.” ¥

Varieties, lusus nature, and monstrosities, may all be arranged
accordingly as they are excesses, deficiencies, or misplacements. ‘To
this classification of monsters by Buffon? unnatural formations


a brain, invested by its own dura mater, and the upper received its blood from
the lower. The features of the upper head were sometimes unaffected when the
lower head cried, and were never affected when it smiled. The gums of both
were cut by front teeth. When the nipple was presented to the upper head, it
made a slight attempt to suck. The tears of the upper head constantly ran over,
but especially when the lower head cried. The eyes of the upper head would
open on a sudden impression, but even then, as well as at all other times, were
directed to no object: they remained open during sleep. The mouth of the
upper head showed signs of gratification when the lower sucked. The upper
head had much less sensibility. (Phil. Trans. vols. 1xxx. and Ixxxix.)

Winslow saw, in 1698, an Italian with an additional little head, attached by
the lower half of the right side of the face and cranium to the thorax, below the
cartilage of the third rib. It had been separately baptized, and the man felt if it
was touched. (Mém. de 0 Acad. des Sc. 1733.)

Sle. De Monstris.

t Three cases will be found in M. Paletta’s Evxercit, Patholog.

« Ostendere, portendere, predicere.

* De Monstris.

¥ le.

* Histoire Naturelle, Supplement. t. iv. p. 578.


MALFORMATIONS. 1085


are added by Blumenbach *, as a part may be malformed, although
neither excessive, defective, nor misplaced.

Butfon’s arrangement relates to whole organs ; but, were it
applied to portions of them also, Blumenbach’s fourth class would
be exceedingly small. For instance, when the anterior part of
the urinary bladder and corresponding integuments are absent,
the ossa pubis not conjoined, and the posterior part of the bladder
projects between the recti abdominis muscles, forming, by its
mucous lining, a soft, red, sensible protuberance on the lower
part of the abdomen, contiguous at its circumference with the com-
mon skin, with the ureters opening upon it, and constantly allow-
ing a free passage to the urine, this is really a case of deficiency
as far as respects the bladder, integuments, and ossa pubis, and of
misplacement as respects the recti muscles. Spina bifida is a
case of deficiency ; the hare-lip, which is often accompanied by
a cleft in the palate also, and a bifid glans penis, again, are in
fact examples of deficiency. Another instance adduced is a single
cyclopic eye in the middle of the forehead, —a monstrosity which
is a misplacement of each eye, for the organ is plainly always
two united; or of a union of the two kidneys into one. The
propriety of applying these subdivisions to deviations of portions
as well as of the whole of organs is proved by the occasional
deficiency or redundancy of portions only, vc. when the arm
Between the shoulder and hand, or only the front of the urinary.
bladder, is absent. But the termination of the rectum in the
bladder or vagina, its termination without an Opening, and a
vascular tumour of the skin called nevus, fairly belong to this
fourth subdivision, they being instances neither of excess, defect,
nor misplacement, but of unnatural formation.

Few cases are unmixed. Defect, excess, or misplacement, are
often, sometimes indeed necessarily, combined with unnatural
formation: and not unfrequently excess, defect, and unnatural
formation, all make up the derangement together.

There may be different kinds of deviation in different parts of


4 Although these arrangements are intended for monsters only by Buffon,
and for the more striking malformations by Blumenbach, they may be applied to
all deviations.

> Handbuch der Naturgeschichte, s.ii. See a compilation of malformations by
Mr. Lawrence, Med. Chirurg. Trans. vol. v.


4B Q


1086 MALFORMATIONS.


the same subject; and it -is worthy of notice that considerable
deviations are generally accompanied by minor ones of other
parts. Spina bifida and club feet very frequently co-exist. When
the brain is absent, so that the foetus has no forehead and looks
like a cat (called in Germany hatzenkopf), there is often some-
thing wrong about the extremities or the viscera of the trunk ;
and absence of heart is said to be always accompanied by con-
siderable deviations in other parts.

The highest degree of deviation may combine the extremes of
more than one of the four subdivisions, and sometimes presents a
being very like a brute. In old books we read of women bringing
forth dogs, pigs, monkeys, nay, even lions, elephants®, and fish4,
and even little devils with hoofs, claws, horns, tail, and a black
skin®, since intercourse with such beings was two centuries ago
thought common enough and monsters were ascribed to it.

As an instance of the lowest degree of unnatural formation, I
may mention a minute opening in the lachrymal sac on the side
of the nose of a young lady whom I know: the highest degree is
perhaps instanced in some malformations of the heart. The lowest
degree of misplacement is exemplified when a testis is placed for
life in the groin: the highest is perhaps witnessed in the trans-
position of the viscera.f The lowest degree of defect is instanced
in the absence of a toe or the gall-bladder: the highest, where

_only the lower half of the trunk with the lower extremities, or only
one extremity, exists. In excess the addition may be merely at-


¢ Shenkius, Obs. Med. 691.

4 Roederer, Dissertation couronnée a Petersbourg.

Licetus, De Monstris, with plenty of plates, shows what can be done in the
way of incredible cases.

e After many learned examples of women loved by brutes and devils, to
which monsters were ascribed, Burton gravely declares, “« Many divines stiffly
contradict this, but I will conclude with Lipsius, that since examples, testimonies,
and confessions of those unhappy women are so manifest in this our town of
Lovan, it is likely to be so. One thing I will add, that I suppose in no age past
(1 know not by what destiny of this unhappy time) have there ever appeared
or showed themselves, so many lecherous divels, satyrs, and genii, as in this of
ours, as appears by the daily narrations and judicial sentences upon record.”
(Anatomy of Melancholy, 3.2, 1.1.)

f Mr. Lawrence refers to five examples of this, and some of the subjects were
adults, and one lady died at 72 years of age. Sir Astley Cooper’s subject had
reached old age.


MALFORMATIONS. 1087


tached, or may be mingled with the same part into one larger.
The lowest degree of excess is where there is an additional spleen
or toe: the highest, where a considerable portion of a second being
is attached. Zacchias saw at Rome, in 1617 and 1623, a well-
formed handsome boy, named Lazarus Coloreto, from whose chest
there grew another, with only one leg, and that too short ; muti-
lated arms; a hideous face, a thick head unable to take food,
perpetually dribbling, and with no sense but that of touch, which
he showed by moving himself when pinched, and who had been
christened John Baptist. 8


8’ The poor people very consistently thought he must have a soul as well as
_ Lazarus, and so baptized him. Zacchias disapproves of this, and very reasonably,
as the brain showed no intelligence ; being compelled to measure mind solely by
cerebral power, and, seeing none, to conclude that John Baptist had nosoul. Yet
though this was reasonable, it was very inconsistent with his belief in soul, since,
according to it, John Baptist’s case was exactly like that of all idiots: — A soul
existed, but merely because the brain—the instrument it had to play upon, was
bad, its operation was prevented. Zacchias, who was chief physician at Rome
to the ecclesiastical states, extricates himself from the difficulty as cunningly as
the Jesuits did when publishing Newton’s doctrine as a mere hypothesis. “ Latis
a summis pontificibus contra telluris motum decretis nos obsequi profitemur,”
said they. “ Ecclesia Catholice, in hoc et in ceteris omnibus, humiliter me sub-
jicio,” says Zacchias. (I. c. vii. 1. 4—17.) The manifestation of mind must
determine whether a monster should have the rights of a human being, and its
parents those of fruitful spouses. Without some mind, it cannot live at all after
separation from the mother, unless attached. to another; but should it have no
more senseand volition than is sufficient for breathing, it ought not to be destroyed.
Two women, one a midwife, were prosecuted at York for drowning a child with
deficient cranium that would probably have lived but a few hours or days. The
judge expressed a hope that the prosecution would prove the erroneousness of
the vulgar opinion that the law allows the life of any human being to be taken
away by another. In former times, all monsters were destroyed without cere-
mony, as the offspring of the devil. Many mothers, among brutes, devour their
offspring if it is monstrous, and sometimes even if, on account of having been got
by a male of another species, it does not resemble them.

Montaigne saw a boy exactly fourteen years old, who had a headless brother
fixed front to front, looking ‘* as if a small child was endeavouring to embrace
a bigger.” The place of union was below the breasts, and about the extent of
four fingers, so that “if you lifted up the imperfect child, you saw the other’s
navel.” (Zssais, ii. 30.) Winslow saw attached to the body of a well-formed
girl, twelve years of age, the abdomen and lower extremities of another smaller
than herself. It discharged feces, and she felt when it was touched. Winslow
was consulted upon the propriety of administering extreme unction to it as well
as to its sister. (Mém, de Acad. des Sciences, 1733,) If it had a soul and required

4B 3


1088 DOUBLE CHILDREN.


When there is no great difference in the size of the two beings,
the case can hardly be styled an excess, or at any rate either
party has an equal right to consider the other the exuberance.
Such were the Hungarian sisters described by Buffon, who were
united at the back below the loins. All the viscera were double;
but the recta and vagine of both formed one common opening.
The aorte and inferior cave also united. They menstruated,
evacuated, felt hungry, slept, and were ill at different times, but
of course died together." One was rather stronger than the


baptism, Van Helmont was right in placing the soul in the abdomen. A male
pelvis with lower extremities attached to the pubes of a well formed Gentoo boy
is described in the Phil. Trans. vol. xxix. The lad had no power over his burthen-
some piece of a brother, but felt if it was touched. In the medical journals for
1821, is an authentic case of a lad in China, sixteen years of age, named Ake, who
had a brother growing to the pit of his stomach, without a head, so that this at-
tached brother seemed as if he had run his head into Ake’s body. Whatever part
of this was touched, Ake said he felt as if the same in his own body was touched,
and really, on the narrator pinching the little one’s hip while Ake was looking
the other way, Ake instantly turned about and clapped his hand upon his own
hip. When Ake made water the little one always did the same. A similar
case was more lately published in the second volume of the Medico-Chirurg. Trans.
of Edinburgh,in which the perfect brother could discharge urine at pleasure from
his pendulous brother. Dr. Vulpes (Istituzioni di Pathologia Generale, t. i. p. 65.)
says that there is, in an anatomical museum at Naples, a healthy foetus with a
mass hanging from its mouth containing the fragments of another, Many other
such cases are recorded, .

* The following epigram, related by Petrarch, was inscribed on stone figures of
a similar pair, christened Peter and Paul.


“‘Non vero nobis unus somnusque cibusque
Nec risus nobis, fletus et unus erat.
Unus membra dabat somno, ridebat et alter,
Surgebatque unus, flens quoque et alter erat.”
(F. Petrarch, De Rer, Mem. iv. 6. 21.)


Two Italian sisters with one abdomen and one pair of lower extremities, but
two chests, necks, heads, and sets of upper extremities, — in fact a double being
above the centre of the body, were seen at Paris a few years ago. (London Med.
Gazette, 1830.) They were christened Ritta and Christina, and-I deposited a
white plaster cast of them in the museum of St. Thomas’s Hospital, on which I
wrote, nearly from Horace,


—-~ “ Quales neque candididiores
Terra tulit; neque queis nunc sit devinctior ulla.”


PARASITIC MONSTERS. 1089


other, and dragged her sister with her when they wished to go
in contrary directions, and they sometimes quarreled when one
only wished to retire; but fortunately Judith and Helen were
extremely fond of each other. They attained the age of twenty-
one. Most of us have seen the Siamese brothers, united by a
band at the sides of their trunk, and equally united in affection,
and who are now active and happy young men.

One of the most extraordinary compound monsters is de-
scribed by M. Maunoir, of Genevai, and the subject is preserved
in our Hunterian Museum. The two children of which it was
composed may be fancied to have been divided transversely,
the two upper halves united at the cut part, and the two lower
likewise, and then the two compound pieces laid across each
other.

The additional being is sometimes not united in this way, but
contained in a cyst, and attached to the exterior of the other. A
perfect child was born in Devonshire, in 1746, with a tumour at-
tached to the sacrum, containing the rudiments of a foetus.‘

The second child, thus encysted, is occasionally placed inter-
nally, and may at last cause serious inconvenience. At Genoa,
in 1699, a boy, fourteen years of age, had a perfect foetus taken
from his abdomen, through an opening made in a very large
tumour just above the umbilicus, that had been increasing from
his birth... A girl, five years old, born at Dangerhorst, proved to
have in her abdomen all the distinct parts of a foetus." The
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society has published the case of
a boy in whose abdomen was a cyst containing all the parts of a
foetus; and of a girl, two years and a half old, who had a large
tumour in the left side, occasioned by a cyst with parts of a
foetus.2 I recollect that the former case was at first generally dis-
believed, and, when believed, regarded as an unheard-of novelty
by a large number of the profession. A boy who had reached
his fifteenth year in good health was found by Mr. Highmore in
Dorsetshire to bear in his abdomen a pretty large imperfect female


i Med. Chir. Trans. vol. vii.
k Phil. Trans. vol. xlv. p. 325.
1 Said to be related in the Thesaurus Med. Chir. Observat. curios. Leipsix,
slg llse
m Said to be related in Lieutaud’s Observ. Med. fase. i. 1760.
» 1809 and 1815.
4B 4


1090 PARASITIC MONSTROSITY.


feetus.0 Bartholin relates that a Mrs. Joan, wife of Nicholas
Peter, produced a pregnant feetus.P A boy, fourteen years of
age, was some years ago discovered after death, at Paris, to have
the rudiments of a foetus in his abdomen4 ; and in the last century
one at Tours.s A girl at Naumburg became such a kind of a
mother in eight days from her births M. Velpeau lately removed
a tumour from the scrotum of a man 27 years old, which had
grown all his life and contained portions of various bones.t <A
male greyhound is said to have voided a live whelp per anum, at
Chester, in 1695.". A mule is declared to have been produced
in Spain with another mule in its abdomen: a cow to have pro-
duced a calf in Hungary with another in its abdomen.* An egg
has sometimes been contained within another.”

When an incomplete feetus is attached to or contained in one
that is complete, the case is called parasitic monstrosity. When
two perfect children are united, the case is called one of a double
child. The frequency of males with parasitic members is to that
of females as 34 to 14. The frequency of female double children
to that of male is 129 to 40. Feetuses with the parasitic attached
to their surface are males in the proportion of 26 to 6 females;
males and females with the parasitic in their interior are in equal
proportion. In cases of external attachment by an extreme point,


© Case of a Foetus, &c. 1815,

P Cent. vi. hist. x.

4 Corvisart’s Journal, t. ix. Gazette de Santé, No. 1. 1804. Saltz. Med.
Chirurg. Zeitung, 1804. 4 b. 290. ; all referred to by Plouquet as for three dif-
ferent cases.

* Journ. de Méd, 1755.

* Dict. des Sciences Méd. art. Cas rares,

‘ Gazette Médicale. Paris, Feb. 1840.

“ Phil. Trans, xix. p. 316.

* T. Bartholin, Ephemerid. Nat. Cur. 1670. dec. 1. an. 1. Moles are there men-
tioned as containing foetuses: and Aristotle and A8lian quoted for foetal mice con-
taining others.

¥ Grew, Rarities, p.18. Phil. Trans, xix. Pp. 632. Gentleman’s Magazine,
XViil. p. 573.

Harvey, Exerc, xi.de Generatione Animal, p. 86., who showed it to Charles the
Second and a large assembly,

T. Bartholin says, “ Qvwm pregnans alio ovo hisce diebus anno 1669 rusticus mihi
ostendit.” (Ephemerid, Nat. Curios. dec. 1. ann. 1670.) In the scholion to this
observation are mentioned several instances of a lemon within a lemon (one seen
by Harvey), and an instance of an apple within an apple,


PROPORTIONS OF MONSTROSITIES. 1091


Q


the only example, — junction of the head, occurred in a male; 3
out of 5 instances of junction by the pelvis were females.”

Of the same nature as parasitic monstrosity are perhaps certain
cases in which hair and sebaceous fat, and frequently teeth, are
found collected. - The hair has no roots, and occasionally is in
immense quantity; the greater part making a compact ball, and
the rest immersed in the fat. The teeth are generally molares,
and have no fangs. The usual seat of these collections is the
ovaria, but then it is the ovaria of virgins. A case lately occurred
in which the mass was situated in the anterior mediastinum of a
young woman, 2] years of age, and consisted of serous fluid, hair,
fat, two cuspidati, two incisores, and three molares, a portion of
bone resembling the superior maxillary, and alveolar processes
around several of these teeth.2 Such a mass has been situated in
the loins of a gelding; — probably in a testis which had not de-
scended.>

The greater number of monstrous formations are discharged
prematurely. Autenrieth found 3 abortions monstrous out of
19 whose parts could be distinguished; Wrisberg 2 among
5; and Ruysch 2 in 12:—altogether 7 to 29. Sommerring
counted 7 monstrous out of 29; and, of 47 acephalous foetuses
mentioned by Dr. Tiedemann, 33 came away by miscarriage.¢
Even if there are twins, one perfect and one acephalous, the head-
less child is almost always born the first, and sometimes a whole
day before the other.

The number of female exceeds that of male monsters: but
Burdach, who contends that the female is the superior being,
urges that this circumstance does not favour the idea of her in-
feriority, because monstrosities are more common among the
superior than the inferior brutes, and in brutes than the human
subject.@

A sound offspring is frequently born at the same time with a
monstrous production, and monstrous productions occasionally
alternate with well-formed children. The same observations hold


= S216. 1.and. 2.

a Med, Chir, Trans. London, 1825. vol. xiii.

> Baillie’s Morbid Anatomy.

© Autenrieth, Supplementa ad Historiam Embryonis.
d § 215,


1092 NATURE OF MONSTROSITIES,


respecting giants and dwarfs; and respecting black or white
children of parents of different colours.

Sometimes one unusual formation only occurs ina large family :
sometimes several, just as in the case of a dwarf or giant, and
perhaps in immediate succession.

Most monstrosities arise from a stage of growth, which naturally
is but transitory, not giving place to another, but becoming
permanent. Thus fissures are caused by the want of growth
towards each other of parts which should at length unite length-
wise. The arrest of growth may be earlier, so that instead of a
fissure there is an uncovered cavity. When this is seen in the
spinal chord (spina bifida) or brain, the osseous case is generally,
but not always, deficient correspondently as well as the skin, so
that the only covering is the serous membrane. It isthe cause of
all degrees of hare-lip. Consequently umbilical hernia is a want of
growth of the margin of the umbilical opening: and there is usually
no stoppage, but slowness of growth, and nature at length cures
the defect. A high degree is when the bladder is seen, and is
itself deficient in front. The open state of the foramen ovale or
canalis arteriosus is a similar example; or the existence of bran-
chial openings in the neck at birth.

Parts may not open in due time, as when the membrana pupil-

laris is close at birth, or the meatus auditorius is shut up by a mem-
brane at birth or in adult age; or the rectum or skin over it or
both are imperforate. The skin may remain a flat covering to the
limbs instead of developing into cylinders.

Portions of organs which should be formed subsequently to other
portions sometimes do not grow forth at all, or imperfectly, as
when the labyrinth remains alone without cochlea or semicircular
canals, or as when the forearm has fingers and no carpus. The
limbs may remain disproportionately short or even as mere buds.
The skin may remain continuous between the fingers and toes in-
stead of at length opening. The intestine may remain shut and
without convolutions.

A part may be absent altogether, either not having been de-
veloped beyond a small point and this having been absorbed, or
not having existed in the least.

The want of progress in the various parts of the heart give rise
to numerous malformations of the organ.

The growth may not proceed so as to change the direction of a


NATURE OF MONSTROSITIES. 1093


part, as when a child is still club-footed after birth. The natural
change of position may not take place, as when the testes do not
reach the scrotum.

As some parts should grow proportionably small again, their
great size may show a defect of growth, as when the appendix
vermiformis or the tongue remains very large, or the mouth very
wide, or the liver as large after birth as it should be in the last
periods of the foetal state.e Arrest of developement may cause a
part which should be single to consist of more than one portion, if in
one stage of its developement it is made up of distinct portions.

Monstrosity may arise again from excess of developement. An
instance of this is when the stomach is divided by a depression
into a cardiac and pyloric portion.

An arrest of due change may cause a part to remain in a po-
sition which it cannot change; as when the heart remains parallel
with the axis of the body.

All monstrosities, however, cannot be explained by some stop-
page or excess of the course of developement. Where there
is a superabundance, as two heads, there has originally in all
probability been an excess, — too much germ, or a fraction of the
germ of another child. But the union of two children or of parts
of two children, or of one and a part of another, is itself no arrest
of developement, but anew circumstance. There may be on the
other hand an original defect of germ, so that no developement
of an organ shall take place at all.

Proper secretion may not take place: as when the pigmentum
nigrum, which should be secreted about the fifth month, does not
appear, and an albino is produced. There may be a monstrosity
from perversion of developement, —a misdirection, or misplace-
ment, or faulty composition. Anomalies of the origin of blood-
vessels, transposition of organs, and texture of parts foreign to
them at all stages of developement, are examples of this.

The growth, and all other changes as well as those of form, of
any part or portion of parts may be arrested at any period of
them, so as to make no further progress.

For a stage to be perfect, the preceding must have been perfect.


€ Dublin Journal, 1834, April. One unacquainted with the course of deve-
lopement might injure such a child with the treatment of diseased liver. In
some cases the large size may perhaps remain without injury through life, like
near-sightedness.


1094 MONSTROSITY.


But the perfection of a preceding stage does not insure perfec-
tion in the subsequent. Bad tendencies in any organ may be de-
veloped, like good ones or changes quite unimportant, at various
ages.

It is remarked that malformation more frequently takes place at
a late than an early period of feetal existence, when higher
powers of developement are required.

Sometimes proper growth may take place, but too slowly ; some-
times too early. Precocious and late puberty are examples of this.
Youths, who from want of due changes in the heart’s structure
were bluish, have lost this hue from the heart having at length
grown properly. Growth may proceed too rapidly and go too
far ; or may proceed too slowly and stop too short.

Different kinds of malformation, excess, defect, &c. may occur
in the same individual: and different kinds in different members
of the same family : showing a general tendency to malformation.

Blumenbach says that, as the human being passes through so
many changes of the brute structure, “ human monsters are not
unfrequently met with strongly resembling the form of brutes,
because the nisus formativus, having been disturbed and ob-
structed from some cause or other, could not reach the highest
point of the human form, but rested at a lawer point and produced
a bestial shape. On the contrary, I have never found among
brutes a true example of monstrosity which, by a bound of the
nisus formativus, bore any analogy to the human figure.” Cer-
tainly, Dr. Fletcher remarks, “a man” “ with fewer than five fingers
approximates in structure to the Hog, the Sheep, or the Horse, but
a Hog with more than four, or a Sheep with more than two, or a
Horse with more than one — and such monstrosities are not very
uncommon — approximates equally in structure to man.”

There are limits to malformation. The lungs are never found in
the cranium or the brain in the pelvis. The intestines and aorta
never form one canal.

Sometimes the excess of developement of one part is attended
by deficient developement of another ; as when there is too large
a number of fingers on one hand, and too small a number on
another. An excess of one part very frequently attends deficient
developement of another : —too many fingers often accompanying
spina bifida, hare-lip, or imperforate anus. Two bodies have often


f Rudiments, Pt. i. p. 70,


HEREDITARY RESEMBLANCE. 1095


no head. Supernumerary parts may experience an arrest of de-
velopement. Sometimes one child has an excess and another a
defect: a girl had 12 fingers and 12 toes, but her sister had a
thumb only on one hand.

Internal parts are less subject to excess or defect than external :
and parts supplied by encephalo-spinal nerves less subject to mal-
formation of any kind than those supplied by the ganglionic.

Malformation of certain parts generally involves that of others.
When the cervical enlargement of the spinal chord does not exist,
the upper extremities are always absent.

Parts which should be distinct are sometimes united, merely
because the part which separates them is defective: as when the
two eyes are but one on account of the absence of the ethmoid
bone and of the internal part of the orbit and the existence of
the nasal bones above the eyes. 8

Some monstrosities have arisen from the accidental destruction
of a part; as when an early accumulation of serum has com-
pressed a part and thus caused not only its non-developement
but its absorption. M.Velpeau has found an arm of a fcetus
before the full time just ready to drop off.


Animated beings have a general tendency to produce offspring
resembling themselves and progenitors, in form, structure, com-
position, and all qualities. By this law eagh animal exists as it is:
— aman is aman; a horseis a horse; and an oak is an oak. Not
only the species, but the varieties and the minutest peculiarities


& On the subject of malformation, consult Meckel, Sommerring, Geoffroy St.
Hilaire, Serres, Beclard, Tiedemann, &c. The two halves of the body are seldom
so well developed as to be perfectly correspondent. The two sides of the head
are often different: and jewellers tell me that rings do not equally fit the same
finger of each hand, —that the right is generally the larger. Parts of the body
that are single and not situated in the centre were originally double and sym-
metrical, but naturally have been developed more in one portion than another,
and have taken a direction from the centre for the purpose of convenience. An
aberration in any of these points is a cause of monstrosity.

Most persons are right-handed. No satisfactory reason is given for this ; but I
presume it depends upon a minute difference of structure in the nervous or
muscular system of the two sides. We are as right-footed too, though I never saw
this noticed. For I believe that most extra-exertions, as kicking, are executed far
better with the right leg than with the left. When people are left-handed, is not
this analogous to monstrosity ?


1096 HEREDITARY RESEMBLANCE.


of the individual in both structure, and composition, and pro-
perties are transmitted. Through the most delicate shade of
manner, corns, the mode of affection by medicines, and morbid


poisons.
** Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis ;
Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquile columbam,”»


The offspring of two of the same race may frequently resemble
both parents, but the proportion of resemblance to each, both on
the whole and in regard to particular parts, is various, —some
children favouring the father most, some the mother, though usually
resembling each enough to preserve a family likeness, and some re-
sembling one parent almost'solely i,—some parts being as it were
an equable compound of the same in both parents, (as the skin in
the mulatto offspring of a black and white,) some an unequal com-
pound, (as when the offspring of a black and white is white with


4 Horace, lib. iv. Od. 4.

' Dr. Parsons (Phil. Trans, vol. lv.) relates that in Virginia two black slaves
of the lady from whom he learnt the fact, married together, and produced a
. white girl. ‘* When the poor woman was told the child was like the children of
white people, she was in great dread of her husband, declaring at the same
time, that she never had any thing to do with a white man in her life, and
therefore begged that they would keep the place dark, that he might not see it.
When he came to ask how she did, he wanted to see the child, and wondered
why the room was shut up, as it was not usual. The woman’s fears increased
when he had it brought into the light ; but while he looked atit he seemed highly
pleased, returned the child, and behaved with extraordinary tenderness. She
imagined he dissembled his resentment till she should be able to go about, and
that then he would leave her ; but in a few days he said to her, ‘ You are afraid
of me, and therefore keep the room dark, because my child is white; but I love
it the better for that; for my own father was a white man, though my grand-
father and grandmother were both as black as you and myself; and although we
come from the place where no white people were ever seen, yet there was always
a white child in every family that belonged to us.” The woman did well, and
the child was shown about as a curiosity ; and was, about the age of fifteen, scld
to Admiral Ward, and brought to London in order to be shown to the Royal
Society. Dr. Parsons received an account from an eye-witness of a white woman
in York marrying a black, and producing a child « entirely black, and in every
particular of colour and features resembling the father, without the least par-
ticipation from the mother.” <A friend of Mr. White’s, named Beazley, met a
Negress in a stage with a black and white child, the production of her English
husband, (On the Regular Gradation, p- 123. sq.)


HEREDITARY RESEMBLANCE. 1097


patches of black or with merely a black penis*,) and others again
similar to the same as seen in one parent only: and it is remark-
able that the resemblance to the parents, whether in regard to
common or uncommon peculiarity, is occasionally not observed
in the immediate offspring, but re-appears in the third or even a
later generation.


‘“« Fit quoque, ut interdum similes existere avorum
Possint, et referant proavorum szpe figuras,
Propterea, quia multa modis primordia multis
Mista sua celant in corpore szpe parentes,

Que patribus patres tradunt a stirpe profecta.
Inde venus varia producit sorte figuras ;


Majorumque refert vultus, vocesque, comasque.” !


A similar circumstance is that of one sex transmitting cer-
tain qualities of its parent of the sex, opposite to its own sex,
to its children of that sex. For example, a mother brings forth
sons with such modifications of the sexual organs as existed in her
father: or a son produces daughters with the sexual peculiarities


k Phil. Trans. vol. lv.

« A black man servant to a gentleman who lived in the neighbourhood
of Gray’s Inn, married a white woman who lived in the same family; and
when she proved with child took a lodging for her in Gray’s Inn Lane.
When she was at full time the master had business out of town, and took his
man with him, and did not return till ten or twelve days after this woman was
delivered of a girl, which was as fair a child to look at as any born of white
parents, and her features exactly like the mother. The black at his return was
very much disturbed at the appearance of the child, and swore that it was not
his ; but the nurse who attended the woman soon satisfied him, for she undressed
the infant and showed him the right buttock and thigh, which were as black as
the father, and reconciled him immediately to both mother and child, I was in-
formed of the fact, and went to the place, where I examined the child and found
it was true.” (Dr. Parsons.)

A man, the son of a white father and black mother, is said to have kept a
public house in Tooley Street, white in his right half and black in his left: a man,
the son of a black father and white mother, resident in Prescott Street, Goodman’s
Fields, and named Clark, to have been black below his navel, and white above ;
and a girl, born in Somersetshire, in 1759, of a black haired father and carroty
mother, to have have had, after she was grown up a little, hair of jet black
on the right side of her head, and carroty on the left. (Zoological Magaz. vol.
xii. p. 369. quoted by White, On the Regular G'radation, p. 122.)

Bartholin, Hist. Anat.

Schurig, Spermatologia, p. 146.

1 Lucretius, lib. iv, We call this Atavism ; the Germans, Riickshlag.


1098 HEREDITARY RESEMBLANCE.


of his mother. ‘The property of milking,” in the words of
an experienced breeder, “is inherited as readily as that of pecu-
liarity of shape.” ‘ In the selection of bulls, besides attending to
those properties which belong to the male, we ought to be careful
also, that they are descended from good milkers, at least if we
wish the future stock to possess this property.”™

As the different properties of both parents may be pretty well
blended in the offspring, we may sometimes by breeding suc-
cessively from offspring and one of the original parents, at length
produce an offspring exactly resembling this parent. Some dis-
solute Europeans are said to have begun with a black woman, and
copulated with their offspring'till they made her the great-grand-
mother of a white.

National features, form, and in a great measure even character,
arise from a nation marrying among themselves, and will be more
marked in proportion to the rarity of connection with foreigners.
Hence the amazing peculiarity of the Jewish race.»


™ Mr. Wilkinson, in Mr, Walker’s Intermarriage, p. 343.

" The advantage of crossing breeds is well known, and may be explained by
the transmission of the parent’s qualities. If any unfavourable deviation in
' Structure or constitution occurs, and is transmitted, and the descendants who
receive it hereditarily intermarry, the .deviation is doubly enforced in their
offspring, whether the effects have manifested themselves in both parents, in
one, or in neither: but, if a connection is made with another family or breed, it
is, on the contrary, diluted. The brain suffers perhaps more than any other
organ, ‘The Royal families of Europe, subjected to absurd restrictive rules
in their marriages, are a lamentable proof of the ill effects of the marriage
of relatives. Imbecility or insanity, in one degree or other, occurs in nearly
every Royal family of Europe. It is amusing, when travelling on the Conti-
nent, to contrast the wretched legitimate heads on the money with the full
front of Napoleon. The rich Jews in this country have the same bad custom of
marrying first cousins; and I never saw so many instances of squinting,
stammering, peculiarity of manner, imbecility, or insanity, in all their various
degrees, intense nervousness, &c, in an equal number of other persons. The
custom in Royalty is but one of the many absurdities to which barbarous times
have left it still a slave: in the Jews it arises from their never liking to marry
a person poorer than themselves, their desire to keep their money in their own
families, and from the intensity of all the domestic attachments among this kind-
hearted and ill used people, so that cousins are attached before love begins,
and this is but a little transition. Could a race, however, have all its wants well
supplied and, at the same time, have no unhealthful habit, so as to acquire no
yendency to unfavourable deviation, and have no latent disposition from old proge-
nitors to any, I do not think that the soundness of breeds would require crosses,


HEREDITARINESS. 1099


It appears that, when animals of different species or of the same
species but of varieties very different from each other, are connected,
the offspring is of an intermediate type,—a mule: but, when the
animals are of different varieties only and varieties not very dis-
similar, the offspring resembles generally one parent only or all but
entirely. Thus an Englishman and a Negro woman produce mules,
—mulattos; but the half-caste offspring who marry with a white
will produce children, some entirely white, some dark like itself.
M. Coladon of Geneva made white and brown mice breed toge-
ther: in every instance the young were purely white or brown.
Mr. Jefferson? saw two albino sisters who bore black children to


ee ee


The Arabians never allow the mares of the noble race to be covered by any
but stallions of their own rank, yet the excellence of the race is maintained.
(D’Arvieux, Travels in Arabia, p.168.) Their horses have every comfort, and
yet are not subjected, like our domestic animals and most of ourselves, to un-
natural habits. Mr. M.N. Smith, who resided long in Arabia, says that the
animal degenerates if the in-and-in breeding is very close — incestuous, for three
or four generations—and that the Arabs breed them not so closely as this. It
might be questioned whether the ill effects of close in-and-in breeding does
not depend upon the want of selection which is implied in it:— upon not
observing the smallest tendency to imperfection the moment it appears, so as
to correct it before it becomes a defect ; for the greater the range, the greater of
course the possibility of selection, ‘ Animals kept together, as Sir John
Sebright remarks, are all subjected to the operation of the same circumstances,
and consequently rendered liable to the same diseases ; and therefore, for close
in-and-in breeding to be safe, the breed should be established in different places,
and thus individuals without the same tendencies to disease and degeneration be
brought together.” (Walker, Intermarriage, p. 298. London, 1838; to which
work I am indebted for several references.) Certainly, if the same defect occur-
ring in both parents is likely to be entailed on the offspring, the same excellence
in both is as likely to be transmitted in great force, Again, a cross may be as
injurious as an intermarriage between relations, if the same evil tendency exist
in both parties, Still, as few families are without faults of constitution, evident
or latent, and these, should they be latent, are likely still to be the same in
relatives, family marriages are to be discouraged. Latent evil predisposition
exists often in the most healthy looking families, and the chances of coincidence
of such disposition is very much less where there is no relationship.

The degeneracy of many plants unless their soil is changed, is quite another
circumstance ; and depends upon the unwholesomeness of the excrementitious
matter of every plant to it, whereas this is good nourishment to other plants
which succeed to its place in the soil.

° Notes on Virginia, p.119. Dr. Winterbottom also ( Account of the Negroes of
Sierra Leone, vol. ii. p. 170.) mentions a white Negro and black Negress pro-


4.¢


1100 HEREDITARINESS.


black men: another albiness who bore an albino to a black:
and a white negress also a black daughter to a black man.
Thus, if an individual has a remarkable peculiarity, such as su-
pernumerary toes or fingers, some one or other of every race of
descendants may have it, though they do not intermarry. If the
offspring of parents of different families or of sub-varieties only,
resembling one parent entirely, marry with another of the same
sub-variety, his offspring may more or less resemble his parent,—
the grand-offspring the grand-parent. Thus a white sheep pro-
duced by a black and white may, by copulating with another
white sheep, produce one either black or with black patches. A
friend of mine in the East Indies, wishing to have white flocks, bred
from white sheep only ; but many of these were the ofispring of one
black parent, and black lambs were continually born of his white
sheep. Great and little intellect, good and bad moral qualities,
appear in children who in this particular do not resemble either
parent, but some other progenitor. I presume that re-appear-
ance of resemblance to progenitors is more likely if both parents

are descended from progenitors having the same peculiarity, —
that black sheep are more likely to appear among white, if both

the white parents had a progenitor more or less black, than if
one parent only had a black progenitor.?

We do not often know the limit to the number of generations
after which a peculiarity may re-appear. But, if, in every instance
of its re-appearance, the connection is with another individual
destitute of it, probably it will at length cease to appear. Inthe
human race this seldom happens.

If one nation overcome another which is numerous and at a
certain degree of civilisation, it cannot extirpate its victims.
Hence M. Abel Amusat has been able, by comparing language
with history, to discover nearly all the nomadic tribes of Asia in
their primitive seats, notwithstanding the numerous revolutions


ducing two albinos and five blacks ; and an albiness, born of black parents,
and married to a black, producing blacks.

» Though a Jew can generally be recognised, the Jewish features have great
diversity; and, from the nation never marrying with others, every peculiarity
is little diluted, and the same latent peculiarity will often meet in the individuals
who marry. Ihave consequently been frequently struck with the diversity of
Jewish features in Hebrew brothers and sisters, and the diversity from even both
parents ; all the diversities of Jewish features thus springing up continually.


HEREDITARINESS. 1101


and conquests in that part of the globe. If the two are in equal
numbers and mingle, the characteristics of each will mark their
descendants ; but will not be blended in every instance, because it
is not possible for every pair to be one of each nation. If they are
disproportionate, the characteristics of the most numerous will
prevail ; but the disproportion must be extreme and the two must
greatly mingle for the characters of one to be diluted till they are
effaced ; and if effaced, their disappearance arises probably not
from mere mingling, but from the cruel oppression of a very small
by a very numerous race till itis extinct. The difficulty of the dis-
appearance of a type will be increased by the probability of each
people inhabiting some particular districts and so not mingling.
From these circumstances, Dr. Edwards was able to discover the
type of the ancient Romans, and probably of the band of the
founders of the nation and their surrounding enemies, in the papal
territory: and in Tuscany, this, and also another race with a high
and well developed forehead, long and not broad head, nose curved
till the point drooped, prominent chin, and tall stature, re-
sembling Dante, the busts of the Medici and other distinguished
men of the republic of Florence, and traceable in some Etruscan
bas-reliefs, and met with by him at Bologna, Ferrara, Padua,
Venice, and still more frequentiy at Milan, as well as on this side
of the Alps at Geneva and Chalons. In Burgundy, Dauphiny, and
Savoy, another type with rounded head, middling forehead re-
treating at the temples, straight nose and features, and middling
stature, prevailed the most. These two types were the posterity
of two Gaulish tribes: the latter the descendants of the ancient
Gauls, and the former of the Cimbri. This type he found in Eng-
land, and therefore infers that the ancient Britons, whose descend-
ants they are, were never exterminated. It exists chiefly in the
north of France, the Belgium of Cesar, and Armorica. In France
the Gaul type prevails, and hence the stumpy French soldiers; in
Normandy and Belgium the tall men with long faces and noses
show the Cimbrian or Kimric type to prevail.4


4 Dr. W. F. Edwards, Des Caractéres Physiologiques des Races Humaines.
Paris, 1829. For the difference of the intelligence of these families,— the Celtic
and Gothic, to which the Cimbrian and Gaulic especially belong, see Dupin’s
Forces productives et commerciales de France. Paris, 1827. In the north-east
of France, where the Gothic, German,‘ or Teutonic head prevails, }, went to
school ; in the western and interior parts, where the Gaulic or Celtic head prevails,


4c QZ


1102 DEVIATION.


The tendency to produce like is not so great but that some
difference occurs ; brothers and sisters are all different. But then
they might differ, even were each to have been formed exactly ac-
cording to tne undisturbed force of hereditary transmission ; be-
cause the proportions of transmission from each parent and from
progenitors might be endlessly diversified. Numberless circum-
stances, however, disturb the operation of the hereditary ten-
dency, too minute in their production of slight varieties for us to
appreciate : and the varieties are of infinite degrees and extent.
They may be compatible with our views of perfect formation and
soundness of health; and not strike us in the least, because a
certain amount of variety is ordinary, and we all differ infinitely.
Even if rather striking, they still may not be exceedingly unusual
or in a very high degree. If the peculiarity, whether it be of ob-
vious structure or of property, interfere with the due performance
of function or with health, it is necessarily considered a disease.
Thus the congenital want of communication between the kidney
and bladder, or a direct communication between the two ventricles
of the heart, is an organic disease; the innate tendency to gout,
dyspepsia, or phthisis, is a functional disease, though it depend no
doubt on a morbid variety of minute composition. The tendency
to any disease or shadow of disease may be hereditary.

I must here remark that the tendency to striking deviation may
be operative before birth, or at any period after birth. For, just as
developement of the truly natural structure and properties takes
place at various periods of life, so does that of peculiarities. The
cause in some instances may be that a certain stage of natural de-
velopement is implied in the peculiarity : for example, just as re-
semblances to the father in beard or to the mother in the uterine
functions cannot occur before puberty, so hereditary diseased con-
ditions of these parts will not occur at an earlier age. But some
hereditary tendencies appear tobe morbid affections of a particular
stage of developement. Hereditary cancer seldom affects the breast
before about the 40th year: hereditary cataract most frequently
after the 60th. In some instances the period of morbid here-
ditary tendency is very precise: in others it has a wider range.
Hernia takes place spontaneously in different members of some


only y{, went to school ; and in the southern, where the Celtic is mixed, a; Were
at school,


DEVIATION. 1103


families at nearly the same age. Consumption begins in the mem-
bers of some families at nearly the same age: in those of others, at
various ages. Occasionally this difference may arise from exciting
causes having strongly operated in the earlier examples. But
that this is not always the explanation appears from the visible
commencement of hereditary diseases not influenced by external
causes. I have been consulted by members of two families in
which some of the fingers became permanently bent at a certain
time of life. In one the father and four sons had the little finger
become bent by the rigid shortening of the tendon: and inall the
sons the change took place at 25 years of age. In the other family
the right ring finger of the mother and two sons was fixed down
in the same way, and the change had begun in the mother at 50;
in the second son at 48; in the eldest at 40.

An exception, of more or less amount, to the tendency to
produce similar progeny, occasionally occurs. Something dis-
turbs and proves too much for the tendency, and much more fre-
quently, we are told, inthe domestic than in the wild state ; — the
offspring differs in some particular from the parents; but by the
force of the general tendency transmits to its offspring its own
peculiarity. By selecting such examples, a breed peculiar in
colour, figure, the form of some one part, or in some mental qua-
lity, may be produced. Thus, by killing all the black individuals
which appear among our sheep and breeding from the white
only, our flocks are generally white ; while, by an opposite practice
pursued in some countries, they are generally black: thus a ram,
accidentally produced on a farm in Connecticut with elbow-shaped
fore-legs and a great shortness and weakness of joint indeed in
all four extremities, was selected for propagation, and the dyxaoy
breed, unable to climb over fences, is now established’: thus
some breeds of hares have horns like the roebuck: the Dorking


r Sometimes a peculiarity is transmitted to the offspring of one sex only.
Thus the peculiarity of the skin of the Porcupine family is restricted to the
males. (Supra, p. 270.) Ina family at Iver, for nine generations there were no
fingers except first phalanges, and a first and second joint to the ring finger as
well as the phalanx, but without a nail ; and the women only transmitted this
defect to their offspring. (id. Med. and Surg. Journ. vol. iy.)

Where the organs are different in the two sexes, as the genitals, the pecu-
liarity shows itself in the corresponding parts. Thus the enormous nymphe of
some African tribes have a counterpart in the enormous prepuce of the male,—
“the old reproach of Egypt.”


4c 3


1104 ARE WE ALL BROTHERS ?


fowl has two hind claws; and fowls in short are bred in every
conceivable variety... The Imperial family of Austria is remark-
able for its thick upper lip, which is believed to have been in-
troduced into it centuries ago by a cross with the ancient house
of Jagellon.'

In some tribes of plants and races of animals, varieties continually
spring up and cease to be transmitted. In others they are rarer
and are transmitted permanently.


A QuEsTION here presents itself.— Are the differences among
mankind to be ascribed to the influence of various causes upon
the descendants of two,— or of more, but all similar, primary
parents ;—or to original differences in more than two primary
parents ?

This, being a physical subject, is now always physically inves-
tigated, without reference to the Bible, except as an historical
work, in conformity both with the opinion of Locke, that only
matters above human reason are the proper subjects of revelation ;
and of Bacon, that religious and philosophical inquiry should be
kept separate, and not pompously united. A true revelation


8 Thomson’s Annals of Philosophy, No. 2.

t Coxe’s Memoirs of the House of Austria,

u See supra, p. 72.75. sq.

Many distinguished scientific living characters utter the same sentiments in
private conversation. Some of them quote Bacon, who calls nature ‘ guasi altera
revelatio ;” and Young, who says,

«*T is elder Scripture writ by God’s own hand,
Scripture authentic, incorrupt by man.
(Night Thoughts, ix.)


Some refer us to Dr. Strauss’s Leben Jesu and Mr. Hennel’s View of the Origin of
Christianity for the reasonableness of their total infidelity. Some argue that, though
believing, they have a right to consider passages as mere fabrications introduced
by knavery or folly, if absurd, just as the passage in St. John’s first Epistle, “ There
are those that bear witness,” &c, is now rejected by many sound divines, though read
regularly in our church service and believed by all who are Christians from mere
imitation. Some argue that, though a passage be authentic, every one has a
right to interpret it in his own way ; just as great divines contend that the periods
called days in the Mosaic account of the creation need not be understood as days,
in the face of the reason given in Exodus by Moses in God’s name for resting
from work on the seventh day,— because God, having worked six days, rested on
the seventh “and was refreshed,” (xxxi. 17.) though it is difficult to suppose
any other than the ordinary meaning of the word day when used in this argument,


ARE WE ALL BROTHERS ? 1105


cannot suffer by the progress of philosophy; but philosophy
has seriously suffered by ignorant appeals to Scripture. Besides,
many will not listen to arguments from Scripture in matters of phi-
losophy, alleging the want of proof of inspiration, or of unquestion-
able meaning. Dr. Bostock, one of the most careful and amiable
of inquirers, does not hesitate to say, that “we do not find that
the writer of the Book of Genesis lays claim to any supernatural
source of information with respect to natural phenomena, while
the whole tenor of his work seems to show, that on such topics
he adopted the opinions which were current among his contem-
poraries.”* Professor Rudolphi of the University of Berlin writes
of the Mosaic account “as a very improbable Jewish tradition.’ ¥

In favour of the opinion that we are all brothers, it may be
urged, — 1. The universal simplicity of nature’s causes would in-
duce us to imagine that, as, if the varieties among us are acci-
dental, two individuals were evidently sufficient for the production
of the rest of mankind, no more than two were originally created.
Nor should I deduce a contrary presumptive argument from the
length of time during which immense portions of the earth must
have thus remained unpeopled. One of nature’s objects seems
the existence of as much successive life as possible, whether
animal or vegetable, throughout the globe. For this purpose,


Just as, also, in the face of the simple, clear, and positive words of the fourth com-
mandment, “ Thou shalt do no manner of work, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-
servant, nor thy cattle,” the most intolerant religious persons plainly think the com-
mandment not worth notice, for they drive to church on Sundays with horses and
men-servants to declare to God their reverence of him and their wish to obey every
letter of his holy word, and actually to see the fourth commandment on the walls
at the altar and hear it read, and at the end of hearing it read they exclaim, “ Lord
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law,”—that is to say — the
law of the Jewish Sabbath. Again, in spite of this part of the church service, some
of its ministers contend that the Jewish Sabbath is no longer a divine ordinance.
Whileall this passes, philosophers havea right to believe that mankind are descended
from one pair or more as they see fit, without any imputation of sin. Some
argue against no part of Scripture, but at once contend that its purpose is solely
to make men pious to God and good to man, just as Paley declares that the doc-
trine of the atonement would never have been revealed but for a moral purpose ;
(Sermon on Seriousness of Heart as to Religion.) and they therefore invariably refuse
to consider in writing or conversation any other than points of practice, and
study the works of Creation independently. (See supra, p. 46. sq.)
x An Elementary System of Physiology, vol. iii. p. 286.
Y Grundriss der Physiologie.


4c 4


1106 ARE WE ALL BROTHERS ?


every species of animal and vegetable possesses an unlimited
power of propagation, capable of filling the whole world, were op-
portunity afforded it. The opportunities of exertion are indeed
very scanty, compared with the power: climate, soil, situation,
may be unfavourable; one vegetable, one animal, stands in the
way of another; even the impediments to the increase of some,
act through them as impediments to others. The incessant ten-
dency of the power of multiplication to exert itself seizes every
opportunity the moment it is presented, and thus, though every
living object has a fixed term of existence, and may be carried off
much earlier by innumerable circumstances, all nature constantly
teems with life.* The slow increase of mankind could not inter-
fere with this apparent object of nature; the deficiency of our
race must have invariably been fully compensated by the oppor-
tunities which it afforded for the multiplication of other existences:
for that proud man alone was not designed to enjoy the earth,
and that he is but an item in animated nature, is shown by the
vast tracts of unpeopled land, and the vast number of situations
inhabitable by other animals only.

Individuals, distinguished from others by no greater differences
than those which spring up accidentally, cannot be supposed
to belong to a separate species. Upon the comparison of these
differences depends the analogical argument first employed by


* From this physiological fact it follows that, if a species is not kept down by
disease or violence, or, as should be the case with mankind, by good feeling, to
such numbers as can find support, the excess must regularly perish, To vege-
tables this can be no cruelty. As all the brute creation are preyed upon, their
numbers may be generally sufficiently thinned without starvation. Violent deaths
are too insignificant to operate much in restraining the numbers of mankind, and
terrible as is the havoc of disease, the rapid increase of those nations who can
command any extent of land they require for food, proves it not to be the great
restrainer of population while food and fresh air are enjoyed. Starvation, how-
ever, is not necessary to limit our numbers, because it is the imperious duty of
every man to abstain from getting children unless he has property or work suffi-
cient to feed them when they come into the world.

These palpable facts have been luminously stated by a celebrated member of
my own College at Cambridge ; and how any one can deny them, or pretend there
is impiety in Mr, Malthus’s Essay on Population, I cannot comprehend. Mr.
Mills (Supp. to Encyclop. Brit. art. Savings Banks), considers that the addition
made by Mr. Malthus to the admitted doctrine of population being commensurate


with food is that man’s tendency to marry and prolific powers cause a greater
number to be born than can be fed.


ARE WE ALL BROTHERS ? 1107


Blumenbach. Finding the ferret (MZustela furo) to differ from the
polecat (M. putorius) by the redness of its eyes, he concludes it
is merely a variety of the same species, because instances of this
deviation are known to occur accidentally in other animals; but
he concludes the African elephant is of a species distinct from the
Asiatic, because the invariable difference of their molar teeth is of
a description which naturalists have never found accidental. Now
there exist among mankind, he contends, no differences greater
than what happen occasionally in separate species of brutes.

The colours of the animals around us, horses, cows, dogs, cats,
rabbits, fowls, are extremely various, —black, white, brown, grey,
variegated.

The hair of the wild Siberian sheep is close in summer, but
rough and curled in winter*; sheep in Thibet are covered with
the finest wool, in Ethiopia with coarse stiff hair»; the bristles of
the hog in Normandy are too soft for the manufacture of brushes°¢;
goats, rabbits, and cats of Angouri, in Anatolia, have very long
hair, white as snow and soft as silk.¢

The head of the domestic pig differs as much from that of the
wild animal, as the Negro from the European in this respect °; so
the head of the Neapolitan horse, denominated ram’s head on ac-
count of its shape, from that of the Hungarian animal, remarkable
for its shortness and the extent of its lower jaw ‘; the cranium of
fowls at Padua is dilated like a shell, and perforated by an im-
mense number of small holes £; cattle and sheep in some parts of
our own country have horns, in others not; in Sicily sheep have
enormous horns '; and in some instances this animal has so many,
as to have acquired the epithet polyceratous.

The form of other parts is no less various. In Normandy, pigs
have hind legs much longer than the fore‘; at the Cape of Good
Hope, cows have much shorter legs than in England * ; the differ-


a Pallas, Spicileg. Zoologica.

Dr. Prichard has seen a boy near Somerton, the son of ordinarily looking
English rustics, with hair as woolly as that of any Negro, undistinguishable
from it except in colour and a little more glossiness. (1. ¢. vol. i. p. 363.)

b Blumenbach, l.c, § 28.

Crise t Le else Hee;

& Pallas, Spic. Zool. fasc. iv. p. 22. Sandifort, Museum Anatomicum Acad.
Lugd. Batav. t.i. p. 306.

h Blumenbach, |. ec. § 30. ike le es


1108 ARE WE ALL BROTHERS?


ence between the Arabian, Syrian, and German horses is suffi-
ciently known ; the hoofs of the pig may be undivided, bisulcous,


or trisulcous.

These are regarded by naturalists as but accidental varieties,
yet they equal or surpass the varieties existing among mankind.
Blumenbach consequently is led by analogy to conclude that the
differences of nations are not original but acquired, and impose
no necessity for believing that more than one stock was at first
created.

Direct facts are said to harmonise with this conclusion. All
races run insensibly one into another, and therefore innumerable
intermediate examples occur where the distinction between two
varieties islost. Again, no peculiarity exists in any variety which
does not show itself occasionally in another. Many instances
of these facts have been already related (page 1067. note?).
The difficulty of regarding the Negro as of the same stock
with ourselves vanishes on viewing these circumstances, and on
reflecting that he and ourselves are two extremes, one of which
may have sprung from the other by means of several intermediate
deviations, although experience may not justify us in supposing
any single deviation of sufficient magnitude.! An accidental


1 In regard to colour, however, the Albino proves how great a change may
take place in one generation. In the Memoirs of the London Medical Society,
(vol. iii.) is described a case, where not only patches of the hair of the head of an
European changed from black to perfect white, first on one side and then on the
other, and in the course of seven years every hair became white excepting the
eyebrows, but the skin also from being swarthy became fair. (I may add that the
irides remained unchanged, and that another case is annexed to it in which half
the hair was black and lank, and the other half light and frizzled.) I recollect
accounts of other persons, who belonged to the dark races, turning white, — one
of a Negress, in Maryland, 40 years of age, who had been turning white during
the last fifteen years, and had become scarcely inferior in any part of her surface
to an European, and was still changing, (Phil. Trans, vol. li.),— one in the
Manchester Memoirs (vol. v. Pt. 1.), of a Negro about 40 years of age, whose
skin had so changed in two years that the narrator was convinced that all the
black portions remaining did not exceed a square foot, and the change still con-
tinued to proceed very rapidly, —one of a man, born in Bengal, near 60 years
of age, who left India in his 10th year, and had for nine years been changing to
white, (Dr. Duncan, jun. Reports in the Practice of the Clinical Ward of the Royal
Infirmary of Edinburgh, p. 138.),—one mentioned by the Duc de Rochefoucault
Liancourt. ( Travels through the United States, vol. v. p. 124. sqq.) The Duke
says that the change which had been proceeding for three years, was still going on,


ARE WE ALL BROTHERS? 1109


deviation in the early ages of mankind would give origin to a
nation peculiarly characterised. Lastly, both the males and
females of all the varieties breed together readily and in perpe-
tuity™,—an assertion which cannot be made in regard to any
different species of brutes ; but this shows only that all are of one
species, not that the different races have a common origin.®


that the wool of the head had changed to European hair, and that several such
instances, though less complete, had occurred. Another will be seen in the
Journal of the Royal Institution, No. xii, p. 379. Sommerring ( Ueber die Korplicher
Verschiedenheit des Negers von Europaer. 1785.) quotes Klinkosch (De vera Natura
Cuticule. Prag. 1775. § 25.) for the fact of a Negro becoming yellow.

Caldani (Inst. Physiol. et Pathol. p. 170. cap. xvi. § 231.) declares that a
Negro shoemaker at Venice grew so light that he resembled a person slightly
jaundiced.

Bomare mentions a French peasant whose abdomen became entirely black in
every pregnancy.

Camper gives an account of a female of rank, who had a beautiful complexion
and white skin, except when pregnant, and then she immediately grew brown,—
‘< vers la fin de la grossesse elle dévenoit une véritable Négresse : ” and he says of
another that, when she was pregnant, her left leg became black, and after delivery
gradually recovered its natural white. (Kleine Schriften, 1 b. s. 47.)

A Sussex girl was, a few years ago, a patient in St. Thomas’s Hospital, whose
family were all white, but whose left shoulder, arm, and hand, were of Negro
blackness, except that a stripe of white ran between the elbow and arm-pit.
(Dr. Wells’s Works.) I once saw a young Welsh woman whose left upper arm
was remarkably dark. The shoulder was almost as black as a Negro’s, but the
colour became gradually lighter down the arm, and abruptly terminated an inch
below theelbow. The greater part of the upper arm was covered with fine scanty
hairs. Blumenbach possessed skin of Negro blackness taken from the abdomen
of a white beggar. A white woman in twenty years became as black. as a
Negress, without any evident reason, according to a statement in the London
Medical and Physical Journal (1811, p. 24,),—another suddenly became black
from mental distress, and remained so ; and the blackness was not from jaundice,
congestion of blood, &c., but a change in the colouring matter of the rete mu-
cosum, (Journal Général, vol, Ixviij., where a second is referred to.) Sém-
merring cites one from Dr, Strack, in which the blackness succeeded ague. (De
Febrib. Intermit. p.194.) And other such cases may perhaps be discovered, though
those which I have read appear to have been instances of cutaneous disease,

m ]xamples have already been mentioned (p. 781. sq.) of what is a still
stronger argument, — the simultaneous production of two individuals of different
varieties, — of a Negro and a Caucasian, by the same mother,

n Mules or the offspring of individuals of different species, whether vegetable
or animal, generally do not breed at all; if they breed, it is almost always with
individuals of one of the parent species, not with each other; and if they breed


1110 ARE WE ALL BROTHERS ?


Others, as Dr. Morton, contend that, although all mankind must
be of one species, each of the above varieties, or races as he would
rather denominate them, was of separate originand “adapted from
the beginning (by an all-wise Providence) to its peculiar local
destination.” In other words, that the physical characteristics
which distinguish the different races are independent of external
causes. Dr. Caldwell argues that “It is 4179 years since Noah
and his family came out of the ark. They are believed to have
been of the Caucasian race:” “ 3445 years ago a nation of
Ethiopians is known to have existed. Their skins, of course,
were dark, and they differed widely from the Caucasians in
many other particulars. They migrated from a remote country
and took up their residence in the neighbourhood of Egypt.”
Supposing that people to have been of the stock of Noah, the
change must have been completed and a new race formed in 733
years, and probably in a much shorter period.

Dr. Morton contends that it is but 4179 years since Noah and
his family came out of the ark ; and they were Caucasians. A
nation of Ethiopia is known to have existed 3445 years ago,
black and differing from the Caucasians in many other particulars.

They emigrated from a remote country and took up their
residence in the neighbourhood of Egypt. If they were of the
stock of Noah, the change must have been completed and a new
race formed in 753 years, and probably in a much shorter period.
Belzoni’s discoveries of paintings executed on the walls of Egyp-
tian tombs above 3000 years ago prove the Caucasian and Ethio-
pian races to have been characterised precisely as at present; so


with each other, so that the parent race is soon re-established, sometimes at once,
this is in the case of vegetables only, and never beyond the third generation.

Nature seems to oppose the production of hybrids. Decandolle asserts that
forty instances only are found in the wild state of plants: many of these are
proved to be sterile, and the fertility of the rest has not been ascertained.
Hybridism is doubtful among insects; rare in fishes ; more frequent among
birds; and very numerous in the mammalia, but usually, though not always,
effected by art. Unless in cases of seclusion from individuals of their own kind,
brutes seldom unite with other species ; and great difficulty is experienced under
most circumstances to bring them together. (Burdach, § 617.) When they
mix with another species the connection is generally unprolific ; if prolific, gene-
rally abortion destroys it: if the offspring survives, still it is generally unprolific ;
and if prolific, is fruitful with individuals of one of the parental species, See
Dr. Prichard, |. c. vol. i. 138. sqq.


CAUSES OF VARIETIES. V3}


that, resting upon this fact, we may maintain that if the Caucasian
race were derived from the Ethiopian, or the Ethiopian from the
Caucasian, by external causes, the change must have been
effected in at most 1000 years :—an idea which the subsequent
experience of thirty centuries proves to be a physical impossibility.

Dr. Prichard allows that, since he first wrote on the opposite side,
Virey, Desmoulins, Bory de St. Vincent and others have asserted
in the most positive manner, in their writings, an original diversity
of the races of mankind: that Cuvier admitted this conclusion ;
and that the most celebrated travellers have been impressed with
a similar persuasion.

Those who oppose the opinion of our descent from two parents,
urge that the five hundred millions of human beings that may at
present exist, could not have descended from one pair without a
chain of wonders; that accidents, diseases, &c., might have
happened to our first parents, and the peopling of the earth would
thus have been left to chance; that no reason can be given for
mankind wishing to leave their place of birth and traverse
continents and oceans,—that indeed mankind is generally in-
disposed to migration; and that the supposition is supported by
no other authority than “a very improbable Jewish tradition.” °

The cause of the differences of our species has been more or
less sought for in climate, alone or in conjunction with other ex-
ternal circumstances, by Aristotle, Hippocrates, Cicero, Pliny,
Plutarch, Galen, nearly all the Greek and Roman historians and
poets, Montaigne, Montesquieu, Buffon, Zimmermann, Blumen-
bach, Dr. Smith of America, &c. Lord Kaimes denied the power
of these circumstances to produce the diversities of either mind
or body ; and Hume expressly wrote an essay to prove the insuf-
ficiency of climate with respect to the varieties of national cha-
racter. Now the intensity of light unquestionably affects the
colour of the surface, although not to the degree of Ethiopian
blackness ; heat the texture and growth of the hair? ; light or heat
the colour of feathers 4, and quantity of nourishment the size.


© Dr. Rudolphi, professor in the University of Berlin. Grundriss der Phy-
siologie.

pP The present sheep of the West India Islands, though descended from the
woolly sheep of Europe, are covered with coarse hair.

4 I brought from St. Gothard, in Switzerland, a winter specimen of the
Lagopus alpinus perfectly white; a summer specimen, brown; and a spring


Dee} CAUSES OF VARIETIES.


By starvation plants are dwarfed; the Dahlia has diminished
from 6 feet to 2: the Spruce fir from a lofty timber tree to a
pigmy bush ; and many of the trees of the plains become more
and more dwarf as we ascend the mountains, till at length
they exist as mere underwood. The size of Mollusca differ so
much, according to external circumstances, that, as Mr. Gray
mentions, the Bulimus rosaceus on the mountains of Chili has
been described as a species distinct from that on the coast: and
the Littorina petrea in the south side of Plymouth breakwater
acquires from its great exposure to light and heat twice the size of
the individuals on the north side of the harbour.’ But the effects
of these circumstances are generally considered superficial on the
higher brutes, though necessarily less protected against their
influence than man.

The vegetable system and the lowest or most vegetable-like
animal systems are greatly affected by external circumstances.
German writers find that the fungi produced by a decomposing
infusion depend as much upon the influence of the material em-
ployed as upon the germ which is influenced: and lichens are of


" specimen, partly white and partly brown. The fact of the influence of season
on the colour is well known in regard to other animals also. The difference of
the hair of the Siberian sheep in summer and winter I have already mentioned
at p.1107. The difference of the coats of animals is proportionate to the difference
of the temperature at various seasons, In hot climates the coat never alters;
and in cold climates it alters more than in the mild. The winter coat of horses
is scarcely different from that of summer in Germany, but consists of long hairs
in Norway. ‘The longer the winter, the greater the duration of the winter coat.
In the Lepus variabilis it lasts 6 or 7 months in Switzerland, 8 or 9 in Norway,
10 in Lapland, and all the year in Greenland, A lemming kept its summer brown
coat as long as it was in Capt. Ross’s cabin, but became white in 8 days on deck.
However, both the Lepus variabilis and Lagopus alpinus have their winter and
summer coat before the seasons quite arrive, the formerin October and the latter
coat in March ; just as Kirby and Spence found hybernating insects grow torpid at
the appointed period though the weather be warm, and not before it though the
weather be prematurely cold. (Supra, p. 628.) Nature seems to have prepared
a disposition conformable to the circumstances in which she intended animals to
be placed, and yet allows them to be influenced by circumstances ; and in some
the force of disposition, in others the force of external agency, has the greater in-
fluence.

t Phil. Trans. 1833, See Mr. Carpenter’s Principles of General and Comparative
Physiology, § 517., a work which makes me proud to think he was once my
pupil, although he can have been but little indebted to me.


CAUSES OF VARIETIES. 1113


various appearances according to the circumstances in which
they are developed. (See supra, p.’717.) A mucor, one of the
inferior fungi, constituting mould, is declared by Mr. Berkely to
have developed itself as a conferva and been recognised after-
wards by its fructification.s Nay, we read that the special repro-
ductive particles formed in the shields of the higher species are
capable of developing themselves into the same specific forms ;
while the powdery matter of their surface, and of other individual
parts of their structure, may separately exist in the condition of
inferior species*: so that in these lower systems we may readily
conceive the weakness of the tendency to the production of like-
ness to the parent." External circumstances so influence variety
in the higher plants, that many which are now known to be va-
rieties of the same species were formerly regarded as of different
species: and no wonder, since one Orchideous plant has pro-
duced the flowers and pseudo-bulbs of three distinct genera.*

The skulls of foxes belonging to northern regions are not dif-
ferent from those of France or Egypt: the tusks of the elephant,
and the horns of the stag and reindeer, may acquire a larger
size when the food is more favourable to the production of ivory
or horn, but the number and articulations of the bones, and the
structure of the teeth, remain unaltered.y So, while the colour
of flowers is greatly altered by soil and climate, the spots on
the wings of moths and butterflies are never known to vary.

Nor are these changes, any more than those induced by mechani-
cal means, as pressure, division, &c., transmitted to the offspring.
The flat headed Indians of Ormuz are known to compress their
skulls; but Dr. Morton considers it certain that the forms thus
acquired “never become congenital even in successive generations,
but that the characteristic form is always preserved, unless art
has directly interfered to distort it. The child of the most sun-


8 Magax. of Zool. and Anatomy, vol. ii. p. 340.

t Dr. Lindley’s Natural System of Botany, p. 331. sq.

u This fact is thought to throw light upon the production of parasitic plants
and animals in others, especially when we reflect that they are found in embryos
and eggs. See Mr. Carpenter, 1]. c.

x Linnean Trans. vol. xvii.

y Cuvier, Discours Préliminaire aux Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles des
Quadrupédes. Natural varieties only are meant. Local situation can produce
the most intimate structural diseases; witness Cretinism,


1114 CAUSES OF VARIETIES.


burnt rustic is born equally fair with other children ; even all the
children among the Moors are born white and acquire the brown
cast of their fathers only if exposed to the sun‘; although the
Jews have most religiously practised the right of circumcision
from the days of Abraham, their foreskin still remains to be cir-
cumcised.2 Were it therefore true that all dark nations are the
inhabitants of hot climates, as the confined knowledge of the
ancients led them to believe, it would still be untrue that the
change effected, for instance, in the colour of the parent’s skin,
had descended to the offspring. But modern discovery has made
us acquainted with light nations inhabiting the warmest regions,
with dark nations inhabiting the coldest, and with others of
various shades of colour although in the same climate.» Many


z Poiret, Voyage en Barbarie, t.i. p. 31. Vide Blumenbach, 1. c.

a Paley, Natural Theology, c. 23. p. 472.

This striking fact proves, I think, that accounts of accidental mutilations of
parents being followed by offspring similar in that particular are, some untrue,
and others explicable by the effect on the mother’s mind. For that the state of
this will influence offspring I shall presently show. Burdach says that mastiffs
and setters with cropped tails often produce pups with cropped tails ; and that this
connate mutilation iscommon in Kamtschatka, where it is the custom to dock the
tails of drawing dogs; that Blumenbach mentions aman, whose right little finger
was once partly separated and replaced awry, and who had several children born
with the same deformity on their right little finger ; that a woman, one of whose
fingers was left deformed by a whitlow, gave birth to two children with the same
deformity ; and that according to a writer in Meckel’s Archives, a man whose
right iris was nearly motionless and marked by a brown spot in consequence of
an accident in his infancy, transmitted this deformity completely to his eldest
child, partly to those which first followed, and not at all to the three born the
last. Now in all these cases the deformity has been visible and'striking ; the penis
of the Jew is not seen by the female, or if ever it is seen, the absence of the pres
puce cannot strike her, and no Jew is born without a prepuce. I must, there-
fore, ascribe Burdach’s instances to the impression on the mother’s mind.

> Jord Kaimes,_M. de Virey, and Dr. Prichard, have quoted many instances
of these facts. ‘ We found,” says Humboldt, ‘the people of the Rio Negro
swarthier than those of the lower Orinoco, and yet the banks of the first of these
rivers enjoy a much cooler climate than the more northern regions. In the
forests of Guiana, especially near the sources of the Orinoco, are several tribes
of a whitish complexion, the Guiacas, Guajaribs and Arigues, of whom several
robust individuals exhibiting no symptom of the asthenical malady which cha-
racterises Albinos, have the appearance of true Mestizos. Yet these tribes have
never mingled with Europeans, and are surrounded with other tribes of a dark
brown hue. The Indians, in the torrid zone, who inhabit the most elevated plains


CAUSES OF THE VARIETIES OF MANKIND. 1115


protected parts are as black as those which are exposed. Nor


are the varieties of mankind more dependent upon the varieties
of food.


of the Cordilleras of the Andes, and those who are under the 45th degree of South
latitude, have as coppery a complexion as those who under a burning climate
cultivate bananos in the narrowest and deep valleys of the Equinoctial region.
We must add that the Indians of the mountains are clothed, and were so long
before the conquest, while the aborigines, who wander over the plains, go quite
naked, and are consequently always exposed to the perpendicular rays of the sun.
T could never observe that in the same individuals those parts of the body which.
were covered were less dark than those in contact with a warm and humid air.
We every where perceive that the colour of the American depends very little on
the local position in which we see him. The Mexicans, as we have already
observed, are more swarthy than the Indians of Quito and New Granada, who
inhabit a climate completely analogous, and we even see that the tribes dispersed
to the north of the Rio Gila are less brown than those in the neighbourhood of
the kingdom of Guatimala, This deep colour continues to the coast nearest to
Asia, but under the 54° 10’ of North latitude, at Cloak Bay, in the midst of
copper-coloured Indians, with small long eyes, there is a tribe with large eyes,
European features, and skin less dark than that of our peasantry.” (Political
Essay on New Spain, translated.)

The Jews settled in the neighbourhood of Cochin ‘are divided into two classes,
called the Jerusalem or white Jews, and the ancient or black Jews.” — “ The
white Jews look upon the black Jews as an inferior race, and not as a pure caste,
which plainly demonstrates that they do not spring from a common stock in
India.” (Buchanan, Christian Researches in Asia, p. 219. &c.)

The white appear to have resided there upwards of seventeen hundred years.

Dr. Shaw and Mr. Bruce describe a race of fair people in the neighbourhood
of Mount Aurasius, in Africa, who, “if not so fair as the English, are of a shade
lighter than that of any inhabitants to the southward of Britain, Their hair also
was red, and their eyes blue.” They are imagined to be descendants of the
Vandals. (Bruce, Travels.)

The Samoiedes, Greenlanders, Laplanders, Esquimaux, &c. are very swarthy ;
nay, some of the Greenlanders are said to be as black as Africans.

“ Do we not in fact behold,” says M. de Virey, ‘the tawny Hungarian, dwell-
ing for ages under the same parallel and in the same country with the whitest
nations of Europe; and the red Peruvian, the brown Malay, the nearly white
Abyssinian, in the very zones which the blackest people in the universe inhabit ?
The natives of Van Diemen’s Land are black, while Europeans of the correspond-
ing northern latitude are white, and the Malabars in the most burning climate
are no browner than the Siberians, The Dutch, who haye resided more than
two centuries at the Cape of Good Hope, have not acquired the sooty colour of
the native Hottentots; the Guebres and Parsees, marrying only among them-


4D


1116 ARDOUR OF PROCREANTS.


It is not probable that the ardour of the procreants affects the
energy of the offspring. But from the days of Aristotle it has
been remarked that bastards are frequently endowed with great
genius and valour, and both ancient and modern history certainly
affords many such examples; and the circumstance has been
commonly ascribed to the impetuosity of the parents during their
embraces. Shakspeare, in King Lear, introduces Edmund bursting
into this indignant soliloquy : —


‘«« Why bastard? wherefore base?
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us
With base ? with baseness ? bastardy? base? base?
Who in the lusty stealth of nature take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed
Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops
Got ’tween sleep and wake?” Act i. scene 2.


“ Hercules, Romulus, Alexander (by Olympia’s confession),
Themistocles, Jugurtha, King Arthur, William the Conqueror,
Homer, Demosthenes, P. Lumbard, P. Comestor, Bartholus,
Adrian the fourth Pope, &c. were bastards; and in almost every
kingdom the most ancient families have been at first princes’
bastards; the worthiest captains, best wits, greatest scholars,


selves, remain white in the midst of the olive-coloured Hindus,” (J. T. Virey,
Histoire Naturelle du Genre Humain, t. i. p. 124.)

The tribes which wander along the burning plains of the Equinoctial region of
America have no darker skins than the mountaineers of the temperate zone.
«¢ Again, the Puelchés, and other inhabitants of the Magellanic region, beyond the
55th degree of S. latitude, are absolutely darker than the Abipones, Mecobios,
and Tobas, who are many degrees nearer the equator. While the Botocudys are
of a clear brown colour, and sometimes nearly white, at no great distance from
the tropic ; and moreover while the Guyacas, under the line, are characterised by
a fair complexion, the Charruas, who are almost black, inhabit the 50th degree of
S. latitude ; and the yet blacker Californians are 25 degrees north of the equator,”
‘“« After all, these differences in complexion are extremely partial, forming mere
exceptions to the primitive and national tint that characterises these people from
Cape Horn to the Canadas. The cause of these anomalies is not readily ex-
plained. That it is not climate is sufficiently obvious, and whether it arises from
partial emigration from other countries, remains yet to be decided.” (Dr. Morton.)


HEALTH OF PROCREANTS. LILY


bravest spirits in all our annals, have been base. Cardan, in his
Subtleties, gives a reason, &c.—Corpore sunt et animo fortiores
spurii, plerumque ob amoris vehementiam,” &c.°¢

Were this explanation satisfactory, the first fruits of wedded love
would still generally be on an equality with illegitimate offspring.
If a greater proportion of illegitimate than of legitimate persons
have really rendered themselves illustrious, their superior energy
may be attributed to the strength of their parents’ constitutions,
it not being likely that the weak and delicate so frequently
become the prey of unlawful passions as the vigorous, and to the
necessity in which such individuals usually find themselves to rely
upon their own exertions. Their native excellence was at least
not acknowledged by Moses. “ A bastard shall not enter into
the congregation of the Lord; even to his tenth generation shall
he not enter into the congregation of the Lord.” ¢

The health and strength of both the parents must have powerful
influence. But some think that the state of the mind of the
parents during the deed of kind is highly important. Aristotle
ascribes monstrosity to the circumstance of the parents being care-
less and thinking of something else during the transaction. In
Switzerland and other places, I have heard the peasants ascribe
the idiotism of cretins whom I met to one or both of the parents
being drunk. If the state of the mother’s mind during pregnancy
will affect the child, we cannot doubt that its condition at the
moment of impregnation will have the same influence: nor is it
unlikely that the father’s mental condition at the moment will
affect it.

Many people are satisfied that mental impressions made upon
the mother may affect the offspring. Others, as Mr. Lawrence’,
consider it needless to pursue “a question on which all rational
persons well acquainted with the circumstances are already una-


© Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, vol. ii. p. 16. sq.

Vanini exclaims, ‘‘ O utinam extra legitimum et connubialem thorum essem
procreatus! Ita enim progenitores mei in venerem incaluissent ardentius, accu-
mulatim affatimque generosa semina contulissent, e quibus ego forme blandi-
tiam et elegantiam, robustas corporis vires, mentemque innubilem, consequutus
fuissem. At quia conjugatorum sum suboles, his orbatus sum bonis,” (De
Admirandis Nature. Parisiis, 1616.)

4 Deuteronomy, xxiii. 2.

© Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xiv. p. 206. 1814.


4p 2


1118 EFFECTS OF MIND.


nimous.” ‘This belief,” continues he, “in the power of imagina-
tion, like the belief in witchcraft, is greater or less according to
the progress of knowledge, which in truth differs greatly in dif-
ferent countries and heads. We know that many enlightened
women are fully convinced of its absurdity, while soi-disant phi-
losophers are found to support it.” f So many extraordinary coin-
cidences, however, both in the human and the brute subject, have
come to my knowledge, that I do not hesitate to believe the common
opinion to be well founded; and, since I declared in my edition of
1820 my inclination to support the opinion, I find it has many sup-
porters. That neither all nor most malformations can be thus


f «¢ We may perhaps be excused,” says Dr. Fletcher, “from at once chiming in
with the accustomed cant that the emotions of the mother ‘ cannot possibly’ have
any effect on its organism. We ‘ cannot possibly’ explain perhaps what is the
immediate process by which such vitiated secretions have this effect, nor shall
we: be able to do so, till we know a little more of the vis plastica than its
numerous appellations; but neither shall we be able, till then, to explain why
this effect should be impossible. It is much easier in these matters to look
shrewd and incredulus-odi-ish, than to give any good reason for our unbelief ; and
if the result of process, however well accredited, is to be believed in, till the
nature of that process has been satisfactorily explained, we must be content to
suspend for the present our belief in our own existence.” (Rudiments of Physio-
logy, Pt. ii. p. 12.)

® Sir Everard Home ( Phil. Trans.1825. p. 75. sqq.), and, according to Burdach
who considers the occurrence of monstrosity from this cause to be an incontestable
fact (§ 360.) Bechstein (Gemeinnuetzige Naturgeschichte, i.17.sq.), Stark ( Archiv.
fiir die Geburtshiilfe, v. 574.), Schneider (Journal fiir Geburtshiilfe, x. 86. xvi.
121.), Sachs ( Hist. Nat. Duor. Leucethiop. p. 3.), Balz (Medexin. Zeit. vy. 190.),
Klein (Meckel’s Deutches Archiv, ii. 235, ), Carus (Zur Lehre von Schwangershaft,
i. 217.), Brandis (Hufeland’s Journal der Pract. Heilkunde, 1815.38.), Hoare
(Gerson’s Magaz. vii. 470.), Toone (Jb. viii. 130.), have given examples in its
favour. Baer, whose name will carry weight, relates the following fact :—

«« A pregnant woman was greatly alarmed at the sight of a lengthened flame
in the direction of her native place ; as she was at a distance from this of 14 leagues,
it was long before she learnt the place of the fire, and this protracted uncertainty
probably acted forcibly upon her imagination, for she afterwards declared she had
the figure of the flame constantly before her eyes. Two or three months after
the fire, she gave birth to a girl with a red patch on her forehead, pointed, and
like an undulating flame. This still existed at the age of 7 years. I relate this
fact because I know all the particulars, for the individual was my own sister;
and I heard her complain before her delivery that she had the flame constantly
before her eyes ; so that we were not obliged in this case, as in most others, to


refer to the past in order to explain the anomaly.”’ (Contribution to Burdach,
§ 359.)


EFFECTS OF MIND. 1119


explained ; that pregnant women are frequently alarmed without
such consequences, even when most dreaded, and that highly ri-
diculous resemblances are fancied to preceding longings and
alarms which were forgotten or may be well suspected to have
never existed, is incontestable. But, in other matters, when a
circumstance may proceed from many causes, we do not uni-
versally reject any one because it is frequently alleged without
reason. A diarrhoea will arise from ingesta wrong in quality or
quantity, from cold, cathartic substances, and also from emotion;
and yet emotion has every day no such effect. The notion is of
great antiquity, as it prevailed in the time of Jacob. How those
who believe the Divine authority of the Bible can reconcile the


In St. Giles’s workhouse is a woman 30 years old, with a remarkably small
narrow head, looking like an elderly child, very idiotic, saying nothing but aye
and no, and in incessant motion. She was born in a state of chorea, and before
her birth the mother was for the last two months of pregnancy annoyed and
sometimes overcome by her violent movement. All this had followed ‘an ex-
treme nervous illness” occasioned by a frightfully disgusting object thrown upon
her bosom” in the fourth month of pregnancy. (Lond. Med. Gazette, May 23.
1833.)

I have seen a child with so exact a likeness of a leech full of blood and hanging
down with its point highest, on the leg of the child of a lithographic printer,
that at a little distance any one would suppose a leech was there. The
mother told me that in her fourth month of pregnancy she had occasion to apply
some leeches : that one remained longer than the rest and hung down full of blood.
This rather frightened her and she dreamt about it. Mr. Hillas of Holborn,
her accoucheur, through whose kindness I saw the child, informed me that, when
the child was born and he observed the mark, he asked the mother if she had been
frightened or had longed for any thing. She replied by asking if the child was
marked; and, on receiving an answer in the affirmative, said, Oh! it must be with
a leech; and then related the same particulars which she afterwards told me.
A remarkable case was published in the Lond. Med. and Physic. Journal for
July 1828, by Mr. George Bennett, so well known for his contributions to natural
history. A woman gave birth to a child with a large cluster of globular tumors
growing from the tongue and preventing the closure of the mouth, in colour,
shape, and size, exactly resembling our common grapes; and with a red ex-
crescence from the chest as exactly resembling in figure and general appearance
a turkey’s wattles On being questioned before the child was shown her, she
answered that while pregnant she had seen some grapes, longed intensely for
them, and constantly thought of them, and once was attacked by a turkey-cock.
Both growths were successfully removed, and Mr. Bennett was kind enough to
allow me to see them.


4D 3


1120 EFFECTS OF MIND.


success of Jacob’s stratagem» with their contempt for the vulgar
belief, they best can tell.


h « And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut
tree ; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in
the rods. And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters
in the watering troughs, when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive
when they came to drink. And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought
forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.” (Genesis, xxx.) Some have ar-
gued that, because Jacob dreamt the rams which leaped were ringstraked,
speckled, and grisled, they were so. If they had been, he would have seen
them speckled, &c. when he was awake. The dream represents only that the effect
taking place was the same as if the rams had been speckled, &c.

*« Jacob the patriarch, by force of imagination made peckled lambs, laying peckled
rods before his sheep. Persina, that A2thiopian queen in Heliodorus, by seeing
the picture of Perseus and Andromeda, instead of a blackmoor, was brought to
bed of a fair white child ; in imitation of whom, belike, an hard-favoured fellow
in Greece, because he and his wife were both deformed, to get a good brood
of children, elegantissimas imagines in thalamo collocavit, &c. hung the fairest
pictures he could buy for money in his chamber, that his wife, by frequent sight of
them, might conceive and bear such children. And, if we may believe Bale, one
of Pope Nicholas the Third’s concubines, by seeing of a bear, was brought to bed
of a monster. Jf a woman (saith Lemnius) at the time of her conception, think
of another man present or absent, the child will be likehim. Great-bellied women,
when they long, yield us prodigious examples in this kind, as moles, warts, scars,
harelips, monsters, especially caused in their children by force of a depraved
phantasie in them. Ipsam speciem, guam animo effigiat, Jetui inducit: she im-
prints that stamp upon her child, which she conceives unto herself. And therefore
Ludovicus Vives (lib. 2. de Christ. fem. )‘gives a special caution to great bellied
women, that they do not admit such absurd conceits and cogitations, but by all
means avoid those horrible objects, heard or seen, or filthy spectacles.” (Vol.i, Parti.
sect. 2.)

M. Girou Buzareingues mentions that a violent blow was given to a bitch
while being lined; that she was paraplegic for some days, and, when she pro-
duced her eight pups, all, excepting one, had the hind legs wanting, malformed,
or weak. (Journal de Physiolog, t. vii.)

Mr. Milne gives an account of a pregnant cat of his own, the end of whose
tail was trodden down with great violence and excruciating pain. She produced
five kittens, perfect except in the tail, which was in each of them distorted near
the end, and enlarged into a cartilaginous knob. (Linnean Transact. vol. ix.
p. 323.)

Such cases are explained by Burdach and others on the ground of a sympathy
between the injured part and the foetus. But the general principle of the power
of the mother’s mental impression is sufficient to embrace them. For, 1. there
must be the mental impression in these accidents. 2. Where the mutilation has
been in another individual —the male, the effect may occur ; so that mutilations


EFFECIS OF MIND. 1721


A curious fact is recorded on the authority of the Jate Earl Mor-
ton. He bred, from a male quagga and a mare of seven-eighths
Arabian blood, a female hybrid, displaying in form and colour her
mixed origin. The mare was given to Sir Gore Ouseley, who bred
from her first a filly and then a colt, bya fine black Arabian horse ;
but both these in their colour and in the hair of their manes
strongly resembled the quagga. The resemblance appears to
have been rather less in the colt than in the filly. Dr. Wollaston
soon afterwards learnt a similar fact in the case of a sow, which,
after littering by a boar of the wild breed, was put, long after the
death of this, to a boar of a different breed, and produced pigs,
some of which were marked like the first boar; and even in a
second litter by a third boar some slightly resembled the first.


(supra, p.1114.) made intentionally or accidentally in the male have been supposed
capable of hereditary transmission; unless this be from mental impression in
_ the male. 3. Burdach, to illustrate the sympathy, cites Stark for the case of a
pregnant woman bitten severely in the genitals by a dog and giving birth in three
days prematurely to a child with traces of lesion in its glans penis and subse-
quently subject to fits of epilepsy, before which it always awoke, jumped up, and
cried out that a deg was biting him, though this had never happened. However the
following very remarkable case from the Medical Times of Feb. 29. last, suggests
another explanation. For a woman who witnessed a mutilation in another, —
an amputation, produced a child with only a stump: but the sight of this stump
caused another pregnant woman to bring forth a child with a similar stump.

“« Maria Juster of Minchinhamptom, Gloucestershire, aged six years, met with
an accident, a broad-wheeled waggon having passed over her arm, which so
much mutilated it as to require immediate amputation, Mary Brinksworth
(who was about two months advanced in pregnancy) took the child to the hos-
pital, and was present at the operation for the removal of the arm. At the full
time of utero-gestation she was delivered of a boy with the left hand and wrist
off just above the pronator quadratus muscle. When her child was about four-
teen months old he was suddenly shown to Maria Weston of Nailsthorp, who
was then pregnant and about six weeks advanced. At the sight of the child’s
arm (to use her own expression) ‘ she became sick and faintish,’ and continued ill
for an hour. At the end of the nine months of pregnancy she was delivered of
a girl with the left hand and arm deficient from about the insertion of the deltoid
muscle. The arms of the two latter children which I saw presented exactly the
appearance as if they had been amputated, I took the above from the state-
ments of the two mothers (Mary Brinksworth and Maria Weston) of the two
children at the dispensary, June 4. 1839.”

One fact runs through all these cases, and, as it alone can explain some, it pro-
bably explains all.


i Phil, Trans. 1821, Pt. i.
4D 4


1122 EFFECTS OF MIND.


The same happens in the human subject ; for the following case
was communicated to me on undisputable authority. “A lady, et.
19, was married to a gentleman of a consumptive tendency, zt. 21.
At the end of a year she borehimason. The child died of hydro-
cephalus, zt. 2; the husband, the year following, leaving the lady
a widow at 22. At 26 she married again, and had issue six children,
—the last a boy. As he grew up, it was remarked by all the
friends of the first husband and admitted by the mother herself
that her sixth child was more like her first husband than his own
father. Moreover, though born of robust parents without any
consumptive tendency, he is delicate, and subject to tracheal ir-
ritation and chest attacks; but is now grown up, living, and in
good health.” k

Some suppose that the impregnating influence of the male be-
fore former pregnancies influenced ova immature at that time.
Just as in the plant-louse and some others an impregnation lasts
for a dozen or more generations, and in the fowl one tread will
cause a score of fecundated eggs to come forthin succession, though
all but 2 or 3 must have been immature at the time, and even
cause others, alsofecundated, to come forwards afterwards without

-arepetition of copulation. One impregnation serves the bee for 2
years or for life! But the society of a gelded animal, or of an
entire animal without copulation, may perhaps have the same effect.

“One of the most intelligent breeders,” says Mr. Boswell, ‘lever
met with in Scotland, Mr. Mustard, of Angus, told me that one of
his cows chanced to come in season, while pasturing on a field,
which was bounded by that of one of his neighbours, out of which
an ox jumped, and went with the cow until she was brought


* These facts are of high importance in a civil point of view.

A married man may have a brother very like himself. He may die. The
brother may be on the same terms of friendship with the widow as before: and
the widow may marry another man, and produce a child clearly resembling the
brother because it resembles the first husband, who has influenced the offspring
of the second; and the woman’s character may suffer unjustly,

' When the roebuck copulates in July or August, it may not be with young till
after January nor bring forth till May: in such a case, the previous fecundation
must have operated long afterwards,—when a vesicle had at length become mature,
(See Pockel’s, in Muller’s Archiv fiir Anatom. 1836. p- 193.) Hausman says
that the female fox has no foetus in March though she have been with the male
in January. (Burdach, § 301. )


‘EFFECTS OF MIND. 1123


home to the bull. The ox was white, with black spots, and
horned. Mr. Mustard had not a horned beast in his possession,
nor one with any white on it. Nevertheless, the produce of the
following spring was a black and white calf with horns.™

“Thad a pug bitch,” says Mr. Blaine, “whose constant com-
panion was a small and almost white spaniel dog of Lord
Rivers’ breed, of which she was very fond. When it became
necessary to separate her, on account of her cestrum, from this
dog, and to confine her with one of her own kind, she pined
excessively ; and notwithstanding her situation, it was some
time before she would admit of the attentions of the pug dog
placed with her. At length, however, she did so: impregnation
followed ; and, at the usual period, she brought forth five pug
puppies, one of which was elegantly white, and more slender
than the others. The spaniel was soon afterwards given away,
but the impression remained ; for, at two subsequent litters (which
were all she afterwards had), she presented me with a white young
one, which the fanciers know to be a very rare occurrence. The
late Dr. Hugh Smith used to relate a similar instance which oc-
curred to a favourite female setter that often followed his car-
riage. On one occasion, when travelling in the country, she be-
came suddenly so enamoured of a mongrel that followed her, that,
to separate them, he was forced, or rather his anger irritated him
to shoot the mongrel, and he then proceeded on his journey.
The image of this sudden favourite, however, still haunted the
bitch, and for some weeks after, she pined excessively, and ob-
stinately refused intimacy with any other dog. At length she
accepted a well-bred setter: but when she whelped, the Doctor
was mortified with the sight of a litter which, he perceived, bore
evident marks, particularly in colour, of the favoured cur, and
they were accordingly destroyed. The same also occurred in all
her future puppings: invariably the breed was tainted by the
lasting impression made bythe mongrel.”2

There could be nothing but imaginati~n in the case, detailed
by Stark°, of a pair of pigeons, which, having lost their own young
one, had a young blackbird put into their nest. This they continued


™ Quarterly Journal of Agriculture.
" Intermarriage, p. 275. sqq:
° Beitriigen zur Psychischen Anthrop. i. p. 291,


1124 EFFECTS OF MIND.


to take care of during the next incubation, and their fresh young
was no longer like them, as the former had been, but in colour
and marks the perfect image of their adopted stranger. P

The effect of the mind in generation is shown by the circum-
stance of a hen laying far more eggs than she otherwise would, if
one of those already laid is removed from the nest daily, though
no fresh sexual intercourse take place. Every bird lays a definite
number, and if any are removed she continues laying till the num-
ber is completed. A swallow naturally lays six eggs; but Lister,
by taking some away successively, caused one to lay nineteen.
The remarkable power of the mind in maintaining the secretion
of milk was shown at p. 841. note*. Every one acknowledges
the power of the mind in causing both functional and organic
diseases, and in maintaining and varying the health. Now ge-
neration is subject to all the laws of every other function. Just
as too many forget that the brain is but like every other organ;
that every organ has its own peculiar function, the brain as well
as the rest; but that every organ is subject to the same general
laws, and that the brain differs not at all in this point of viewfrom
others : so generation has been thought peculiar in every respect.
Writers speak of it as mysterious ; just as if it was more mysterious
than any thing else,—as if all was not mystery to us poor creatures.
It is a process of secretion, excretion, movement, &c., like other
functions ; and the organs and function of generation are subject
to all the cerebral influences, healthy and morbid, to which other
organs are subject, though the function is peculiar.

With civilisation and barbarism favourable changes appear cer-
tainly connected. We should beforehand be inclined to imagine that
the most excellent developement of every animated species would
be effected where all its wants were best supplied, its powers all
duly called forth, and all injurious or unpleasant circumstances
least prevalent: and vice versd. Every one knows the effect of


P Frisch declares that a bird hatched by one of a different species is as unfit
for procreation as a mule; Faber, that a drake hatched by a hen copulates with
hens more willingly than with ducks ; Bechstein, that a variety of pigeons with
black wings and tails, whose young are never unlike their parents in colour, have
a few red feathers in their wings or tails when they have been hatched by another
variety which has an intermixture of red feathers. (Burdach, $359.) If this
is _ it shows an influence not indeed mental, but capable of penetrating a
shell.


EFFECTS OF CULTURE. 1125


cultivation in the vegetable kingdom. It “ often converts a single
flower into a double one, by the metamorphosis of its stamens into
petals, or by the developement of a row of petals previously abor-
tive, or by the change of the smaller tubular florets of a composite
flower (like those composing the eye or disk of the dahlia) into
flat expanded florets which constitute the ray. Cultivation has a
similar effect in obliterating the spines, prickles, and thorns, from
the surface of many plants ; a change which was fancifully but not
improperly termed by Linneus ‘ the taming of wild fruits.’”4 The
apple and cabbage have been altered by cultivation equally with
the dahlia; and, if the seeds of any of these are dropped in a poor
soil, plants are produced approximating to the original type of
the species. All horses, the Shetland pony and Arabian racer,
have a common origin ; as well as the Newfoundland dog and the
Italian greyhound ; and owe their differences to external circum-
stances. For if they return to a state of nature, as is the case
with the dogs introduced into Cuba by the Spaniards, and the
horses and wild cattle which are now spread over the plains of
South America, the differences of breed disappear and a common
form prevails. More than this, znstzncts, dormant for ages, through
external circumstances are excited into activity, for the wild horses
of South America herd under a leader, like those of Asia which
have never been domesticated." But experience teaches us that


4 Mr. Carpenter, 1. c. p. 419.

r « {t seems,” says Mr. Lyell, “reasonable to conclude that the power be-
stowed on the horse, the dog, the ox, the sheep, the cat, and many species of
domestic fowls, of supporting almost every climate, was given expressly to enable
them to follow man throughout all parts of the globe, in order that he may ob-
tain their services and they owr protection.” ‘ Unless some animals had mani-
fested in the wild state an aptitude to second the efforts of man, their domestication
would never have been attempted. Ifthey had all resembled the wolf, the fox,
and the hyena, the patience of the experimentalist would have been exhausted
by innumerable failures before he at last succeeded in obtaining some imperfect
results: so, if the first advantages derived from the cultivation of plants had
been elicited by as tedious and costly a process as that by which we now make
some slight additional improvement in certain races, we should have remained
to this day, in ignorance of the greater number of their useful qualities.” (In-
troduction to the Study of Geology.) The fly attends man, equally with the
dog.

The same difference in the form of the head and the colour are observed in
originally wild horses, and in a race sprung from tame horses which have run
wild again in Eastern Siberia, (Pallas, Voyage en Sibérie.)


1126 EFFECYS OF CULTURE.


changes brought about in an animal after birth are not in general
transmitted to the offspring: the causes of change in a species
must therefore operate, not by altering the parents, but by dis-
posing them to produce an offspring more or less different from
themselves. Such is John Hunter's view of the questions, and it
is certainly confirmed by every fact. Yet circumstances, which
produce a change in the offspring by acting through the parent


The skull of the domesticated swine differs from that of the wild boar. Wild
horses have proportionally larger heads than tame, with foreheads round and
arched. (Pennant, History of Quadrupeds.)

The skin of the ass by domestication becomes softer and loses the small tuber-
cles which are dispersed over the surface of the wild animal and enable the Le-
vantines to make the grained leather called chagrin. (Buffon, Sur la Dégénéra-
tion des Animauz.)

Horses and oxen have run wild in South America, and, the climate being con-
genial to them, have multiplied prodigiously. The wild horses are chestnut or
bay brown ; all the wild oxen of a reddish brown at the upper part of the body, and
black every where else. But the tame horses and oxen are of all colours. (Ca-
zara, Voyage dans ? Amérique Mérid. t.i. p. 178. sq.)

Dr. Prichard considers that ‘it has been proved by M. Serres that sufficiently
characteristic differences may be traced between the skeletons of the dog and the
' wolf, the fox and the jackal, to constitute separate species ; but it does not appear
that any such distinctions can be established between the different breeds of dogs.
The figure of the skull and the proportionate length of the limbs in comparison
with the trunk differ in the different races, and the instinct displays some corre-
sponding varieties, the animal being naturally impelled to procure its prey by
the aid of those organs, whether of sight or of smell, which are more fully de-
veloped in each breed. In the most highly domesticated races, it appears that the
cranium is more fully developed and recedes further from the form of the skull
proper to the wolf, than in those which are less cultivated, though there is no
strongly marked line of discrimination. The mastiff resembles the wolf most;
in proceeding from the mastiff to the spaniel all the differences become greater.
(lsc. :-vols~i. —p. 852, )

* I fear that John Hunter has not generally the credit of this observation, but
the following passage shows it to be clearly his.‘ As animals are known to pro-
duce young which are different from themselves in colour, form, and disposition,
arising from what may be called the unnatural mode of life, it shows this curious
power of accommodation in the animal economy, — that although education can
produce no change in the colour, form, or disposition of the animal, yet it is
capable of producing a principle which becomes so natural to the animal that it
shall beget young different in colour and form; and so altered in disposition, as
to be more casily trained up to the offices in which they have been usually em-
ployed ; and having these dispositions suitable to such changes of form.” (On
the Wolf, Jackall, and Dog, |. ¢.)


EFFECTS OF CULTURE. 1137


may produce the same change likewise in the parent zm a certain
degree, although the change in the latter is not the cause of the
change in the offspring. .

Uncivilised nations exposed to the inclemency of the weather,
supported by precarious and frequently unwholesome food, and
having none of the distinguished energies of their nature called
forth, are generally dark coloured and less distant from brutes
in conformation; while those who enjoy the blessings of civil-
isation, 2. e. good food and covering, with mental cultivation
and enjoyment, generally acquire in the same proportion the
Caucasian characteristics. The different effects of different
degrees of cultivation, says Dr. Smith, “ are most conspicuous
in those countries in which the laws have made the most
complete and permanent division of ranks. What an immense
difference exists in Scotland between the chiefs and the com-
monalty of the Highland clans. If they had been separately
found in different countries, the philosophy of some writers
would have ranged them in different species. A similar dis-
tinction takes place between the nobility and peasantry of
France, of Spain, of Italy, of Germany. It is even more
conspicuous in Eastern nations, where a wider difference exists
between the highest and the lowest classes in society. The
naires or nobles of Calicut, in the East Indies, have with the
usual ignorance and precipitancy of travellers been pronounced
a different race from the populace; because the former, ele-
vated by their rank, and devoted only to martial studies and
achievements, are distinguished by that manly beauty and ele-
vated stature so frequently found with the profession of arms:
especially when united with nobility of descent: the latter poor
and laborious, and exposed to hardships without the spirit or
the hope to better their condition, are much more deformed and
diminutive in their persons, and in their complexion much more
black. In France, says Buffon, you may distinguish by their
aspect not only the nobility from the peasantry, but the superior
orders of nobility from the inferior, these from citizens, and
citizens from peasants.” —“ The field slaves in America,” con-
tinues Dr. Smith, “are badly clothed, fed, and lodged, and live
in small huts on the plantations, remote from the example and
society of their superiors. Living by themselves, they retain
many of the customs and manners of their ancestors. The


1128 EFFECTS OF CULTURE.


domestic servants, on the other hand, who are kept near the
persons, or employed in the family of their masters, are treated
with great lenity, their service is light, they are fed and clothed
like their superiors, they see their manners, adopt their habits,
and insensibly receive the same ideas of elegance and beauty.
The field slaves are in consequence slow in changing the aspect
and figure of Africa. The domestic servants have advanced far
before them in acquiring the agreeable and regular features, and
the expressive countenance of civilised society. The former are
frequently ill shaped ; they preserve, in a great degree, the African
lips, and nose and hair. Their genius is dull, and their counte-
nance sleepy and stupid. The latter are straight and well pro-
portioned, their hair extended to three or four, sometimes even
to six or eight inches: the size and shape of their mouth hand-
some, their features regular, their capacity good, and their look
animated.’’t

Dr. Prichard has “been assured by persons who have resided
in the West Indies, that a similar change is very visible among
the Negro slaves of the third and fourth generation in those
islands, and that the first generation differs considerably from the
natives of Africa.” "

Dr. Hancock the American traveller, in a letter to Mr. Walker,
writes,—‘“ It has appeared to me that very obvious changes are
produced in a few generations independently of intermarriage.
We find in Negro families which have long dwelt with those of
the whites as domestics, that successive generations become less
marked in their African features, in the thick lip and flat nose:
and with skins of a shining black, they gradually acquire the Eu-
ropean physiognomy. This is more especially visible among the
older settlers, and in the smaller islands, such as St. Kitts, Nevis,
Montserrat — where there had been but small accessions of
native Africans. Under such circumstances we may often dis-
tinguish a Dutch Negro by the countenance alone. This difference
can scarcely be described by words, but frequently we observe
that obliquity of the eye so common to the Hollander. *

The South Sea Islanders, who appear to be all of one family,


* On the Causes of the Variety in the Complexion and Figure of the Human
Species, p. 85. sq.

ulic. Ed. 2. t.ii. p. 565. sq.

x Intermarriage, p. 279.


EFFECTS OF CULTURE. 1129


vary according to their degree of cultivation. The New Zea-
landers, for example, are savages and chiefly black; the New
Hollanders, half civilised and chiefly tawny; the Friendly Is-
landers are more advanced and not quite so dark, several are
lighter than olive colour, and hundreds of European faces are
found among them.

The people of Otaheite and the Society Isles are the most
civilised and the most beautiful: the higher orders among them
have a light complexion and hair flowing in ringlets; the lower
orders, less cultivated, are less pleasing.

‘The same superiority,’’ says Captain Kingy, “-which is ob-
servable in the Erees (nobles) throughout the other islands, is
found also here (Owyhee). Those whom we saw were, without
exception, perfectly well formed; whereas the lower sort, besides
their general inferiority, are subject to all the variety of make
and figure that is seen in the populace of other countries,” 4


There is no question that the cultivation of any organ or power
of the parent will dispose to the production of offspring improved
in the same particular.

“Every one conversant with beasts knows that not only their
natural, but many of their acquired qualities are transmitted by
their parents to their offspring. Perhaps the most curious ex-
ample of the latter may be found in the pointer.

“‘ This animal is endowed with the natural instinct of winding
game, and stealing upon his prey, which he surprises, having first
made a short pause, in order to launch himself upon it with more
security of success. This sort of semicolon in his proceedings
man converts into a full stop, and teaches him to be as much
pleased at seeing the bird or beast drop by the shooter’s gun as
at taking it himself. The staunchest dog of this kind, and the
original pointer, is of Spanish origin, and our own is derived from
this race, crossed with that of the fox-hound or other breed of
dogs, for the sake of improving his speed. This mixed and fac-
titious race of course naturally partakes less of the true pointer


y Cook, Voyages, vol. iii. book v. ¢. 7.

z If the kingdom of Hayti continues, some highly interesting physiological
questions will be determined; — We shall know what cultivation the African
race is capable of, and what influence civilisation has upon the system of succes-


sive generations,


1130 EFFECTS OF CULTURE.


character ; that is to say, is less disposed to stop, or, at least, he
makes a shorter stop at game. The factitious pointer is, however,
disciplined in this country into staunchness; and what is most
singular, this quality is in a great degree inherited by his puppy;
who may be seen earnestly standing at pigeons or swallows in a
farm-yard. For intuition, though it leads the offspring to ex-
ercise his parent’s faculties, does not instruct him how to direct
them. The preference of his master afterwards guides him in his
selection, and teaches him what game is better worth pursuit.
On the other hand, the pointer of pure Spanish race, unless he
happens to be well broke himself, which in the South of Europe
seldom happens, produces a race which are all but unteachable,
according to our notions of a pointer’s business. They will make
a stop at their game as natural instinct prompts them, but seem
incapable of being drilled into the habits of the animal which
education has formed in this country, and has rendered, as I have
said, in some degree, capable of transmitting his acquirements to
his descendants.

‘«‘ Acquired habits are hereditary in other animals besides dogs.
English sheep, probably from the greater richness of our pastures,
feed very much together; while the Scotch sheep are obliged to
extend and scatter themselves over their hills for the better dis-
covery of food. Yet the English sheep, on being transferred to
Scotland, keep their old habit of feeding in a mass, though so
little adapted to their new country: so do their descendants ; and
the English sheep is not thoroughly naturalised into the neces-
sities of his place till the third generation. The same thing may
be observed as to the nature of his food, that is observed in his
mode of eating it. When turnips were introduced from England
into Scotland, it was only the third generation which heartily
adopted this diet, the first having been starved into an acqui-
escence in it. In the same manner it required some years to
establish the English practice of bringing up calves by hand in
Scotland ; the first who were so fed being cheated into swallowing
milk, as the English calves at first are, by dipping the finger in
the bowl and giving it the animal tosuck. Nor was this mode of
administering nourishment (slowly and reluctantly admitted by
Lowland calves) ever, I believe, cordially adopted by their moun-
tain kindred. The Highland beast has shown himself the worthy
imitator of the Highland man, and is as obstinate in his opposition


EFFECIS OF CULTURE. 1131


to this, as his Celtic master is to any other southern improvement
which can be offered to him.”

Mr. Knight many years ago» advanced that bees and every
Species of domestic animal acquired “an irresistible propensity to
do that which their predecessors of the same family have been
taught to do through many successive generations.”” He stated,
“that a young Terrier, whose parents had been much employed
in destroying Polecats, and a young Springing Spaniel whose
ancestry through many generations had been employed in finding
Woodcocks, were reared together as companions, the Terrier not
having been permitted to see a Polecat or any other animal of a
similar character, and the Spaniel having been prevented seeing a
Woodcock or any other kind of game; and that the Terrier evinced,
as soon as it perceived the scent of the Polecat, very violent anger ;
and as soon as it saw the Polecat, attacked it with the same degree
of fury as its parents would have done. The young Spaniel, on
the contrary, looked on with indifference ; but it pursued the first
Woodcock which it ever saw, with joy and exultation of which
its companion the Terrier did not in any degree partake.” ¢


* Thoughts and Recollections by one of the last Century.

> Phil. Trans. 17.

* Phil. Trans. 1837. p. 865. ‘* Woodcocks are driven in frosty weather, as
is well known, to seek their food in springs and rills of unfrozen water, and I
found that my old dogs knew about as well as I did the degree of frost which
would drive the woodcocks to such places; and this knowledge proved very
troublesome to me, for I could not sufficiently restrain them. I therefore left
the old experienced dogs at home, and took only the wholly inexperienced young
dogs; but to my astonishment, some of these, in several instances, confined them-
selves as closely to the unfrozen grounds as their parents would have done.”
(p. 366.) “ The most extraordinary instance,’ Mr. Knight adds, “of the power
of instinctive hereditary propensity which I haye ever witnessed, came under my
observation in the case of a young dog of a variety usually called Retrievers. The
proper office of these dogs is that of finding and recovering wounded game, but
they are often employed for more extensive purposes, and are found to possess
very great sagacity. I obtained a very young puppy (only a month old) of this
family, which was said to be exceedingly well bred, and had been brought to
me from a distant county. I had walked up the side of the river which passes
by my house, in search of Wild Ducks, when the dog above mentioned followed
me unobserved, and contrary to my wishes, for it was too young for service, not
being then quite ten months old, It had not received any other instruction, than
that of being taught to bring any floating body off a pond, and I do not think
that it had ever done this more than three or four times. It walked very quietly


45


1132 HEREDITARY EFFECT OF CULTURE.


It is impossible not to suppose that similar results upon human
offspring by educating the parents may be obtained. Mr. Knight
thus writes to Mr. Walker. ‘A celebrated French civil engineer,
M. Polonceau, visited me some years ago, bringing with him a
young French gentleman who spoke English eloquently, and
perfectly like an Englishman, though he had been in England
only two years, and, as he assured me, knew nothing of the lan-
guage previously, nor had ever heard it spoken. I asked him
whether he could pronounce the English name Thisslethwaite ;
and he instantly pronounced it most distinctly and perfectly.
The next day, when talking of other matters, he said that he had
some Irish relations; and it appeared that his grandmother, on
the female side, whom he had never seen, was an Irishwoman.
Hence arose, I do not at all doubt, his power of so readily pro-
nouncing the word I had prescribed. A French gentleman at
Paris boasted to me that he could pronounce correctly any En-
glish word. I proposed Thisslethwaite to him, when, instead of
trying, he exclaimed, ‘ Ah barbare !’”*


behind my gamekeeper upon the opposite side of the river, and it looked on with
apparent indifference while I killed a couple of Mallards and Widgeons, but it
leaped into the river instantly upon the gamekeeper pointing out the birds to it,
and it brought them on shore and to the foot of the gamekeeper, just as well as
the best instructed old dog could have done. I subsequently shot a Snipe, which
fell into the middle of a Jarge nearly stagnant pool of water, which was partially
frozen over. I called the dog from the other side of the river and caused it to
see the Snipe, which could not be done without difficulty ; but, as soon as it saw
it, it swam to it, brought it to me, laid it down at my feet, and again swam
through the river to the gamekeeper. I never saw a dog acquit itself so well,
yet it was wholly untaught. I state the circumstances with reluctance and not
without hesitation, because I doubt whether I could believe them to be well
founded upon any other evidence than that of my own senses; the statement
is nevertheless perfectly correct.”” (p. 367. sq.)

Other functional changes are effected in the offspring through the parents al-
though they could not be brought about in the parents themselves. Englishmen
carried out greyhounds to hunt hares in Mexico, The great platform where
they hunt is about 9,000 feet above the level of the sea, and the ordinary height
of the barometer is 19 inches. The greyhounds could not support a long
chase in the thin atmosphere; and lay down gasping before they came up with
their prey. But their whelps do not suffer in the least from the attenuation of
the atmosphere, and run down the hares with as much ease as the best hounds in
England. (Lyell.)

4 Intermarriage, p. 178. sq.


EFFECT OF CLIMATE. 1133


Climate, however, has not been shown to have no effect: but
its power, being in itself not generally very considerable, cannot be
Strongly manifested when opposed. In fact, a diminution of the
sun’s influence does dispose to the production of light varieties :
the inhabitants of hilly situations are, ceteris paribus, fairer than
the people below, and persons of the same tribe and degree of
civilisation lighter in the northern parts of Europe and Asia than
those in the more southern; whiteness, too, is very common in
the North among animals which nearer the equator are variously
coloured; a pair of brown mice kept in a dark place are said to
generate a white offspring. Blumenbach mentions that small birds
fed on hemp-seed in a chamber, become black. Some statements
have been lately made respecting New South Wales, that show
the influence of the climate of that country to be considerable.

““It appears, indeed, that the change which takes place in the
physical constitution of all kinds of animals on transplantation to
New South Wales, is something quite astonishing. It was long
since remarked, that prostitutes who had never borne children
in Europe, became prolific mothers in the Australian colonies, and
that married women who had long left off child-bearing, recom-
menced, in some cases even at the advanced period of fifty years,
after a short residence in these regions; and the observation
appears to be confirmed, that not only the human race, but most
of the quadrupeds produced from animals imported, improve their
breed and increase considerably in size. Mr. Dawson, the intel-
ligent manager of the Australian Agricultural Company, thus
writes in a private journal with which we have been favoured,
‘Both the climate and the soil appear by nature intended to
produce fine wool and fine animals too, even from the worst
beginnings. The latter seems a paradox. The extensive range
that can be afforded to every animal keeps it in good condition,
and, perhaps, the native grasses may have more of good in them
than their appearance indicates. However this may be, the
climate clearly has a wonderful effect on the size of all animals,
even upon man, who is almost universally tall here, although born
of diminutive parents. From this I am led to believe that the
climate governs chiefly, and thus every breeding animal intro-
duced here will attain a size not known in Europe. From what

© Med. Gazette, No. 2,
4EZ


1134 EFFECT OF CLIMATE.


I know of the origin of the breed of horses introduced here, and
the size of the stock that has almost promiscuously been pro-
duced from them, I have strong: grounds for inferring that the
produce of such horses as we have imported will be something
extraordinary.’”’?

Bishop Heber, in speaking of India, says, “ It is remarkable to
observe how surely all these classes of men (whites, — Persian,
Greeks, Tartars, Turks, and Arabians), in a few generations, even
without any intermarriage with the Hindoos, assume the deep
olive tint, little less dark than a Negro, which seems natural to
the climate. The Portuguese have, during three hundred years’
residence in India, become as black as Caffres. Surely this goes
far to disprove the assertion which is sometimes made, that climate
alone is insufficient to account for the difference between the
Negro and the European. It is true that in the Negro are other
peculiarities which the Indian has not, and to which the Portu-
guese colonist shows no symptom of approximation, and which
undoubtedly do not appear to follow as naturally from the climate
as that swarthiness of complexion which is the sole difference be-
tween the Hindoo and the European. But if heat produces one
change, other peculiarities of climate may produce other and
additional changes, and where such peculiarities have three or
four thousand years to operate in, it is not easy to fix any limit to
their power. I am inclined, after all, to suspect that our Euro-
pean vanity leads us astray in supposing that our own is the
primitive complexion, which I would rather suppose was that of
the Indian, half way between the two extremes, perhaps the most
agreeable to the eye and instinct of the majority of the human
race, Colder climate and a constant use of clothes may have
bleached the skin as effectually as a burning sun and nakedness
may have tanned it; and I am encouraged in this hypothesis by
observing that of animals the natural colours are generally dusky
and uniform, while whiteness and a variety of tint almost inva-
riably follow domestication, shelter from the elements, and a
mixed and unnatural diet. Thus while hardships, additional
exposure, a greater degree of heat, and other circumstances with
which we are acquainted, may have deteriorated the Hindoo into


. - a . +
f Quarterly Review, Jan, 1828, p.7. Review of Two Years in New South
Wales, $c. by P. Cunningham, surgeon, R, N. 1827.


EFFECT OF CLIMATE. 1135


a Negro, opposite causes may have changed him into the pro-
gressively lighter tints of the Chinese, the Persian, the Turk, the
Russian, and the Englishman.” &

“Where the mountains of intertropical Africa rise or are con-
tinued into high plains or into steppes of considerable elevation,
the physical characters of the inhabitants are generally those
which are termed European, and the continuity of surface being
favourable to a nomadic life, such nations, as for example the
mountaineers of Caffaand Enarca, and the hordes termed Gallas,
approximate, in their habits and manner of life, to the pastoral
tribes of Northern Asia. In the Negro countries, properly. so
called, the natives of higher districts are observed to be physically
superior to those of low and swampy valleys; and there is, per-
haps, an equal difference in their manifestation of intellect and
mental vigour.” »

“On the plantation of Ulster, and afterwards on the successes
of the British against the rebels in 1641 and 1685, great multitudes
of the native Irish were drivenfrom Armagh and the South of Down
into the mountainous tract extending from the Barony of Flews
eastward to the sea; on the other side of the kingdom the same
race were expelled from Leitrim, Sligo, and Mayo. Here they
have been almost ever since, exposed to the worst effects of hunger
and ignorance, the two great brutalisers of the human race.” The
descendants of these exiles are now distinguished physically from
their kindred in Meath and other districts where they are not ina
state of physical degradation. They are remarkable for « open
projecting mouths, with prominent teeth and exposed gums ;
their advancing cheek bones and depressed noses bear barbarism
in their very front.”

“In Sligo and the northern Mayo the consequences of two
centuries of degradation and hardship exhibit themselves in the
whole physical condition of the people, affecting not only the
features but the frame, and giving such an example of human
deterioration from known causes as almost compensates by its
value to future ages for the suffering and debasement which


& Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces of India, Jrom Calcutta
to Bombay, by the late Reginald Heber, D.D, Lord Bishop of Calcutta,
p. 54. sq.

* Dr. Prichard, Researches, vol, ii. p. 53.


4 E 3


113 EFFECT OF CLIMATE.


past generations have endured in perfecting its appalling lesson.”
“ Five feet two inches upon an average, pot-bellied, bow-legged,
abortively featured ; their clothing” a wisp of rags, &c. ‘These
spectres of a people that once were well grown, able-bodied and
comely, stalk abroad into the daylight of civilisation, the animal
apparitions of Irish ugliness and Irish want.” In other parts of
the island where the population has never undergone the influence
of the same causes of physical degradation, it is well known that
the same race furnish the most perfect specimens of human beauty
and vigour both mental and bodily. i

Volney gives us a singular instance of the power of climate
upon different races; not, indeed, in producing variety, but in
mysteriously affecting generation.

“During five hundred and fifty years that there have been
Mamlouks in Egypt, not one of them has left subsisting issue :
there does not exist one single family of them in the second
generation; all their children perish in the first or second
descent. Almost the same thing happens to the Turks; and it
is observed that they can only secure the continuance of their
families, by marrying women who are natives, which the Mam-
louks have always disdained. Let the naturalist explain why
men, well formed, and married to healthy women, are unable to
naturalise on the banks of the Nile, a race born at the foot of
Mount Caucasus! and let it be remembered, at the same time,
that the plants of Europe in that country are equally unable to
continue their species! Some may refuse to believe this extra-
ordinary fact, but it is not on that account less certain ; nor does
it appear tobe new. The ancients have made observations of the
same nature: thus, when Hippocrates asserts, that among the
Scythians and Egyptians, all the individuals resemble each other,
though they are like no other nations ; when he adds, that in the
countries inhabited by these two races of men, the climate, seasons,
elements, and soil possess an uniformity nowhere else to be found,
does he not recognise that kind of exclusion of which I speak ?
When such countries impress so peculiar a character on every thing
native, is it not a reason why they should reject whatever is foreign ?
It seems, then, that the only means of naturalising animals and
plants would be to contract an affinity with the climate, by alli-


' Dublin University Magazine, No. 18.; also Dr. Prichard, 1. ¢, vol. ii. p. $49,


EFFECT OF CLIMATE. 1137


ance with the native species; and this, as I have before said,
the Mamlouks have constantly refused. The means, therefore
by which they are perpetuated and multiplied, are the same by
which they were first established ; that is to say, when they die,
they are replaced by slaves brought from their original country.’*

Being curious on this point, and having a most intelligent and
valued friend, the late member for Ripon, who travelled in Turkey,
Syria, and Egypt, and even spent seven months in the Desert of
Arabia, I applied to him for information, and received the fol-
lowing note : —


“ Dear Elliotson, Limmer’s Hotel, March 3. 1828.


“TJ have just received your note, and have great pleasure in
giving you what information I am able on the subject of the Eu-
ropeans in Egypt. You asked me yesterday if I had not told you
Volney was incorrect in the statement he has made in p. 108.
concerning the Mamlouks? I do not remember having told you
any thing to that effect: the subject which he seems to have been
misinformed upon is the climate of Syria, which does not interest
you.

‘‘ From the various inquiries I made in Egypt I consider Volney
to be perfectly correct. The persons whom I asked had never
read his work, and till I asked them had never given their attention
to the subject ; yet still they could not bring one instance to their
recollection of the children (of two whites) born in the country
ever coming to maturity. I was also told that children begotten
by Europeans out of natives (a circumstance which, however,
rarely happens, owing to the Copts and Arabs being very par-
ticular on that subject) entirely lose their appearance of European
origin in the third generation. The physiognomy of the Copts is
very striking ; I never remember secing the least European mixture,
which would be visible if they had made alliances with the Turks
who are as different in the form of face as can be well imagined,—
the Turks have Roman noses; the Georgians Grecian; the Mam-
louks both; but the Copts are snubs.

‘“‘T was told at Damietta, the port on the eastern branch of the
Nile, that an Italian family had flourished amazingly ; afterwards
I heard the mother was a Maltese, which, if true, more strongly


k Voyage en Egypte et en Syrie, t.i. p. 87. sq.
4E 4


1138 EFFECT OF CLIMATE.


corroborates the fact, as the Maltese are supposed to be of
Arabian origin; they speak a kind of jargon so like Arabic as
to make themselves understood by the natives on their arrival in
Egypt.

“What Volney also says about the vegetables is equally true.
When I left Cairo, a gardener hearing that I was going to Jaffa
and Damascus, and likely to return, begged me to bring him melon
and cauliflower seed, as, though those plants thrive exceedingly
well in Egypt, unless the seed be renovated constantly, it dege-
nerates so as quite to become another plant. This is also the
case, I understand, with the Brussels sprouts, so celebrated in
the Netherlands. Plants raised from seed from Brussels thrive
well in this country; but seed saved here, though it ripens
thoroughly, greatly degenerates in the second generation.

“The race of Mamlouks has been entirely destroyed by the
present Pacha, Mahommed Ali. Only a few escaped the general
massacre in the citadel, and fled to Dongola. These few have
been gradually dying off. When I was in Cairo I heard from a
person lately arrived from Abyssinia that only a very few were
left. One old man, the only one in Cairo, I used to see daily in
_a public garden. I had some conversation with him several
times, but he was quite superannuated, and could give no inform-
ation. . In fact, had he been capable, his life would not have
been spared.

“Ever your’s most truly,
“J. 8S. Crompton.”


The effect of civilisation on corporeal strength was proved by
Peron!,who ascertained, by means of Regnier’s Dynamometer, the
bodily power of the complete savage of Van Diemen’s Land to be
inferior to that of the more cultivated New Hollander, of the latter
to that of the still more cultivated inhabitant of Timor, and of the
last very considerably to that of Europeans. The weakest French-
man was equal in the hands to the strongest man of Van Diemen’s
Land, and the weakest Englishman stronger than the strongest
New Hollander: the average strength of Europeans in the loins
exceeded that of the most powerful individuals of either Van
Diemen’s Land, New Holland, or Timor.


' Voyages des Découvertes aux Terres A ustrales.


EFFECT OF CLIMATE. 1189


Perfection, in other words, the highest compatible point of
utility or agreeableness, or of both, is nature’s universal aim in
her productions; but it is in general obtained slowly, and the
more so in proportion to the excellence or degree of the qualities
to be perfected. Animals and vegetables have to pass one period
before they burst into birth, and another before their full powers
and proportions are reached ; and man, whose perfections are
very excellent, arrives at his acmé very late.

It is in this respect with species as with individuals, — their
improvement is gradual.

The fact of the improvement of progeny by the operation of all
favourable causes upon parents is highly encouraging. Horace, in
his invective Ode against the vices of the Romans, says,


‘* A‘tas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem yitiosiorem ;”™


But as happy circumstances will tend to the production of a
better progeny, we have great encouragement to exert all our
energies for the improvement of mankind, whatever distress we
must feel for our disappointments in individuals of whom we had
thought well and for whom we havedone much. Ordinarily a cer-
tain amount only of improvement by education can be effected in
an individual. He generally stops at last; and defies all efforts to
advance him farther. Happily he dies, with all his uneradicable
prejudices. His offspring has them not, or not so fixed; and it
would seem that the offspring is likely to be still better organised
than the parent, through the good influences exerted upon the
parent.

In vegetables and brutes, whatever improvement is made by
good management of external circumstances, there is a constant
tendency to fall back to the original state, so that constant
cultivation is required." It is the same with us; and the neglect


m Carm, lib, ili. 6.

" M. Roulin, in a paper read to the Academy of Sciences in Paris in 1829,
stated that in South America the brutes from Europe soon acquired more or
less of their wild characters. The hog, wandering in the woods and subsisting
on wild fruits, becomes very ferocious and assumes almost the character of the
wild boar. The bulls and cows soon became wild, and could be kept in sub-
jection by repeated battues only. By the independent character which the horse


1140 ATTENTION TO THE BREED.


of the physical and mental means of improvement will cause an
inferior progeny to be established. But, great as this influence
is, and greatly as we ought to rely upon it, that of the breed is
very far stronger; and, though almost entirely neglected by in-
dividuals, should always guide marrying people. No one has
spoken better or more plainly on this point than Burton in his
Anatomy of Melancholy. tis thought that not only a good cross
within the same nation is always desirable, but that a cross
between two nations begets offspring superior to either. The
importance of crossing an inferior nation by a better is shown by


leads, it resumes nearly the character of the wild horse, and remarkably re-
sembles it in colour.

Variety is less difficult to accomplish in some species than in others: and is
transmitted with different degrees of facility : and sometimes is soon lost again ;
sometimes it becomes permanent, and this especially when it has been effected
with difficulty.

° Pt. 1. see. ii, mem. 1. subs. 6. ‘ An husbandman will sow none but the best
and choicest seed upon his land ; he will not rear a bull or an horse, except he be
right shapen in all parts, or permit him to cover a mare, except he be well assured
of his breed ; we make choice of the best rams for our sheep, rear the neatest kine,
and keep the best dogs; quanto id diligentius in procreandis liberis observandum ?
and how careful then should we be in begetting of our children? In former time,
some countries have been so chary in this behalf, so stern, that, if a child were
crooked or deformed in body or mind, they made him away ; so did the Indians
of old (by the relation of Curtius), and many other well-governed common-
wealths, according to the discipline of those times. Heretofore, in Scotland
(saith Hect. Boéthius) if any were visited with the falling sickness, madness,
Sout, leprosie, or any such dangerous disease, which was likely to be propagated

Jrom the father to the son, he was instantly gelded ; a woman kept from all com=
pany of men: and if by chance, having some such disease, she were found to be
with child, she with her brood were buried alive : and this was done for the com-
mon good, lest the whole nation should be injured or corrupted. A severe doom,
you will say, and not to be used amongst Christians, yet more to be looked into
than it is. For now, by our too much facility in this kind, in giving way for all
to marry that will, too much liberty and indulgence in tolerating all sorts, there
is a vast confusion of hereditary diseases, no family secure, no man almost free
from some grievous infirmity or other. When no choice is had, but still the
eldest must marry, as so many stallions of the race; or, if rich, be they fools or
dizzards, lame or maimed, unable, intemperate, dissolute, exhaust through riot,
(as he said) jure hereditario sapere jubentur ; they must be wise and able by in-
heritance ; it comes to pass that our generation is corrupt; we have many weak
persons, both in body and mind, many feral diseases raging amongst us, crazed
families, parentes peremptores ; our fathers bad ; and we are like to be worse.”


ATTENTION TO THE BREED. 1141


the great improvement of the Persians, who were originally ugly
and clumsy, ill made and rough skinned, by intermixing with the
Georgians and Circassians, the two most beautiful nations of the
earth. “There is hardly a man of rank in Persia who is not
born of a Georgian or Circassian mother; and even the king
himself is commonly sprung, on the female side, from one or
other of these countries.”? But when one nation is not surpassed
in any particular quality by another, I doubt whether this quality
is improved by the cross: the superior race cannot gain, but must
lose. Unfortunately, few nations are not inferior in some things,
and national crossing is therefore generally useful ; for there is less
chance of the same defects meeting in the two, than when they
marry among themselves. What is excellent in the one nation
must be deteriorated by mixture with the low degree of the same
in the other. Crossing among nations may be more advantageous,
as being more decided, than crossing among individuals of the
same nation. But without care it may be an evil.


P Lawrence’s Lectures.


1142


APPENDIX.


DIGESTION.


Srnce the publication of the First Part of this work, I have learnt
that a rare opportunity of studying the function of digestion has
occurred and been turned to excellent account by Dr. Beaumont
in America. @

A Canadian youth, 18 years of age, had a fistulous opening of
the stomach, left after a gunshot wound. In June, 1823, a year
after the accident, an external opening into the stomach, nearly
24 inches in circumference, existed. Early in the winter a small
fold of the inner membrane began to appear, which gradually
- filled the opening, preventing egress, but was easily pushed back
with the finger.

When the stomach was empty, it always contracted upon
itself, and the valve of mucous membrane, equal in size to a hen’s
egg, was forced through the orifice. After he had slept a few hours
on the left side, the protruded portion became so much larger as to
spread over the neighbouring integuments to a circumference of
5 or 6 inches, so that the mucous membrane could be well ex-
amined. Dr. Beaumont ascertained that the gastric juice is not
secreted in the intervals of digestion, nor does it accumulate to
be ready for the next meal.

As soon as food came into contact with the mucous membrane,
the blood-vessels enlarged with blood ; the membrane, from being
pink, became red; the temperature is always 100°. This is in
accordance with the general fact, that during its function every
part becomes more or less turgid with blood; and if, by a con-
trivance of structure, the blood does not pass away from a part


* Experiments and Observations on the Gastric Juice and the Phy ysiology of Di-
gestion. By W. Beaumont, M.D. Plattsburgh, 1833,


DIGESTION. 1143


as quickly as it arrives, this becomes much larger, — experiences
erection. The peristaltic action of the stomach increased, and
innumerable minute lucid points and very fine papille arose, from
which oozed a clear, colourless, inodorous, and acidulous-tasting,
slightly viscid fluid, which collected in drops on the points of the
papillz, and trickled down the sides of the stomach till it mingled
with the food. This was the gastric juice. Mechanical or any
cause of irritation, as well as food, occasioned the same result.
The fluid would keep unchanged almost any length of time.

It always bore a direct relation to the quantity of food required
by the system, not to the quantity taken.

Whenever a feverish state was induced by undue stimulants or
emotion, the mucous coat became sometimes red and dry, and at
others pale and moist, and lost altogether its smooth and healthy
appearance. If the state increased, no gastric juice could be
procured even on the application of the usual stimulus of food.

Although the contact of any indigestible substance immediately
excited the secretion, fluid ceased to flow as soon as it proved
that the substance could not be acted upon.

When an ounce of masticated fresh beef was placed in an ounce
of gastric juice, it was partially digested in 2 hours if kept at a
temperature of 99°, but scarcely changed if the temperature was
but 34°.

In the same experiment as the last, but with cold water instead
of gastric juice, the beef seemed merely a little macerated. In
6 hours, the beef in the warm vial was half digested ; but that in
the two others, had experienced no farther alteration. At the
end of 24 hours, the beef in the warm vial, 4 drachms of gastric
juice having been previously added because the original quantity
could dissolve no more, was completely dissolved and exhibited
the usual appearance. The portions in the cold juice and cold
water were softened and similar, and without any appearance of
chyme. The vial with cold gastric juice was now placed ina
sand bath at blood heat. Ina very short time digestion com-
menced and advanced as regularly as in the other parcel.

When portions of meat were suspended in the stomach by a
string, so short as to prevent them from being fully subjected to
the peristaltic action, the influence of the gastric juice was con-
fined almost entirely to the surface, and longer time was requisite
for their solution.


1144 DIGESTION,


Meat in a vial of gastric juice was dissolved sooner if gently
agitated: and when 2 ounces of unmasticated roasted beef were
introduced through the opening into the stomach, and confined
by a string, only half was digested in 4 hours.

When a few spoonfuls of soup were introduced through the
orifice, the folds of the mucous membrane gently closed upon it,
and completely prevented the entrance of a second quantity till
it was diffused: relaxation then occurred, and a fresh supply was
admitted. When solid food was thus introduced, either in larger
pieces or finely divided, the same gentle contraction and grasping
motion began, continued for from 50 to 80 seconds, and more
could not be introduced till the contraction was at anend. If the
man was so placed that the cardia could be seen, and he then swal-
lowed a morsel, a similar contraction and closure of the stomach
upon the bolus always took place, and, till this was over, a second
morsel could not be received without great effort.

The disturbance of digestion by taking fresh food before the
last meal has left the stomach is ascribed by Dr. W. Philip to the
fresh food becoming surrounded by the former and thus, not being
exposed to the gastric juice, remaining unchanged. But, as all
the contents become intimately mixed and equally exposed to
the gastric juice, Dr. B. ascribes the disturbance to the supply of
gastric juice being all expended on the first meal, and the sto-
mach not being yet ready to secrete again.

The peristaltic action of the stomach is at first comparatively
slow and feeble, and grows rapid and energetic as chymification
advances: and at the same time the gastric juice becomes more
acid. Chyme begins to form in a quarter of an hour after de-
glutition, and the contents to lessen almost as soon as food is
swallowed. The food is gradually impelled to the pylorus, which
contracts and refuses admission to every undigested portion. If
any portion is in its nature indigestible, or the stomach having
temporarily lost its power cannot digest, the pylorus, after refusing
egress for some time, at length contracts no longer and allows the
undigested food to pass.

Drink was carried off by absorption and did not go through the
pylorus.

An ounce of gastric juice, after a fast of 17 hours, was poured
into a vial, and % drachms of recently salted beef put into it: the
vessel was corked tightly, and immersed in water of 100°. In 40


DIGESTION. 1145


minutes, digestion had distinctly begun on the surface: in 60,
chyme was formed: in 90, the muscular fibres hung loose and
floated in shreds: in 3 hours, they had lessened to half; in 5, few
were undissolved ; and in 9, the solution was perfect. But, when
a similar piece was introduced into the stomach, it was completely
dissolved in 14 hour. The difference arose from the circum-
stance of the peristaltic action causing every fresh portion to be
successively exposed.

When the man swallowed a mouthful of any tenacious food after
the digestion of the preceding meal was considerably advanced,
it always passed towards the great curvature and then disap-
peared. Ina minute or two it reappeared, more or less broken
down, and mixed with the general alimentary mass ; and, ina short
time more, it was so changed as to have lost its identity. From
this and numerous other facts, Dr. Beaumont infers, contrary to
Dr. Prout, &c. (supra, p.81.), that “there is a perfect admixture of
the whole ingesta during the period of alimentation and chy-
mification;” and that “the whole contents of the stomach, until
chymification be nearly complete, exhibit a heterogeneous mass
of solids and fluids —hard and soft, coarse and fine, crude and
chymified — all ultimately mixed, and circulating promiscuously
through the gastric cavity, like the mixed contents of a close
vessel, gently agitated or turned in the hand.” As Dr. Combe
justly remarks °, this we must have supposed the case on reflecting
upon the contents of the stomach when vomited.

When Dr. Beaumont extracted a portion of the food through the
opening half an hour or an hour after eating, he always found it
composed of perfectly formed chyme and particles of food inti-
mately mixed and blended; and every portion so completely sup-
plied with gastric juice, that its chymification proceeded with no
other aid than proper temperature and agitation till the whole
was digested.

Dr. B. put 12 drachms of recently salted beef into a phial with
12 drachms of gastric juice obtained after a fast of 18 hours; and


+ In the same experiment with chicken, the solution was slower; from the
greater compactness of cooked chicken.

© The Physiology of Digestion, &c., by Andrew Combe, M. D.; all of whose books
are of the greatest practical utility; and,in common with his phrenological
papers, show excellent sense.


1146 DIGESTION.


kept it agitated in water at 180° ina sand bath. Digestion soon
began, and, after continuing with uniformity for 6 hours ceased.
One half of the meat was found dissolved, the rest being only loose
and tender, —undigested. Only 64 drachms of beef were found
to have been digested by the 12 drachms, — nearly double its
weight of gastric juice. Hence we see why an excess of food is
not digested. In such circumstances, digestion was resumed
upon Dr. B. adding more gastric juice.

At 20 minutes after a common dinner of beef, vegetable sub-
stance and water, Dr. B. drew off a portion of the contents of the
stomach into a vial. This was placed in a water bath at 100° for
5 hours: and was then found perfectly dissolved ; insomuch that
little difference was detected between it and a second portion of
the same food taken from the stomach at the end of the 5 hours,
though the process was rather slower; 20 minutes having sufficed
for the adequate supply of gastric juice for digestion.

After a meal of 18 ounces of recently salted lean beef, 4 ounces
of potatoes, 4 ounces of boiled turnips, and some bread, portions
were withdrawn at successive periods. At 15 minutes, some of
the meat was found slightly digested: at 45, fragments of beef
and bread were perceptible, but the former was in small shreds
and pulpy, and the fluid was more opake and gruel-like. At 2
hours, nearly all the meat was chymified and changed to a red-
dish brown fluid: but small pieces of vegetable matter now pre-
sented themselves for the first time, yet less advanced in digestion
than the beef, so that their structure was visible. Some of the
2d and 3d portions, treated in a vial as usual, became quite di-
gested, as in the other experiment, except that the process was
slower, and a few vegetable fibres remained to the last undis-
solved.

Milk and albumen were always coagulated by the gastric juice
in the first instance.

When vegetable soup was taken with beef and bread, the fluid
was so absorbed in 50 minutes that the contents were even thicker
than after eating more solid food.

When acescent fruits and vegetables were eaten, the pulp in
the stomach, at the end of an hour, was acrid and irritated the
edges of the aperture and the rest of the mucous membrane; and
still more acrid at the end of 1} hour: and, though the stomach was
empty at the end of 2 hours, it still had an appearance of irri-


PHRENOLOGY. 1147


tation. A pint of sweetened rich boiled sago or of custard was
digested in 2 hours, and occasioned neither acrimony nor smarting
of the edges of the opening.

Food finely divided before it was introduced into the stomach
was digested almost as soon as food masticated and moistened
with saliva.

Animal and farinaceous aliments were of more easy digestion
than what are commonly called vegetables.

The time generally required for the disposal of a moderate
meal of the fibrous parts of meat, bread, &c., was from 3 to 34
hours.

Bile was not ordinarily found in the stomach.


PHRENOLOGY.


In a former part of this work I showed the injustice of Dr.
Spurzheim towards Gall,—his gross attempts to share with Gall
discoveries in which he had no participation, and to make it appear
that he had rendered systematic and philosophical what had been in
Gall’s hands rude and detached facts. My object was not “ the
exaltation of Gall over all the other phrenologists, physiologists,
and anatomists ;” for I did not suppose that a nian existed, however
low his knowledge, in whose eyes he was not exalted above all other
phrenologists, and, as phrenology is the physiology of the brain,
above all other physiologists in regard to the brain, and above all
anatomists as far as regards the same organ. On the anatomy
and physiology of other parts than the nervous system, Gall has
written nothing. My convictions resulted from my sense of
truth; and my only motive was love of justice. For with Gall I
had no intimacy, and against Spurzheim no animosity. When Gall
was in London, I saw him once at Deville’s, when his cast was
taken; once at St. Thomas’s Hospital, where he went to present
himself to Sir Astley Cooper; and once at the Phrenological
Society : and on no one of these occasions did I exchange twenty
words with him. Dr. Spurzheim’s intimate friends had so dis-
paraged him to me both asa phrenologist and a man that [neither
called upon him nor attended his lectures, never having read his
4 F


1148 PHREN OLOGY.


works, but having studied those of Dr. Spurzheim only. After I
had read his works, I called upon him in Paris for three minutes
on my way to Switzerland in 1826; and, on my return, I called
twice upon him. In 1827, when in Paris on my way home from
Italy, I spent a whole day with him, and made him two calls. I
never saw him afterwards, nor did I ever correspond with him.
Dr. Spurzheim I knew very well; attended his lectures, and
had always been on good terms with him. A few days before he
left England for the last time, I believe, but one, I sat next him
at a dinner party, and accidentally expressed my regret that he
had not given fuller demonstrations of the brain in the course of
Phrenology which he had just finished, as several medical men
as well as myself had attended the course principally for the
purpose of becoming conversant with the new anatomy of the
brain and profiting by it in examining the organ when diseased.
He told me that an acquaintance with the old anatomy was just
as useful for pathological investigations, and that he was not in
the habit of spending more time on the anatomical part of the
subject than he had done in this course. Nothing more passed ;
and I had no idea he was displeased. The next day I received
a note from him containing the two guineas I had paid him for
the course, and expressing the impossibility of his keeping the
fee as I was not satisfied. I returned the money, assuring him, as
nearly as I can recollect, that, since I had attended all the lectures
and learnt all that he proposed to teach, the money was justly
his;' and that it had been an error of mine to suppose that the
amount of anatomy would be greater than it had been. However,
he sent back the money a second time, informing me that when
L received it he would have left England. Conceiving that the
money was not mine, I requested a friend to return it to him at
Paris, with a short note something like the first, I believe ; and a
letter came to me afterwards from Dr. Spurzheim, stating that he
had sent the two guineas to the Westminster Hospital. This was
the whole affair. I had no quarrel, nor did I think of quarrelling,
with Dr. Spurzheim. So far from it, that, at the invitation of a
young man at whose father’s house he stayed, I went to the
house by appointment with him to meet Dr. Spurzheim, that I might
be shown some proofs, by Dr. Spurzheim himself, of the existence
of what he called the organ of Conscientiousness. I was in the
house an hour; but Dr. Spurzheim never made his appearance, and


PHRENOLOGY. 1149


left the house, I afterwards found, rather before I did. I then
fancied he might be offended: but I bad done nothing calculated
to offend an amiable man, and I felt no displeasure with Dr. Spurz-
heim.

I formerly stated (p. 333.), that Gall frequently employs the
word we when speaking of himself only. In vol. vi. 8vo. p.279.
he uses the word nous when professedly writing alone. “ Finissons
comme nous avons commencé a dire, &c.” p. 391. vol. ii. “ Nous
avouons que nous ne sommes pas en état.” vol.i. p.106. “Tout
ce que nous venons d’alléguer,” &c. vol. v. p. 491. ‘Dans Ja pré-
face qui est 4 la téte du premier volume de mon grand ouvrage,
voici comment je me suis exprimé.” p.xxxi. “ Nous espérons,” &C.
See vol.vi. p.'405. “J’ai eu bien raison de dire,” &c.

Although Gall says, ‘In 1805 we demonstrated it ” (the un-
folding of the brain); in the same page he writes, “J demon-
strated in my lectures ;” and he twice calls it my discovery.

Again, “It is the observation of hydrocephalic heads which
led me to the discovery of the unfolding,” &c. “M. Sommerring,
attempted to deprive me of the honour of my discovery,” &c. (8vo.
vol. ii. p. 266. sq.) In fact, Gall supported a hydrocephalic woman
in his house for years, in order to ascertain the state of the brain
after death; yet Dr.Spurzheim has the effrontery to claim the
discovery of the true mode in which the brain unfolds in hydro-
cephalus. Gall says, “ The first volume of my great work which
contained the anatomy of the nervous system and especially that
of the cerebrum and cerebellum did not appear until 1809; but
for several years before my travels, I constantly gave at Vienna the
demonstration of the brain according to my discoveries.” He then
goes on to say that in 1805-6-7, “ we gave the same demonstration
of the brain;” showing (see supra, p. 331.) that Dr. S. was his
assistant in demonstrating his anatomical discoveries, and that
what was done after he had hired Dr. S. was what had always
been done before. Indeed, Dr. S. incautiously allows that he was
a mere assistant at Gall’s lectures, for he says, in his notes to
Mr. Chevenix’s article, “ In our public as well as private demon-
strations of the brain, I always made the dissections and Dr. Gall
explained them to the auditors;” z.e. he was the mere prosector
to the lecturer Gall. This is one instance for all of the sense in
which Gall used the word we.

He continues. “During my journey, several of my auditors

7


1150 PHRENOLOGY.


published my lectures.” (8vo. vol. vi. p.181.sq.) In the same
page he speaks of the memoir written hy himself, but to which he
kindly affixed Dr. S.’s name with his own in these terms. ‘We
presented to the Institute of France a memoir containing an
account of ows anatomical discoveries.” But that he used the
plural merely because he had kindly joined Dr. S.’s name to his
own appears from the very next sentence, in which he writes, “and
M.Rolando knew nothing of. my anatomical and’ physiological
doctrine, except as an absurd opinion refuted by Malacarne !
They made me maintain,” &c. A much more evident proof that
M. Rolando has not appropriated my discoveries,” &c. In vol. vi.
pp- 28, 29, Gall, having employed Dr. S. as his dissector and assis-
tant to investigate for him according to his instructions (“ J have
repeated and ordered to be repeated hundreds of times the researches
upon the brain, supra, p. 333.’’), says “Nobody has examined so
many brains as Dr.S. and myself. All owr predecessors cut
up this noble organ into a thousand bits,” &c. But continues,
“Ihave placed myself above all authority. JZ have broken the
ice, and J have established a method of philosophical and phy-
sidlogical dissection.” ‘ To form a judgment upon my anatomical
“system,” “it is indispensable to know my method of examining
the brain, and my discoveries.” Though Gall wrote every line of
the Mémoire presented to the Institute, and the Observations in
reply to the report, and kindly put Dr. S.’s name to it with his
own, calling the one our report and the other our answer, and using
the word we and other plurals ; yet, when speaking of this work,
in his 6th volume, p. 46., he declares at once it was all his own.
“« J have refuted, &c. in a pretty long passage, &c.”® “ The Com-
mittee have pretended that my doctrine upon the structure of the
brain has no necessary and immediate connection with my doc-
trine upon the functions,” &c. His sole right to what he gave
their joint names is shown at p.32. “ This is the way in which J
expressed myself in our answer to the Report of the Commissioners.”
“Every one knows that in all our writings and all our works, we an-
_nounce my doctrine as the Anatomy and Physiology of the nervous
system in general and of the brain in particular. Z have constantly
declared that examinations of skulls and heads were necessary
to arrive by observation at a knowledge of the different cerebral
portions. This part of my doctrine,” &c. (vol.ii. p. 33.) In the


* Recherches sur le Syst?me Nerveux, suivies d’ Observations.


PHRENOLOGY. 1151


observations he says, if we ourselves had not found the decus-
sation of the pyramids, it would have been impossible for us, &c.
Yet Gall taught the decussation before Dr. S. became his pupil,
as Dr. S. confesses. (Supra, p.332.) In vol.ii. p. 41. Gall says,
‘* All who have attended our lectures and read our works are
astonished at their immense number (the facts).” The Ist
volume and part of the 2d in 4to. bear the joint names of Gall
and Dr. $.: yet in the Preface to the 3d volume Gall says, In
the 1st volume of this work, Z have detailed, &c. In the 2d,
Ihave entered upon, &c.” He everywhere speaks of the great
work as entirely his own, and of himself as being considered in
all his travels the person and the discoverer. “I everywhere
received the most flattering reception; sovereigns, ministers, the
learned, civil functionaries, artists, on all occasions seconded my
views by increasing my collection and furnishing me with new
facts. The circumstances were too favourable for me to be able
to refuse the invitations which 7 received from most of the Uni-
versities. By this means my journey was prolonged much beyond
the term which J had originally fixed; but so many public and
private discussions upon my doctrine resulted, that it has acquired
a degree of maturity which few founders of new doctrines have
attained during their lifetime. This journey gave me the oppor-
tunity of studying the organisation of a great number of men,’
&e. JZ collected numerous facts,’ &c. “JZ levied contributions
on many anatomical and physiological collections. J submitted
ancient statues and busts to my observation, and £ compared them
with historical accounts. After having employed for so many
years such numerous and diversified means, I no longer feared
either the danger or the accusation of precipitating the publication
of my great work.” (8vo. vol.i. p. 16. sq.) In vol.i. p.78. Gall
boldly says in the face of Dr. S., “In the Ist volume of my great
work.” “JZ have treated,” &c. ‘J have assigned,” &c. ‘‘Z have
rectified. JZ have proved,” &c. “JZ have detailed,” &c. “J
have proved,” &c. “ J have shown,” &c. J have demonstrated,” &c.
«« Thave restored,” &c. “ J have proved,” &c. “ J have established,
&e.” “ Ihave seized,” &c. “ J have demonstrated,” &c. “ What I
have taken from touch Jhave given to sight,” &c. “Thus J may
refer my readers on all these points to my great work.”

L asserted that Gall sometimes uses the word we in the usual
singular meaning of authors. “ J know many Negroes,” &c. and

4F 3


L152 PHRENOLOGY.


then, “ from what we have just said.” (ii. p. $35. sq.; see also vi.
p- 161.) In vol. iii. he says at p. 78. “We have detailed the dif-
ferent opinions of the learned in vol. i. 4to.” &c. and then in the
next page, “J have proved in vol.i. 4to.” &c. In vol. ii. 4to.
where he is writing professedly alone and not referring to disco-
veries, he uses the plural like many authors. ‘ We confess that
we are not yet qualified to point out,” &c. p. 379.

In many cases where he had employed our in the 4to. he says
my in the 8vo. In the table of contents vol. ii. sect. 3., the ex-
pression “ our principles” occurs five times. Inthe corresponding
table, vol. i, 8vo., in every instance it is “ my principles.”

I have said (supra, p. 331.) that no one ever thought of attacking
Dr. S. for the new anatomy and physiology of the brain. Gall says,
‘ Some speak of my discoveries, pretending to blame me and do
honour to their professors ; others claimed my discoveries as their
own, without daring to point out the source of their riches ; others
published extracts from my lectures, but took good care not to
name them; others were expelled from their learned societies for
having declared themselves partisans of the extravagancies of the
German doctor, 8vo.ii. 32. sq. “All knowwith what animosity they
_ (Ackermann and Walter) attacked indifferently all my anatomical
and physiological discoveries. Arrived at Paris we obtained at
first the most brilliant success from our anatomical demonstrations.
The highest scientific men were enchanted. Soon afterwards the
Emperor arrived from his German campaign. I know not what
panic seized the members of the Institute of France ; but, as if
by a charm, everything suddenly changed. All that I said, all
that J demonstrated was now nothing but doating, quackery, and
humbug as they chose to report it to this. monarch,” p- 14. sq.
He then adds, ‘they ascribed our method of dissecting the
brain,” p. 15. although it is universally admitted that the mode of
dissection had been long taught by him before he heard of Dr. S.’s
name and was taught by him to his pupil Dr. 8. His next words
are “ J have proved in’my answer to this report that our method,”
&c. ; “our predecessors ;” “we must have made more researches
if we had followed the steps of our predecessors instead of paving
for ourselves a new road,” &c. (ii. 16.) The whole world knows
that Gall only opened this new road, and he himself declares it
repeatedly, yet while saying « they have conceded eighteen es-
sential points of ow discoveries” (p-17.),—all notoriously Gall’s dis-


PHRENOLOGY. 1153


coveries, ovr memoir,—declared by himself to be zs own memoir,
he goes on now with the singular —“ My adversaries have seized,”
&c. ‘Agreed upon one point, to discredit my doctrine,” &c.
“Cuvier told me honestly when he was struck with my dissection,”
&c. ‘In what then does the plan of my researches differ from that
of my predecessors? It is only after having familiarized myself with,
&c., that J was able to seize the principles, &c. As soon as I
found myse/f in the right road, J had but to persevere unremit-
tingly, adding some mechanical proceedings only ;” and this was be-
fore he had taught Dr.S. the anatomy or physiology of the
brain. “Thus J succeeded in finding and placing in the rank of
positive knowledge the structure, arrangement, gradual perfection,
the connection and relation of the different parts of the brain. I
have established order, unity, and life, in a study where there was
previously nothing but confusion. Where nothing had been seen
but mechanical forms and fragments J demonstrated apparatus
for the manifestation of the moral and intellectual powers,” p. 19.
sq. Even when he speaks of his demonstrations made before
Reid and Loder, who knew, as all Europe did, that he was the
sole discoverer, and like all the world saw Dr. S., the young man
fresh from college and hired by Gall as his prosector, merely as
his humble assistant, and expressed their astonishment at Gall’s
discoveries, he says “the demonstrations which we continue to
make,” vi. p.31. He had just before said my method of ex-
amining the brain and my discoveries, p. 28.

Where he‘really alludes to Dr. S. under the words we or our
he no where considers him as more than a witness or an assistant ;
—the hand man of the head man. He spoke of others in the same
way. “If Mr.Spurzheim, myself, and so many others affirm that
we have learnt how to interpret these differences of develop-
ment of the various portions of the brain, would it not be right,
instead of denying such interesting correspondencies with a
haughty indifference, to examine without prejudice how far ob-
servation confirms my pretended discoveries?” He alone lec-
tured, yet (vol. i. p. 373.) he writes, “ We detail in our course the
numerous observations with which experience has furnished us ;
and we boldly declare our opinions.”

Although Dr. S. originally spoke of the 4to. work as our work,
he at last, as inconsistently as on other occasions, in his Outlines
refers to it as Gall’s only.

AF 4


1154 PHRENOLOGY.


Everlastingly Dr. S. copies word for word from Gall and always
without acknowledgment.

Gall had made all his great discoveries in the anatomy and
physiology of the brain and taught them to the world before he
knew Dr. S. The latter was a young man twenty years Gall’s
junior, who happened to attend his lectures, was convinced by
Gall, and afterwards engaged by Gall as his dissector and general
assistant. In all the travels Dr. S. spent not a farthing, but re-
ceived pay from Gall like artists and others whom Gall had with
him. The establishment was Gall’s and Dr. S. never presumed to
be thought of otherwise than a humble individual of Gall’s suite.»

Gall told me that Dr. S. was at first the clumsiest assistant that he
ever had; lost hima great deal by breaking his casts, &c. (for these
were then scarce), and that it was twelve months before he could
teach Dr. Spurzheim to dissect the brain, whereas he taught
Dr. Fossati in two or three. Gall was all kindness and simplicity ;
he trusted that Dr. S. would carry on phrenology after his death,
and, being quite easy about his own fame, since he and he alone
was known all over-Europe as the alleged discoverer of a new
system of the anatomy and physiology of the brain, he thought
he could lose nothing, but might serve Dr. S. and Phrenology

by joining the name of Dr. S. with his own in his works. The Mé-
motre presented to the Institute, the Odservations on the report
of the Institute, and the great work were all composed and written
by Gall only, and without the slighest participation by Dr. S. ex-
cept as a mere clerk, who looked into other works for references
and saw that the artists executed the engravings accurately. “Il
sait,” Gall openly told him, “ qu’il n’a été chargé que de fournir
les notes littéraires. (Gall, 4to. iii. xvii.) He examined this point
and that in anatomy by Gall’s direction ;—Gall thinking, reason-
ing, and investigating,— mechanically obeying Gall’s directions.
Gall took him as his companion to every prison and other place of
observation. On this very account Gall frequently speaks in the
plural; giving their joint testimony to a fact. ‘“ Résumons nous,”


> In 1802 Gall informed the Austrian government that he had spent 7000
guilders upon plaster casts of the skulls of men and brutes, and upon the models
of the brains of men and brutes in wax, and above 15,000 guilders in preparing
for his large work. See his interesting Petition and Remonstrance to the govern-
ment of Austria, translated and printed by Messrs. Combe in their translation
of his section on the cerebellum, &c. &e.


PHRENOLOGY. 1155


&c. The desire of enforcing his own assertions by adding the
testimony of another; his wish to establish Dr. Spurzheim as’ his
successor in advocating phrenology ; his security with respect to
his own merits and fame ; arid I must add a great carelessness in
all that was not essential, are the reasons why he united Dr. S.’s
name with his own, and spoke in the plural number.

That he never meant to allow Dr.S. any participation as an
author or discoverer, is evident from his using the singular in a
perfectly clear manner, excluding every other person, on those
very ‘points in which he even used the plural in a way that a
Spurzheimite would conceive favourable to Dr. S.’s claim.

{have stated (supra, p. 334.) that Gall after reading some of Dr.
S.’s English work gave the book up in disgust half cut, and knew
nothing more of Dr. §.’s sayings and writings afterwards than
what was pointed out to him, and it was with the greatest diffi-
culty that he could be prevailed upon to take notice even for a mo-
ment of what was pointed out to him. The notice in Gall’s work
of any thing by Dr. S. was through their pointing out to him cer-
tain passages in Dr. S.’s books. Tobe quite accurate, I wrote to
Dr. Fossati for more precise information: and in a letter dated Nov.
27. 1838, Dr. Fossati answered, “Gall n’a pas tout lu ce que Spurz-
heim a écrit méme de sa phrénologie, mais il l’a lu en partie; je
crois qu'il s’était arrété a Partie v. Practical Considerations, parce-
que les feuilles du livre n’étaient pas coupés, quand il est mort. Le
livre sur l'éducation que je lui ai porté de Londres en 1822, il
ne l’a pas lu. Les feuilles ne furent pas coupés. ‘ Gall n’avait
pas grande opinion de Spurzheim ; il voyait dans le livre de quoi
il était question ; il trouvait des raisonnements qui ne lui allaient
pas, et il fermait le livre pour ne plus l’ouvrir.”

In a former letter Dr. Fossati writes, “ Spurzheim n’a jamais
reclamé les découvertes anatomiques, avancées alors comme les
découvertes de Gall. Quand on parlait a Gall des découvertes
de Spurzheim, il élevait les épaules, et il disait qu’il y avait trop
d’écrits de son temps pour qu'il se donnat de la peine a cet égard.”

In a letter dated Jan. 1836, “Gall disait qu il avait fallu plu-
sieurs années pour que Spurzheim fut habitué a saisir les formes
des tétes et a distinguer les organes. II lui rendait justice quant
a son adresse dans l’anatomie; mais il soutenait toujours et
devant tout le monde que c’est lui, Gall, qui lui avait appris
Yanatomie du cerveau et la méthode de la disséquer.”


1156 PHRENOLOGY,


To show how moderately Dr.S. was advanced in the science when
he travelled with Gall, I may mention that Gall laughingly told me
that when they went into a prison or any other building tenanted by
a large number and he began to examine heads and pronounce his
opinion, Dr, S. used to pull him back and make signs of intreating
that he would not give-opinions, so greatly did he fear that phre-
nology was scarcely competent for such judgments. Dr. S, never
presumed to speak on these occasions.

I know none among the advocates of Dr. 8, who is not miser-
ably ignorant of the writings of Gall and of the history of phre-
nology, and has not derived his knowledge second hand from
Dr. S. or from some one taught by him; and few who are not most
unjust to Gall.¢


© Mr. G. Combe, in his reply to Dr. Roget (1. c. p.197.), says “that the titles
which Gall and Spurzheim give to their science are Phrenology.” Now Gall
nowhere calls it phrenology. He invariably contents himself with the expres-
sions, Functions of the Brain ; just as we say functions of the kidneys.

In translating Gall’s treatise on the cerebellum, he of course gives Gall’s foot-
note, who says that it is reported in the Brittische Annalen that a machine is used
by debauchees in England to hang them a little and thus precure an erection,
Mr. C. remarks in a foot-note of his own, ‘‘ The idea is unworthy of Gall.”
(p.93.) Now Gall does not say he has such an idea; he relates what he finds in
a book without expressing any opinion, and with no other view than to show that
it has been thought to apply the effect of hanging on the genitals to a practical
purpose. Does Mr, Combe deny that there was such a machine in England for
old gentlemen? or did he never hear the report, some twenty years ago, of an
old gentleman having died in a certain house in London because he was let to
hang rather too long?

At another part he has this foot-note: “ The cerebellum was largely developed
in Gall, and although the feeling did not subjugate his intellect, it produced ir-
regularities of conduct which were reprehensible,” p, 142, Now what good ob-
ject could Mr. Combe have in writing this note? IT again ask what worthy object
could he have? He was not writing Gall’s biography, but translating a treatise
on the cerebellum. I have always heard that Gall was faithful to his first wife
till they parted ; that he then had a mistress to whom he was as faithful, and to
whom he was married as soon as his first wife died. If Gall’s cerebellum was very
large he did not make it. A wag would think that perhaps Mr. C.’s is very
small and that he envied Gall.

At p.214. Mr. Combe says * Dr. Spurzheim found by observation that in an
individual who manifests great self-esteem, a certain part of the brain is fully
developed, and likewise that the individual carries his head high and reclining
backwards ’’ Why,"all this was found by observation by Gall before Dr. S, had
heard of phrenology.’’*


* To show that I am not alone in my views, I shall publish portions of letters


PHRENOLOGY. 1157


An array of references has been made to parts of Gall which
refer to the writings of Dr.S.: on one occasion one reference,


In his preface to the work he recklessly asserts, p. xxiv. ‘Drs, Gall and
Spurzheim haye the merit of having discovered and first taught the true anatomy


s


to me from two of the soundest phrenologists, both authors on the subject, and
one indeed a phrenologist of nearly thirty years’ standing, who, I feel persuaded,
would not object to the publication of his name; but as I have not formally
asked his permission, and he is too far off for an answer to be received under a
length of time, I abstain from mentioning it.

* Like yourself I have often felt puzzled at the worship paid to Spurzheim. My
own opinion was made up many years ago, the first time I read his preface to
his Anatomy of the Brain. Every thing since has confirmed it; and where, in
reading Combe, I used to read and admire, ignorant of Gall, as, alas! most are,
— when I read Gall I was amazed: all of the good was copied from Gall’s words,
or from Spurxheim’s unacknowledged plagiarisms. Mr, Combe thought proper
once to take me to task for my remarks on Spurzheim, as being the following of
a ‘too ready listening to what Dr. Elliotson had said.’ I told him, as was just,
that I was then totally unaware of your opinions, which you will remember to be
the fact, since I was not aware of your opinions therein till after publication of
my pamphlet in which my opinions were expressed. I rejoice at your exposures.

*¢ Since I have studied Gall I have been completely astounded at the ignorance
of Gall’s mind which he shows, and at the same time the effrontery with which
he plagiarises from him, when it suits his purposes, without a hint of acknow-
ledgment.

“« The edition I use is Capen’s edition in 2 vols. Boston (U. S.), 1838.

‘¢ The cases of Spurzheim’s plagiarism and dishonesty and direct falsehood are
too numerous to point a// out. It would occupy a volume. I confine myself
chiefly to the first volume, and in that I have marked down the following pages as
SPECIAL instances ; —
¢¢ Pp. 11, 121.15. 23: and 24, and following ; 35. 40. 44. 51, 52. 56. and 57. 61,

64. 64,.66, 67. &c., 74. 95, 96. 102. 105. 116. 121. 124. &c., 126. &c., 190,

132. 135, 136. 139, 147. 153. 162, 163. 186, 187. 190. 195. 197. 202, 205,

206. 209. 236, 238. 305, 306, 307. 327. 334. 340.

«« The greater part of vol. 2. is derived or copied verbatim from Gall,—see, ¢. ¢.,
107. and many following pages, :

«« T proceed to notice a few of the more flagrant of the above instances ; —

«© P,11, The whole a complete misstatement and misrepresentation,
12. Directly false; three separate statements, in three first paragraphs,
23. &c. Copied almost verbatim from Gall.
35. Ditto.
40. &c. Gall’s exact words — 44, copied,
51. Again, all before and after, copied; — and insolent presumption of
*¢ Gall and I” continually,
52. Copied from Gall again.


1158 PHRENOLOGY.


extending into two pages, is made into two. But that may pass :
I have only to remark that all the references, except a mere


of the brain!’ Why not say Drs. Gall and Spurzheim, Mr. Combe and Mr.
Deville first established phrenology? Mr. G. Combe shows his absurd tendency


57. Gall again.

61. All preceding ch. from Gall.

64. Ditto.

66. Insolence.—and false in last parag. especially italicised ‘ owr common.’

67. All from Gall.

73. Ditte:

95. As to theft, murder, &c. not true; Gall justly showed their tendency in
excess was this, and distinctly says so.

102. All this said merely to ape at a difference and superiority from Gall.
Spurzheim well knew that Gall merely said it (as he elsewhere,
copying Gall, says it) to prevent quackery.

105. The whole chapter ending here — from Gall.

116. All this section also,

121. Particular inypudence: he says, ‘it seems to me,’ when he copies
Gall’s exact words on same subject.

124. &c. Particularly to be noticed, Little else than a string of falsehoods of
the most barefaced kind. e.g. Gall ‘ taking only situation of organs
as guide,’ when Gall classed them. Gall ‘ unacquainted with special
faculties, when Gall, in each case, devotes much to this point.
Middle parag. of p.125. impudently false ; and as to bumps ridiculously
so: whole chapter should be well examined; where not falsehoods
as to Gall, it is taken from Gall’s words, — which is Spurzheim’s
usual way of striving to get credit — first decrying Gall and then
copying his words. ;

130. Last parag. in chap. : — ‘my work’ false and presumptuous.

132. Most impudently false passage in whole book: —* Gail did not de-
termine organs in conformity with their views,’ — when every point
copied from Gall, (See especially §2. of Gall’s 3d vol. under his
definition of faculties.) Can any thing be more barefaced or impudent ?
Gall laid down these rules (only in better terms than Sp.) and ap-
plied them, which Sp. does not.

135. Last parag. strives to find here excuse for his ignorance or laziness against
Gall’s beautiful and most valuable illustrations. Gall’s is the only
philosophic mode, — Turn over leaf for falsehood and absurdity.
Every case quoted by Spurzheim is taken unacknowledged from Gall,
as see p. 139. &c. &e.

153. Sp.’s ¢ Amativeness,’ ‘ Physical Love,’ against Gall’s Instinct of Pro-
pagation. Compare with p. 124. anté.

162, Last parag. His usual insidious insinuation to seem as if Gall did little
and he had determined the seat of ‘ Adhesiyeness :’? he knew Gail de-
termined it thoroughly,


PHRENOLOGY. 1159


mention of the title of Dr. S.’s book on insanity, are to but one
work, and that which Gall criticises at length in his third 4to


to exalt Dr. S. unjustly in the following passage, p. 234.: ‘ Many yearsago Dr.
S. and some other phrenologists inferred from the fact of motion remaining in


186. ‘J,’ &c. asusual. Gall on contrary calls it ‘ Instinct of defence of self
and property,’ which is complete.

190. Acguisitiveness, All from Gall.

195. Gall expressly states theft to result from excess,

197. Copied from Gall: much, Gall’s own words.

202. Usual misrepresentation. Gall expressly distinguishes between coward
and to feel fear; and his argument beautifully shows difference be-
tween them and its cause.

205. Altogether misrepresentation of Gall.

206. Impudently false. Gall drew the finest line between Pride and Vanity
ever drawn,—and yet Sp. dares to speak thus! Gall drew the most
graphic distinction between effects of each,—and yet Sp. says he con-

founds them! Quote Gall’s picture of vain man and proud man, in
answer.

236. Gall discovered organ of ‘ wonder,’ (see him on ‘imitation’) and yet
Sp. claims, and his slaves give him, the discovery.

238. Remark as to Rousseau (insinuated against Gall) made by Gall himseif
and copied from him,

305. Gall never said forehead a single organ ; he grouped the whole as forming

‘ the intellect,’ which Sp. had not philosophy to do.

306. False, that Sp. discovered 5 organs and more accurate than Gall; but
love of approbation his ruling passion,

307. ‘I —I—T,’ while copying Gall.

327. Third parag. ‘ I show,’ while copying Gall’s words,

334. Sp. very bad on reflection ; the little that is good is from Gall.

340. Directly false that Gall admitted not feelings and intellect ; also, Gall
observed on time. . The constant aim of Sp. is to place himself in op-
position to Gall, especially so in p.340, See also same spirit in

Preface to Anatomy of Brain,”


The following is an extract from a letter from Dr. Forster, who gave the
name of Phrenology to our science (supra, p. 690.), and pointed out to Dr. S, that
there must be an organ of marvellousness. (Récueil des Guvrages et des Pensées
dun Physicien et Métaphysicien. Par Thos. Forster. Frankfort, 1836, p. 12.)

“In March, 1816, Professor Jamieson requested me to write a paper for the Wer-
nerian Society at Edinburgh, I chose for my subject, Phrenology, comparative
and human, and had about twenty elegant drawings made for its illustration ;
which, together with my paper, were exhibited at the Society in due course in the
same month; so that I am the first person who announced Gall’s doctrine in


1160 PHRENOLOGY.


volume; and that all must know that he read Dr. S.’s Phrenology,
though only as his friends pointed out parts to him.

Dr. S.’s conduct is only explicable by an inordinate amount of
vanity, which made him so short sighted as not to see thatthe
majesty of Gall’s intellect and moral dignity would but make
all unprincipled attempts to plunder him futile, and throw the
poor offender for ever into the sink of all bad men. Take but
two examples to illustrate his character. Gall long before Dr. S.
knew anything of Phrenology had dissected the brain in his new
way, and defended the decussation of the pyramids. But Dr. S.
madly writes, “Modern anatomists before Gall and myself were


some cases where feeling was lost and vice versa, that the nerves must really be
double.” Any one would infer that till the time of Dr. S. no person drew this
inference, whereas it was drawn by the ancients themselves long before Dr. S.
was born; and in 1783 revived and defended by the French surgeon Pouteau.
(Supra, 19.)


Scotland, though Spurzheim with his wonted egotism took the credit of it.
The next day the Professor Jamieson called on me and said that my doctrine
had given offence and wounded the prejudice of the faculty and others, who
thought it irreligious and also unsupported by faets; and, in short, that phre-
nology was unpalatable as ascience in Edinburgh. He had previously proposed
me as Hon. Member of the Society ; but, from what he said, I was induced to
request that no more notice of me should be taken by the Society, and I with-
drew from Edinburgh in great disgust of the whole proceeding. To the best of
my recollection, Gordon, Combe, and Mackenzie, were all against the doctrine
violently. Subsequently, Spurzheim came and gave lectures in the autumn of
the same year, and made some converts. But what is remarkable is this ; —that
I said prophetically, ‘ the seed is sown, inquiry on foot, and Edinburgh will be
the first town to have a School of Phrenology.’ So, indeed, it has turned out.
Spurzheim always flattered me to my face, but abused me behind my back, as I
learnt from several persons, The whole discovery is Gall’s, just as the real
source of the higher astronomy belongs to old Sir Will. Herschel, while the
tyros and pupils take the credit of his labours. Gall was a good, honourable,
humane man ; and to have spoken of him as Spurzheim did to me, is a blot in
the moral character of the latter, that qualities more useful than his would have
been inadequate to counterbalance,

“Spurzheim behaved still more unhandsomely to me about the organ of
Wonder, which I twice or thrice suggested to him in 1815 and 1816, and he
denied its being a separate faculty. I called it Mysterizingness (see my Sketch of
Phrenology, 8vo. London, 1815); he afterwards adopted the organ, and called
it Wonder, &c., without acknowledgment,”’


PHRENOLOGY. 1161


divided in opinion on the subject of the decussation.” ‘“‘ Before
Gall and J began our researches, anatomists were in the habit of
cutting down the brain by slices.” (Supra, p. 322.)

Thavea firm conviction that, if Gall’s 8vo. work had been trans-
lated, and neither Dr. S. nor Mr.Combe had published their works,
Phrenology would by this time have been far better appreciated
and understood, and would many years ago have been received as
extensively asit is at present. At p. 389. I said, “It is greatly to be
lamented that Gall’s 8vo. workis not translated; and I am certain
that the legacy left by a Scotch gentleman could not have been laid
out to half the advantage in any other way than in publishing a
cheap translation of it. Pure aswere the motives of the gentlemen
intrusted to fulfil the wishes of the spirited bequeather, in publish-
ing works of their own, Iam convinced that they would have done
far better in publishing the writings of the founder before any
thing else.” This was courteously expressed, and made no charge,
but regretted an error of judgment only. However, it gave great
offence to the so styled Phrenologorum facile Princeps*, who wrote
to me, denying that money had been spent upon any work of their
own, except the Constitution of Man, and sending me in print the
reply that was to appear in the next edition of his Constitution of
Man: — “‘ Mr. Henderson’s Trustees have published zo works of
their own at the expense of his funds. Not a stxpence has been
contributed to any work but the present, and aid was given to zt at the
bequeather’s special request.” On receiving an assurance from me
that I made no charge, but merely differed from their judgment,
he wrote again and said that it was a direct charge ; and that “in
order to render the charge as little offensive as possible,” I gave
“them credit for the purity of their motives:” and that it would
have been better not to have made such a charge against them at
all, seeing that it was without foundation.

But as I had always understood that those who had entered
upon the speculation of the Phrenological Journal had lessened
their losses by sums from the bequest, I told him of this and he
could not deny it. He confessed that the circulation was at one
time so low that there was a great loss on every number: and the
speculators therefore received 10/. a number from the bequest till
they lost nothing. This wasavery prudent measure, and showed


4 Statistics of Phrenology, p. 9.


1163 PHRENOLOGY.


wisdom in their generation: but after the confession of it, and my
declaration that I neither made nor thought of making a charge,
it was not very polite or reasonable in Mr.Combe to add, as
he did, “If this was the only fact on which your charge was
founded, it was very ill supported indeed.”

At length, however, truth and reason have prevailed; for Mr.
Combe writes in the Phrenological Journal for April, 1839, p. 190.,
that I have reminded him that a donation of 10/. a number had
been given from it in support of the Phrenological Journal ; and
that I am correct, and his expressions of denial too general. In-
deed they were, for they were universal — “ Not a sixpence has
been contributed to any work but the present.”

In keeping with this affair, I will now for the first time mention
another. About 12 years ago I sent to Mr. Combe for the Phre-
nological Journal, a paper read by me to the Phrenological So-
ciety of London, with a title to this effect, and bearing my name.
In it I casually expressed my regret that Dr. S. had not followed
Gall’s plan of detailing the origin and progress of each of his
discoveries of organs and of laying a body of individual instances
in proof to his readers; but merely made ah assertion ; so that one
was inclined to think that he had reasoned himself into the belief
of faculties, and then considered where their organs were most
likely to lie; not having first met with the facts and extended
his observations in consequence. Mr. Combe thought proper to
strike this out of the paper without communication with me. When

complained, his apology was that the Editor was answerable for
every thing in the Journal, and that differences among phrenologists
were injurious; and that posterity would settle the respective
merits of Galland Dr. S. I replied, 1. That the paper professed to
be a certain paper read at a certain place. If it was mutilated,
it was not what it professed to be. 2. That, as it bore my name,
the editor was not responsible for its sentiments, as in the case of
anonymous reviews, in which every thing is considered as the
Editor’s. 3. That when a phrenologist is wrong, the sooner his
error is corrected the better: the more error spreads, the greater
will be the difficulty when the time arrives, as it always must, for
its correction; so as to Gall and Dr. S., if the present generation
of their cotemporaries allow injustice to prevail, posterity will have
a fine argument in our silence that all was right and Dr. 8. what
he pretended to be.


1163


MESMERISM.


“ Credulity argues Weakness of Mind, and is, deservedly attended with Re-
proach. It is offensive to Philosophy; whose venerable Records it interlines
with false Stories, and idle Tales. But, on the other hand, ’tis also true, that
Scepticism is not less a fault; for that alone renders the whole Book of Nature
insignificant. What can the clearest experiment, or the best discovery import to
him, who will not hear, who will not see 2” — Phil. Trans. vol. xx. p- 261. 1698)

** Galilée, Newton, Salomon de Caus, Volta, Fulton, Windsor, Arkwright,
Gall, et tous ceux qui se sont présentés une vérité 4 la main a la porte de ce
vaste Charenton, qu’on appelle le monde, ont été recus a coup de pierres ou de
sifflets.” — Jobard.


In the second part of this work, published in 1827, I declared
that I “ should despise myself if I hesitated to declare my de-
cided conviction of the truth of Mesmerism;” and added, just
as I have stood abundant ridicule for advocating Auscultation,
Phrenology, Quinine, Hydrocyanic Acid, and Creosote, and main-
taining the liability of mankind to Glanders, never having yet
declared an opinion upon a new medical truth that I had been
obliged to retract, I “ will now stand more ridicule with the
same firmness and the same silent pity or contempt which I have
always felt for my opponents, till I see, as I shall, the truth of
Mesmerism established.” (Supra, p. 656.)

How I have up to this moment fulfilled my promise, the world
knows. I have now for three years carefully and dispassionately
investigated the subject by experiments performed almost every
day upon a variety of persons; and I not only repeat my firm
conviction of the truth of mesmerism, but of the truth of many
points in it upon which I formerly gave no opinion, because I had
not then witnessed them, and was determined to remain neutral
upon every point on which I myself did not witness facts.

The production of the peculiar coma by mesmerism, independ-
ently of all mental impressions, is a truth now admitted by a very
large number of the best informed, acutest, and least credulous
men in England, whose attention was excited to the subject by

4G


1164 MESMERISM.


what I showed them; for, though some of the seed which I sowed
fell on stony ground and among thorns, much proves to have
fallen upon good soil, and is now daily bringing “ forth fruit,
some thirty fold, some sixty, and some an hundred.” This coma
may be induced in some persons who have no idea of what is in-
tended, and sometimes merely by pointing the fingers close
towards them; in some, by doing so behind their backs, without
their knowing that we are about any thing; or even that we are
there ; in some, who firmly disbelieve the whole matter*: in those
who resisted all effect to their utmost; in those who are already
in ordinary sleep; and in children completely idiotic. If it is
complete, no pinching or other violence is felt during it, and, till
the patient wakes spontaneously, possibly after many hours, or
some days, there is perhaps no other mode of waking him but by
transverse passes, darting the hand towards him, or blowing in
his face. The case of Elizabeth Okey, related at pp. 628. sq.
682. supra, has continued up to the present moment ; and a sister
rather younger than herself, taller, more robust, and of bustling
and hardworking character, who had also been treated by others
and myself in vain for epilepsy, fell into a similar state of ecstatic
delirium, and was in this state when admitted into the hospital.
When I first saw her, she was in the delirium, but almost instantly
fell asleep on my putting my finger on her forehead. The sleep was
very short; but returned whenever I re-applied my finger. Her
case likewise has continued up to this time. Scarcely a day has


a One of the cleverest men in this country mesmerised an incredulous gentle-
man, who suddenly fell into the coma. He then blackened the gentleman’s face and
put him on a woman’s cap, and placed a looking glass before him, intending to
wake him in this state and thus convince him he had been asleep. But the wife
feared he might be terrified into a fit; so the glass was removed, the cap taken
off, his face washed, and he was awakened by transverse passes. When he was
awake, he stoutly denied he had ever been asleep, and disbelieves mesmerism to
this hour. The gentleman who operated had refused to accompany a distin-
guished friend of mine to the hospital to see my experiments, on the ground of
having conceived a respect for me, though unacquainted with me, and being
unwilling to have his good opinion lessened by seeing me make a fool of myself.
At length he did accompany the Baronet. He was astonished, but could not
believe, till, seeing one of the Okeys after the experiments hanging carelessly over
the balusters, he made a pass ata distance behind her back and in such a manner
that it was impossible for her to be aware of it, and he fixed her instantly, sense-
less and rigid, He has now mesmerised hundreds, and conyerted as many.


MESMERISM. 1165


elapsed in which Mr. Wood, who was my clinical clerk at the
time they were in the hospital, or myself have not mesmerised
one or both and carried on the investigation. We are enabled
to state in the most positive manner, after the most rigorous daily
observation for three years, that all the phenomena displayed
are real: that the accusation of imposition is utterly false ; and the
report of one of them having been a performer among the Irving-
ites or been an Irvingite, is, like every other respecting them un.
favourable to mesmerism, a pure malicious invention of an unfeel-
ing mind.

These sisters exhibit perfect specimens of double conscious-
ness ; the most remarkable perhaps on record. In their ecstatic
delirium, they know nothing of what has occurred in their natural
state: they know not who they are, nor their ages, nor any thing
which they learnt in their healthy state: and in their natural state
they are perfectly ignorant of all that has passed in their delirium.
Their memory in their delirium reaches back only to the moment
when each first woke from mesmeric sleep into the delirium.
They would then, indeed, speak: but their minds were nearly
blank : they knew nobody, nor the names, nature, nor use of any
thing: they had to learn every thing afresh. For above a twelve-
month, whatever was told them they believed; and whatever
name was given to them for a thing, they invariably adopted.
Not knowing what the terms father and mother meant, and the
elder being told that I was their father, and Mr. Wood their
mother, they always considered these words applicable to us only.
They were exceedingly silly, loquacious, as I have described
the elder at p. 630. If one of us disappeared, the elder began
to cry, and on being told the other had swallowed him, firmly
believed it, and entreated the other to pull him up again; and, on
his pretending to do this and the absentee suddenly showing him-
self, would be overpowered with joy and thank the other. Their
language was peculiar. Almost every word was spoiled, and
always spoiled in the same way: but spoiled by each differently :
and each had a strange mode of expressing herself and of intro-
ducing certain superfluous words between words and syllables.
For example, for opportunity, one said opporwaytunywhatsty.
Mr. Wood was always Mr. Waywood. Occasionally the disfigure-
ment of language would be much worse for a week or two.

4G 2


1166 MESMERISM.


This state has gradually improved; so that, though at this
moment, while in it, they know nothing of their natural mode of
existence, they are comparatively sane; they have learnt afresh
to read, write, work, &c. in this state; and behave extremely well,
and speak nearly like other people, talk very little nonsense, and
are only rather odd. Whenever they have been brought out of
this state, during now three years, they, on coming into their
natural state, lose all the intermediate period, and connect the pre-
sent moment with the last of their natural state, when they were
thrown asleep. Vice versd, when, by being sent into mesmeric
sleep in their natural state, they wake up into the delirium, the
present moment is continuous with the last of their former deli-
rium. I have allowed the interval to be days, weeks, months, and
never once have I witnessed a shadow of inconsistency, never once
have they betrayed in one state a trace of knowledge obtained
in the other state or of any thing connected with it, or a trace of
the character of the other state. I have had them in my own
house four months together: they were in the housekeeper’s
room, and watched by as sharp persons as are to be found, all
day, and on occasions when they could not have believed any one
near. They lived three months with a Colonel’s lady. They have
passed days and days with a very shrewd woman, — Mrs. Trol-
lope. But never has there been a shadow of inconsistency or
want of due keeping. Their cases, however similar, differ greatly :
even the phenomena which occur in both, and are most similar,
have a modification in each.

The elder, whose case, up to the publication of my Second
Part, is already detailed, is far the more susceptible ; and has ex-
hibited stranger phanomena. For a length of time, she had
perfect anesthesia in her delirium. She could hold nothing unless
she saw it; nor, till she acquired the habit, could she walk without
looking at her feet. She used to take red-hot coals out of the
fire, and wonder, as she held them, why other people cried out
and desired her to throw them down, and why her hands became
blistered. A seton was put into her neck by: Mr. Wood behind
her, while she was chattering to me who stood before her: but
she never altered a feature or a tone; and, on bringing her into
her natural state, she presently in turning her head felt a sore-
ness which made her think some one must have pinched her neck.
Some persons chose to doubt the reality of her anesthesia, and


MESMERISM. 1167


stuck pins in her, and made various experiments which they
thought would hurt her; conceiving the thing impossible, as
though palsy is not an undoubted symptom of nervous disease.
In females with nervous affections we continually observe spas-
modic and convulsive actions on the one hand, and palsy of
motion on the other: sometimes such morbid sensibility that the
least touch cannot be borne, and sometimes the most excruciating
neuralgic dartings are experienced ; and often, on the other hand,
we have local loss of sensation, and sometimes a general loss of
it. It would be strange if such insensibility as the elder
Okey’s did not occasionally occur ; and the doubt of its possibility
betrays great medical ignorance. Other real cases have been
doubted as well as those of the poor Okeys. A case of cata-
lepsy with this insensibility occurred in the Infirmary of Edin-
burgh, and was lectured upon by Dr. Duncan. He made the
following remarks : — ‘‘ We cannot avoid noticing, and we do so
with feelings of the most unmixed disgust, an unmanly, wanton,
and barbarous experiment, practised on this unfortunate patient
by an individual unconnected, we are happy to add, with the
department of clinical medicine. It will scarcely be credited,
but nevertheless it is strictly true, that during a paroxysm of in-
sensibility, the person to whom we allude, tore with his nails, two
separate pieces of skin from the hand of the patient. She was not
aware of the cruel and unwarrantable experiment at the time, but
she feels its effects in the intervals, very acutely. It is satisfac-
tory, however, to know that but one feeling of the most unequi-
vocal reprobation pervaded teachers and pupils at this inhuman
and unprofessional act.” Endless experiments were made which
proved the reality of the insensibility. It ceased early one morn-
ing, with the occurrence of sensation of pins and needles: and
her sister, who was very romping, on banging her before she got
up, wondered to find her complain, for she had borne this pre-
viously without caring for it. And when she herself got out of
bed she was surprised to find the floor ‘so hard,’ for hitherto she
had never felt the floor in walking, and could not walk without
seeing where she placed her foot.

She had also a wonderful susceptibility of unpleasant feeling
from the influence of persons seriously ill: a feeling of weakness,
oppression, and distress; and such an effect upon her mind that
she, being in her delirium, fancied an image of death wrapped in

4G 3,


1168 MESMERISM.


white clothes, standing by the side of the patient. The more
adult the patient, and the more violent the disease, the more
intense were the distressing feelings, and the taller the fancied
spectre. In her natural state she has nothing of the kind: and
in a third state, one of sleepwaking with her eyes open, in which
she walks about and speaks gently, and sighs, and sometimes
does not wink an eyelid for a whole hour, in which she is not at
all delirious, she has the oppression, but not the delirious image.
The moment the person dies, the sensation and the image cease.
This pheenomenon will occur when the individual’s face is not seen
by her, — as when she is walking even at some distance behind a
person, whom she never saw, and whose faceshe cannot see. I have
known it occur when the patient, a child, has been at an opposite
window in my street, and looking out with other children. I have
tested her accounts in every way, and know them to be correct.
This peculiarity had disclosed itself many months in the hospital
before I learnt it, and then she let it out to me accidentally.

A third peculiarity, not observed, except for a short time in 1838,
in the younger, though a condition in one respect similar to it for
many months happened to her, is, that by certain means we can
throw her into the state of sleeping waking just mentioned. In
this state her countenance is truly heavenly ;_ such as enraptures
painters and every one who has a feeling for painting and poetry.
She accurately foretells the changes in her complaints and accu-
rately points out the means which may be required. But there
was a mixture of delirium originally in this state, for she fancied
she saw a kind Negro, whom she applied to and who answered
her questions.» But this delirious fancy has long ceased. In
1837, p.685. supra, I said that, from the facts recorded by Gall and
Lord Monboddo, &c., I was willing to believe that a sleepwaker
may prophesy morbid changes in himself with accuracy. This
fact is completely realised in the elder. Her predictions respecting
the return of her epileptic fits, paroxysms of sleep for a certain
number of hours, the occurrence of peculiar phenomena, nay
the sudden occurrence of violent inflammatory symptoms, with
intense heat, sweating, rapidity of pulse, anguish of countenance,
and buffiness of the blood, have been predicted by her with the


b See similar phenomena in Dr. D’Espines, Observations de Médecine Pratique,
Anneci, 1838.


MESMERISM. 1169


most perfect accuracy even to the hour. Possibly this has de-
pended upon the imagination. The power of mental impressions
I know to be far greater than is generally apprehended: and in
mesmeric states its power is greatly augmented. Lord Bacon
knew well that warts,—a very trifling and fugitive structural
disease, could be charmed away, that is, removed by mental im-
pression; and he details his own case. The younger Okey had
once a large raw surface on the back of her neck caused inten-
tionally through stimulating dressings after a blister. The pain
was extreme when she turned her head or moved her shoul-
ders in the least, or when any one of her brothers or sisters
touched the place, as they often did. Wishing to keep it raw,
but also to prevent her sufferings, we told her in her delirium
to ask a figure, which she also deliriously saw and asked ques-
tions of, how we could, in her language, “ make feel not live
at it.” She told us to pass around it a piece of silver, first
dipped in water on which we had breathed, or in which we
had put our finger. We did so. She znstantly bore any slap or
pressure upon this part without knowing it: we pulled off the
dry and concreted lint which had been on it for days, as she
had absolutely refused to undergo the pain of dressing it, without
a word, a tone, or a look, expressive of pain. It was from that
moment perfectly insensible, and remained so for many months,
as I know by often having pinched and pricked it. without her
knowledge. By the same method, for months while the idea of
producing insensibility in this way was strong in her mind, I made
many patches of her hands, arms, neck, and face, insensible: and
in every experiment, made in every way to prevent deception, to
try the sensibility of these parts and the insensibility of those,
the effects were uniform. The effect of the mind over the condition
of sleepwaking in the elder was always shown by the somnambu-
lism continuing as long as she said it would. She would predict
accurately how long it would last: and, if she did but say it would
last a certain time, her prediction never failed. Without this, its
duration was uncertain; and she often fell down asleep in the
midst of it when we were anxious for its continuance. Mr. Wood
thought of prolonging it to an extent desirable for our experi-
ments by prevailing upon her as soon as it began to name its


© Of the Advancement of Learning.


4G 4


1170 MESMERISM.


duration. When it continues long enough for her to answer our
question, and in it she always speaks so slowly that frequently
she falls asleep before the answer comes, it has invariably lasted
the time. Frequently, by keeping her in conversation it has
lasted longer: but never less: and frequently it lasts the time to
a minute. We often beg her to name a definite time, as half
an hour or an hour: and, if she obliges us, the prediction is sure
to be fulfilled. Evidently for the same reason that, if we deter-
mine to wake at a certain hour, the impression on our mind is
potent even in sleep to accomplish the result : and, though un-
conscious of impression, we wake punctually. As to foretelling
matters not relating to changes in their own systems, I have never
yet witnessed any thing that gives a shadow of probability to
such prescience. Persons in a mesmeric state of delirium or
sleepwaking may fancy they have this power, and some may not
fancy it but wish to appear to possess it; but, adhering to my
original plan of asserting nothing that I have not myself wit-
nessed and tested, I cannot defend this.

Cases, independent of mesmerism, in children and youth, ot
attacks of an infantile state, during which the thoughts, actions,
and language were the same as those of the individual when a
| very young child, have been now related to me by medical men;
and one I have seen myself, the patient, —a little girl about eight
years of age, knowing nothing afterwards of what had occurred.
Paroxysms of this sort, in which the language and every thing else
are as they were in the delirium two years ago, attack the elder
Okey, for part of an hour, if she is much mesmerised.

Many persons in the mesmeric coma will at Jength answer if re-
peatedly spoken to: some will walk; some do various things: in
fact become sleepwakers. A young gentleman from Wales, who
was prevented by epilepsy from following his profession, but never
had a fit after he was once mesmerised, and by daily mesmeris-
ation for a time by Mr. Symes of Hill Street has now been per-
fectly well for two years and is married, was easily brought out of
his coma into sleepwaking by gently blowing in his face. In this
state his eyes converged and his face flushed: he denied having
any thing which any question implied ; made a strange noise ; as-
sumed every attitude of his mesmeriser; and did whatever his
mesmeriser did, and followed him every where, pushing against
him, and endeavouring to get into the same point of space, so


MESMERISM. 1171


that he constantly pushed on. An excellent young woman whom
I cured of a long and dreadful hiccup by mesmerism, after all
other means had failed, clenched her hands and became perfectly
rigid when mesmerised, except that, though her eyes were per-
fectly closed, I could draw any part of her in any direction, and
she constantly turned towards me and assumed every position in
which Iplaced myself. She had no power of moving her feet, so
that to bend to one side or the other, to turn her body round, and
to stoop, in imitation of myself, the rest of her body and lower
extremities becoming situated so awkwardly in relation to her
feet, and to remain thus bent round, stooping, and inclining far
to one side as long. as I thought proper, was what a number of
strong and unprejudiced men declared with truth was absolutely
impossible to themselves. And yet I have kept her thus strangely
situated, and without the least support, for above an hour; and
at the end of the time on waking her, which was the work of a
few moments, she not only knew nothing that had occurred, but,
so far from being fatigued, always felt and looked greatly re-
freshed.

I witnessed a remarkable cure of violent periodical insanity by
mesmerism. A young man had every evening, for two or three
weeks, been attacked with the most violent insanity, which lasted
many hours. Several straps were required across his bed, and,
in addition to these, three persons, to restrain him. His howl-
_ings always alarmed the neighbourhood: after a time he had a
stage of whistling ; and an uniform series of changes was always
gone through before the sleep came on in which the fit always
ended. Strong doses of strong medicines, and various means had
completely failed. I was called in and saw him during his
paroxysm: I mesmerised him for three quarters of an hour in
vain, and he made many attempts to bite me. I requested Mr.
Chandler of Rotherhithe to mesmerise him the following and
every night before the fit begun. This gentleman was so obliging
as to accede to my request ; and perfectly cured his patient, who
at first laughed at such a mode of treatment, and declared that
he had experienced nothing, though on the first night that Mr.
Chandler mesmerised him the fit was entirely prevented: and in
a few nights the mesmeric process presently brought on sleep
from which he quickly awoke into the fit, and the fit became
shorter and shorter and milder and milder. By mesmerising


1172 . MESMERISM.


him still, after the commencement of the fit, sleep again came on,
from which he was awakened, by transverse passes, into his
healthy state. By inducing the mesmeric sleep, the fit could be
brought on at pleasure in the day: and as it was more incon-
venient in the evening, Mr. Chandler always brought it on early
in the afternoon, and by mesmerising him always in the fit, this
was put an end to sooner and sooner, till at length it was arrested
instantly and then ceased to return. The cure was effected in a
very short time. At the end of a year, through a fall, the disease
returned, but was cured by mesmerism very quickly.

Some are not rendered insensible, but become completely
unable to command their muscles, and incline towards their
mesmeriser or imitate him, being wide awake, and perhaps are
painfully drawn; or are strangely agitated. In the Okeys, the
susceptibility of traction of different parts was often extreme.
When they were not aware of it, we have by movements of the
hand behind their backs at the distance of many yards, drawn their
limbs or body just as we wished. We have tied heavy weights
of above 80 lbs. to their arms, such as they could not lift of them-
selves, and in the same way drawn their arms and the appended
weights up into the air. Whether they were in coma or wide
awake in delirium, the result was equal. If they were once
stupified, or half stupified, they often slowly put themselves into
every position we assumed. Nay, when the susceptibility was
extreme, whatever we did behind the back of the elder, and what-
ever feature of our own we contorted, and in whatever way, the
same thing occurred precisely in her, though her eyes were shut.
When she has been placed supine on the ground, we have drawn
her right up from it in a way that in the natural state would be
impossible. The young woman just mentioned, too, would rise
out of the most constrained posture unassisted by any thing but
the movement of my hand at a distance, in a way for which she
had no sufficient muscular force in her ordinary state. We could
thus place the different limbs of the elder Okey in all sorts of
strange positions, and open her mouth and eyes, all remaining
fixed, and thus give her the strangest appearance.

By pointing the fingers towards a part thus brought into a fixed
position, the contraction suddenly at length gave way; or if we
darted them towards it, the contraction always at once yielded
somewhat, and, yielding every dart, at length ceased altogether.


MESMERISM. 1173


Whatever muscular action existed, or whatever mental action
was going on, with a degree of coma, deeper sleep was apt to
come on, and the mind then suddenly ceased to give any sign of
action and every voluntary muscle relaxed completely, except
as regarded the function of respiration. Presently the sleep was
at an end, and they woke with the previous delirium. We at one
time could draw either sister, not only at very great distances,
but where a moderately thick wooden partition intervened. We
could produce the coma through screens of pasteboard, or thin
wood or glass. The ordinary way of mesmerising was by passes
at a short distance, or by continuing to point the fingers near
the patient, whether before or behind: but contact by means of
the hand upon their hands or head, or I suppose any where
else, had the same effect. We always found, while the suscepti-
bility remained equal, that the greater the surface brought into
contact, or, if there was no contact, the greater the proximity ;
if passes were made, the more rapidly they were made; the
larger the mass or surface with which the pass was made, as with
both hands and not one, with all the fingers andthe thumb and not
the fingers only, with two fingers and not one; the larger the mass
or surface with which a given part, as the hand or finger, making
the pass, was connected, as when, the hand being used, I put myself
in contact with a second person, or still more if we made a chain
of three, and so on; the larger the individual mesmerising ; the
stronger he was,—the greater the effect. The points of the
body, as the ends of the finger or nose, seem to have more power
than any other of equal dimensions and equally covered with
skin in affecting, and to be more susceptible of receiving and
conveying the influence, than other parts.

The mucous membranes received and communicated the influ-
ence far more than the skin. These observations of mine Mr. Wood
verified in an idiot baby, whom he has mesmerised for at least half
an hour daily for eight months with extraordinary benefit. He
employs passes, and the child soon goes to sleep; but, when it is
asleep, it begins to breathe heavily or snore, if he puts his finger
on its nose or lip. The most susceptible mucous membrane is the
conjunctiva; a touch of it often causes sudden coma when other
modes have failed. Consistently with all this, the point of the finger
upon the closed eyelid has great effect; the eyelid being only a
fine screen to the eyes: as well as the point of the finger held


1174 MESMERISM.


near the open eye. When we make passes before the eye, the
wider the eye is open, that is, the greater its surface of exposure,
the greater the effect. Were the effect to arise merely because
the patient sees the pass made, there would be no difference
whether the eye was only as open as usual, or opened as widely
as possible. The region of the cornea, too, is far more susceptible
than other portions of the ball. Ihave made thousands of the most
delicate and unexceptionable experiments upon all these points,
and ascertained the facts to the greatest nicety.

Many things that another person, or, indeed, I may say, another
animal, has touched, acquire the influence. Thus, gold, silver,
nickel, platinum, if held in the hand or mouth, will, though wiped,
ov being brought into contact with them, when they are suscep-
tible, occasion sudden sleep if the susceptibility is extreme ; in
which sleep there may be convulsive actions ; or a spasm of the
part, and at length sleep; or a spasm only. Just as in the case of
passes, when the susceptibility is extreme, a pass knocks them
down senseless and relaxed; if they are not so susceptible, it
merely stupifies them, makes them senseless, with their eyes open,
rigid throughout, and fixed in the very attitude in which they
were at the moment. This fixing with the eyes wide open, and
senscless, is one of the most wonderful and magical-looking phee-
nomena of the whole. Its success behind their back, and by
perfect strangers, has converted hundreds who, not understanding
the subject, were bewildered by the more delicate phenomena. A
beautiful experiment showed the gradual diminution of the power
imparted to the gold: and could, for the most part, be made upon
the younger only, as her susceptibility was, in general, not so
great as to show powerful effects from moderate causes. A so-
vereign is held ina person’s hand, and then given her. Instantly
her hand closes violently upon it, she becomes stupified with her
eyes open, and at last falls senseless and relaxed: on waking, in
a minute or two, she is desired to pick up the sovereign, and
again it causes her hand to close, and stupifies her; yet not so
soon but that she has time to rise a little trom the floor, before
the stupefaction and rigidity come; and the perfect sleep and re-
laxation are longer in supervening. On waking she is desired
to pick up the sovereign again ; the effects are longer in super-
vening, so that she rises higher from the floor before they come,
and there is time, by pointing one’s finger at her close hand, to


*


MESMERISM. yA i es 3


cause it to relax, and drop the sovereign ; and in consequence of
the absence of this, the rigidity and stupefaction are not kept up,
and terminate in waking instead of perfect sleep and relaxation.
She is desired again to pick up the sovereign; she does so, and
rises higher than ever before the effects come, and they are
shorter. All is repeated, she rises completely before they come,
and they are still shorter. Again all is repeated, and she not only
rises but goes about, and talks before the effects come, and they
are slight. On repetition a still longer time intervenes, and still
slighter are the effects; and so experiment after experiment goes
on till the sovereign has lost its power altogether. The sovereign
often rolls far away; and in such cases it has been changed for
one charged by contact with another person, it being impossible
for her to observe the change and impossible for her to detect
any difference in regard to warmth or moisture, as the original
sovereign has been as much in her own hand as the new sovereign
in the hand of another person. The new sovereign has always
produced a far more quick and strong effect than the exhausted
one.

By means of chargeable metals, I devised a mode of showing very
accurately the influence of health upon the mesmerising power. I
took one of the sisters into a female ward in which she had never
been, and respecting the inmates of which she and I were perfectly
ignorant. Every ticket with the name of the disease on the head
of the bed was removed: every patient had the clothes drawn com-
pletely over her. A sovereign, which had lain long untouched, and
had therefore no mesmeric charge, was taken up by her, and we
proceeded to the ward. She put the sovereign under the bed-
clothes into the hand of each patient in succession, and at the
same number of moments by my stop-watch took it out again and
kept it in her hand. I noted the period in which the effect began,
the length of time it lasted, and the amount of it, — whether it
caused spasm of the hand only; of the hand and arm; or spasm
and stupefaction. So we went round the ward, and in one bed,
at the request of a certain student, I repeated the experiment.
As soon as each experiment was finished, the bed-clothes were
turned down and the ticket examined. The effects were in every
instance precisely proportionate to the strength of the patient in
whose hand the sovereign had been placed. Those in consump-
tion or worn down seith paralysis produced little or no effect :


1176 MESMERISM.


those who had complaints not impairing the health and strength
produced full effect: and all the intermediate degrees were ex-
quisitely proportionate to the condition of the patient. One patient
had produced a great effect, who, the student said, was continually
bled and kept constantly on low diet. But I found she had not
been bled for some weeks, had been for some time on full diet,
was taking bark, looked in capital condition, and had only some
cutaneous disease not interfering with her strength. Of the two
experiments made at one bed, the first had produced a full effect
proportionate to the strength of the patient. The second experi-
ment produced only a moderate effect: the clothes were then
turned down, and it proved that a nurse said to be in good health,
and to do all the work of the ward, had been lain in it. The woman,
however, looked very sickly, and I found that she had just lain
in, and had come back to her place very weak, and long before
she was competent. The experiment was triumphant, and an
apology was the next day made to me by the student who had so
misrepresented to me the state of those two patients, and at whose
request I had willingly made the experiments in this his wise
uncle’s ward, because the results in the case of both sisters, per-
- fectly accordant in every instance up to that time with the
strength of each patient, though modified like all results in their
form in each sister, had been made in my own ward, where they
and I knew every patient.

Another beautiful set of experiments was made with brutes. If
their hand was brought into contact with a brute, the rapidity and
intensity of the effect was always proportionate to the size of the
animal. If their fingers were placed under the wing of a perroquet,
the effect was much inferior to what it was if they were placed
under the wings of a cockatoo. If placed on the nose of a small
deer, the effect was inferior to what it was if placed upon a lama
or a large deer: —a mere rigidity and concussion of the head in
the first instance, stupefaction and at last perfect insensibility and
relaxation in the latter. Contact of the ends of the fingers with the
dry rough trunk of the elephant had no effect upon the elder:
but, the instant she touched the soft moist mucous membrane of
the trunk of this immense beast, she dropt senseless and snored
loudly, and did not become sensible for ten minutes.

Screens lessen the effects. The thicker any given one is, the
greater the impediment. But the effects through them, when


MESMERISM. 1477


so managed as to prevent the patient from knowing what is
doing, are very satisfactory. Mesmerised gold or silver pro-
duces its effects more slowly and faintly in proportion as it is
more wrapped up: and is thus proved to have power, because, if
wrapped up and rubbed against the patient, it is impossible for
her to know what metal is used.

Through glass the patient sees the pass made, yet the effect is
always slower and weaker than if no glass is interposed. If I
blow upon the back of the neck of either sister, when very sus-
ceptible, stupefaction and rigidity are instantaneous: if into the
hair of the back of the head, a few moments intervene: if there
is a handkerchief or tippet on the back of the neck, and I
blow upon it, many moments intervene before the effect ensues.
The effects of breathing are proportioned to the distance. If
standing down stairs I blow upwards towards the face of the
younger, whilst hanging her head over the balusters at the very
top of the staircase, the effect comes so slowly that she laughs
and talks some time before she is suddenly and unexpectedly
stupified and rigid.

Some metals, as lead and copper, could never be charged so as
to affect the elder: and nickel had always a tremendous influence
over her, such as I defy any human being to imitate. But lead
and copper affected the younger, if, after having been held in
the hand of another, the perspiration was not wiped off them. If
it was wiped away, no effect ever occurred. Iron could never be
made to affect either, under any circumstances ; on the contrary,
it invariably destroyed the power in charged gold or silver. No-
thing could be more interesting than to see a charged sovereign
or shilling lying in their hand, a skreen being held between it and
their head ; and, as soon as the hand began to close and the eyes
to fix, to observe these effects instantly arrested and subside
when a short iron rod was brought into contact with the metal,
and augment again when it was withdrawn. I have often sub-
stituted a rod of silver or of some other metal, for I had rods
made of various metals precisely similar in form and size, when
it was impossible the girl could know which was being used; and
in the case of a leaden rod I myself should not have known by
the eye at the moment, but to prevent confusion had put each
into a separate pocket. The silver, copper, and lead had no
neutralizing power, and therefore never diminished or arrested


1178 MESMERISM.


the effect. I recollect one day having put a charged sovereig?
into the hand of the younger. Her hand began to contract, and
she could not by any effort open it. She was very cross, and,
seeing two rods exactly alike, took up one, thinking it was iron:
and told me now she was a match for me and would open her
hand. But her hand would not open. I then went to look at
the other rod, and found that it was the iron rod, and that she
had taken the leaden. I pulled the leaden one out, and intro-
duced the iron one between her fingers and palm, and her hand
immediately opened.

Friction has no power alone, but, if a part first touched or
breathed upon by another person, or touched with any thing as
far as I have hitherto inquired, except iron, which has the breath
or perspiration or saliva of another person upon it, or with gold,
silver, or nickel which has been influenced by another person’s
contact, though wiped, is well rubbed with an indifferent and un-
charged substance, even with iron, the friction augments the effect
of the previous cause ; it will re-excite the effects for a long time
after they have ceased; and, when they have not begun, and may
be thought not likely ever to take place, will excite them. Even
contact has far more effect if united with friction. Thus the
point of the finger on the nose will produce an effect much sooner
if it is rubbed upon the nose, instead of being held still.

Another curious fact is that, although lead and copper have
no power of producing spasms of the hand, however long they
may have been in contact with another person, and however long
and with whatever friction they are applied; yet, if rubbed
against charged gold, silver, or nickel, they acquire a charge,
and, when applied, produce the effects, in a less degree, of the
metal with which they have been in contact. I have made such
experiments many thousand times: and allowed others to make
them: and, when the susceptibility existed, the effects have been
invariable. I have taken a short rod of copper or lead in my
right hand, put both my hands behind me under my coat, and
even had a large pasteboard placed at the same time before the
face of the girl with its lower edge close against her chest,
and then rubbed it five hundred times (first wiped if the subject
was the younger sister) on the palm of either of them. No effect
ever ensued. I have then put its extremity against a sovereign
or shilling which I had in my left hand, still behind me and under


MESMERISM. 1179


my Coat, and, soon after rubbing her palm with it, the hand has
closed with strong spasms. I have put the rod of lead or iron
behind me in different experiments again and again without
bringing it in contact with the gold or silver, and never saw an
effect; but after I had silently, and without the possibility of
any one knowing what I did, rubbed it against the gold or silver,
friction of the palm with it invariably, when there was any sus-
ceptibility to gold or silver at all, excited spasm. The mesmeric
influence is capable of reflexion from mirrors, and appears to be
subject to the same laws as light in this respect.

Water has no effect: but, if it is breathed into or has a finger
placed in it, acquires the power of producing sudden sleep if
drunk by either sister : and, in the elder, contraction of a finger or
limb which is moistened with it, as well as deep sleep. We send
her to sleep by passes, and measures are taken to prevent the pos-
sibility of sight, and, when she is asleep, we moisten any finger,
the side of the nose, or any other part of the face with it or with
plain water. If with plain water, there is no effect: if with the
mesmerised, the part after a time contracts. If the back of the
finger is moistened, the finger extends: if the inside, it bends: if
the forehead, this wrinkles and moves up and down: if the eyelids,
they open: if the angle of the mouth, it twitches sidewise. These
experiments have been made thousands of times, and always,
unless for some evident reason, with the same results. But the
mesmerised water has a powerful narcotic and depressing pro-
perty. The longer it is applied, and the more of it is used, the
deeper the sleep and snoring become: and, if too much is used,
paleness, exhaustion, rapidity and extreme smallness of pulse take
place, so that no one should presume to make these experiments
unless well acquainted with the subject. Indeed, with respect
to any of these experiments, for an ignorant man to take the
matter in hand himself, as though he had made himself master of
the subject, is as absurd and disgusting as if a countryman should
push aside a chemical lecturer, and mix acids, alkalies, and salts
from various bottles, and declare, because things did not happen
as he expected, that chemistry was fudge: or if such a clown,
who had never seen a microscope before, should put objects under
it, and knowing nothing about the instrument, be able to see fog
and confusion only, and therefore declare the instrument an im-
position. If the susceptibility is not strong, water swallowed’
may have no effect till a second draught is taken, or even a

4


1180 MESMERISM.


draught of unmesmerised water, so as to occasion friction of the
part wet with the mesmerised water. Since, if a part has been
breathed upon or touched by another, or touched with something
mesmerised, friction with any unmesmerised or unmesmerisable
substance will bring out the effects of the previous and hitherto
dormant cause or re-excite effects that had ceased ; should a finger
be held by another person, and then rubbed with a brush moistened
with unmesmerised water, effects will ensue just as if water first
mesmerised were used. Should mesmerised gold or nickel have
been applied to a part, and from the susceptibility being low no
effect have occurred, or should there have been an effect and it
have ceased, friction with any thing will bring out the effect of
the thing previously applied: or should a thing not directly
mesmerisable, but mesmerisable by contact with a directly mes-
merisable metal, be ignorantly allowed to be in contact with a
mesmerisable metal, and then be applied to the person, the effects
of the directly mesmerisable metal will be produced.

_ Great care is requisite to prevent other causes of mesmerism
from acting. If, while some unmesmerised or unmesmerisable
substance is applied and the susceptibility is great, a person
makes a pass near or at a distance, or breathes upon the patient,
or though at some distance breathes towards her, or if any con-
tact of hand, whether with the hands or even a covered part as
the shoulder, take place; or should a person look intently even
behind the patient, especially should several do this“; or should
one or more remain very near her, sleep may come on, though not
any local effect such as mesmerised metals or water induce. For
example, at times the susceptibility has been such that a person
had only to fix his eye upon either sister, behind her back, when
she could not possibly know it, and she was stupefied and fixed
or dropped senseless and relaxed. Indeed, it often happens
when a person has been rendered susceptible by mesmerising,
but not before, that the imagination will alone induce sleep.
When placed quietly, and led to expect they are being mes-
merised, they will gradually fall asleep. But this no more upsets:
the variously made other experiments, than the sleep of a person


* I have frequently mesmerised one sovereign among many with my eye,
looking intently at it while the girl was out of the room; and, on her taking up
this one, the hand has been cramped, though no other had this effect ; but another
would have this effect afterwards, or, to speak correctly, mere veluntary closure of
the hand, which implies so much friction, would have this effect.


MESMERISM. 1181


accustomed to an opiate pill, or the evacuation of the bowels of,
a person accustomed to a cathartic, though a pill of crumb of
bread be substituted without his knowledge, proves that neither
opium nor colocynth has medicinal properties: nor because the
mere sight of a steamer will cause sickness in those who have
been sea-sick, that a ship’s motion has no such effect.

It is also to be remembered that the susceptibility fluctuates ;
that it will be high or low for days, and may vary in the same
day. As soon as it is found to vary, the particular experiments
in which we are engaged should be desisted from. A moderate
number of experiments increases the susceptibility, but many
exhaust it. Those with passes only, and by traction, scarcely
exhaust ; but those with metals and water very soon take off the
susceptibility, and derange and debilitate the system. And
this is not by tiring the patient; because mere mesmerism, by
passes of the hand fixing and stupefying them all day, rather
refreshes than tires, and because, when the susceptibility to
passes has declined, it may be at once augmented again by ope-
rating two or three times with gold. From some modification
of the power by the metal or water, after strong or continued
results from either, there frequently is no susceptibility at all;
and, after this absence of susceptibility, every now and then, the
system beginning to recover itself, an experiment succeeds.
But, if experiments are repeated thus early, the susceptibility
is again exhausted presently, and effects no longer result till it
has accumulated again. An early experiment soon exhausts it
again; and thus an ignorant person, determined to make experl-
ments at all hazards, as though he had inanimate matter before
him, is confounded, and, if conceited and overbearing, presumes
to pronounce all an imposition. When these points are remem-
bered, as well as the fact of the different degree of susceptibility
of the two sisters and the peculiarity of susceptibility in each, no
wonder that strange inferences should have been drawn, and
much nonsense written against palpable truth. ¢


e As much of the subject was new, and required very careful investigation, I
refrained from publishing my results ; but, to prevent all objection and malignity,
I made every experiment with open doors, and gave every body all the facilities
of observation in my power. Although the results of the experiments were real,
and without deception in the eyes of every person capable of observation (and
fewer can observe weil than reason), exceptions, difficulties, and failures, con-

4u 2


1182 MESMERISM.


Why some are susceptible and others not; is no more known
than why some are never salivated with mercury and others
salivated by a single grain of calomel; why some have never been


stantly occurred, as in every laborious investigation. By perseverance I have
now ascertained the cause of every difficulty and failure.

In my address to the students on declining to hold my professorship any longer
at University College, (which address may be procured at Longman’s, and is
published in the Medical Gazette,) was the following passage : —

«In an evil hour I consented to show some experiments to the Editor
of the Lancet, after repeated entreaties conveyed by his assistant, Mr. Mills,
who had witnessed the phenomena at the hospital, reported many in the Lancet,
been enraptured with them, and declared them over and over again to be so satis-
factory that to doubt or to suspect the two Okeys of imposition would be the
height of absurdity. I exhibited to the Editor the production of the singular
delirium, and a variety of the most beautiful and satisfactory experiments which
he has entirely suppressed. But I presently feared what would be the result.
He said he was pestered with letters upon the subject; but that nineteen out of
twenty were unfavourable. Nineteen persons of course purchase more Lancets
than one, and [ fancied I already saw his rejection of the evidence. The men-
tal phenomena were such as no person capable of sound and refined observation,
and fitted for philosophical investigation, could for an instant have imagined to
be feigned. The physical phenomena with the hand, the eye, metals, and water,
were as striking and conclusive, with the exception of some with lead and nickel ;
and those I have since proved to large numbers of able judges to be equally
conclusive. Mesmerised nickel produces upon the elder sister the most violent
effects, which none but a very ignorant person could consider pretended. Now
when this, or gold or silver, has been rubbed upon a part, and the friction has
been desisted from before the effects come, or the effects have come and have
ceased, they may be at once excited in the former case, or re-excited in the
latter, by friction of the part with any thing—a piece of wood ora piece of
lead; and this excitement may be produced again and again. Friction was
performed with lead upon parts to which nickel had been applied, either with or
without effect as it might be, and the effects took place violently. This explan-
ation I gave to the Editor, but he was either too dull to understand, or had his
reasons for not understanding. In another set of experiments lead produced
effects, though nickel had not been applied to the parts; and yet I never had
been able to mesmerise lead by holding it in my hand and to produce effects by
then applying it. Those effects I candidly said I could not explain, since I
had not commenced experiments with lead or nickel for more than two or three
days: but, as there was no more deception in the cases, nor less certainty of the
various facts which I had observed, than in chemistry or any other natural
science, 1 added that these results showed only that they required farther in-
vestigation, and that I had no doubt I should, by perseverance, discover their
cause. The Editor knew that I was about to leave London that same day for


MESMERISM. 1183


sea-sick, while others are sick almost unto death as soon as they
are at sea, or by only looking at a steam-packet after having
been sea-sick; or why people change in these as well as so many
other particulars at various times.

I have mentioned my persuasion that persons in a mesmeric
state may predict, without any guess, the changes in their own
disease and general health; but no more. Whether, by touching
others, they, through some instinctive feeling, can learn the state
of the system in a way that others cannot, I will not venture to
determine. A Parisian sleepwaker, who had never seen us, cer-
tainly told the state of health ofa friend and myself accurately


an absence of six weeks on the continent, and yet he could not wait for my re-
turn and give me an opportunity of farther research, but, with that gentlemanly
delicacy for which he and his friends are so remarkable, published, almost
immediately, what professed to be an account of what he had seen, —a most
imperfect and worthless account, however; in his plenitude of scientific import-
ance, he declared that not one more experiment on magnetism would ever be
required ; and answers which were sent he never published. He omitted to
state a circumstance in his experiments with lead, which had never been allowed
to happen in mine, but which, when reflecting upon them on my tour, I thought
might have influenced the results. In employing the lead, I had noticed that
he applied it against a piece of nickel held in his other hand, before he applied
it to the patient. On my return, I applied lead to her as before, and indeed,
copper also; yet never obtained an effect. I then applied the lead or the
copper, as it might be, against a piece of mesmerised nickel or gold, before
applying it to her, and its application to her was always productive of effects.
I discovered that the surface of the Jead or copper had become nickelised or
aurified by the contact; and thus the difficulty was solved. These experiments
I have repeated again and again before numbers of gentlemen, taking the
greatest care that the patient should not know when I applied lead or copper which
had not been in contact with either of them, and the results have been uniform.
I was obliged to leave the poor little girl in an intense coma, with occasional
violent tetanic spasms, at the Editor’s house, little imagining that any farther
experiments would be attempted, especially in my absence, by a person ignorant
of the subject and altogether incapable of making experiments. I had seen
sufficient of the extreme carelessness, and want of information and philosophic
power of the Editor, during the experiments conducted by myself, and which he
frequently altogether deranged, not to be convinced that in my absence no ex-
periment could be made in a manner to justify conclusions. In his ignorance,
he acted as though mesmeric susceptibility is always present and always the
same: whereas the reverse is the fact; and experiments with water and metals,
frequently repeated so derange the susceptibility, that we are often obliged to
desist.”


4H 3


1184 MESMERISM.


to the minutest point. But very many such instances would be
necessary to prove that all was nothing more than a successful
guess: though, as I can conceive the possibility of endless ex-
ternal senses, I can conceive the possibility of many suscepti-
bilities and faculties; the brute creation have many which we
have not.

Upon transposition of the senses, as it is called, I have no facts
of my own. The elder Okey has an appearance of fits of seeing
with the back of the hand; and both she and her sister have had
an appearance of hearing for a short time, the one with the
shoulder, the other with the hand. There was no attempt at de-
ception. In the natural state they would be greatly hurt at the
mention of their having appeared to exhibit such phenomena,
and in their ordinary delirium they laugh at it as nonsense.

It might be a delirious fancy, or a faint degree of the trans-
position of the senses ; but I cannot prove the reality of the thing,
so imperfect have been the signs of it in every instance.

There appears to me no reason why one part of the nervous
system should not, in a new and strange state, acquire properties
foreign to it and possessed by another analogous part of the
same system. I do not believe that the liver, or even the sciatic
nerve, could, in any state, think; nor even that a nerve of mere
motion could perform the part of one of sense. But I see no
reason why a nerve of one feeling should not acquire another
feeling. The nutrient vessels of one organ will deposit, in dis-
ease, what is foreign to their natural function: —arteries will
ossify, and muscles be replaced by fat. One secreting organ in
preternatural states will secrete what nature never intended it
should: even a case is well attested of secretion of genuine milk
by the scrotum of a young man twenty-one years of age.f I
therefore know no reason why one nerve of sense should not be
able to perform the office of another. In truth there is now the
evidence of my fellow-labourer to the fact.


«‘ Le vrai n’est pas toujours vraisemblable.”
FontTENELLE.
« T never said it was probable: 1 only said it was true.”
Monk Lewis.


* Gazette Médicale de Paris, 4 Juillet, 1825; also an analogous case in Hufe-
land’s Journal, vol. liv. See Lancet, vol. xxviii. pp. 465. 597.


MESMERISM. 1185


In 1828 I went to Paris to witness, through an introduction,
what was declared to be an instance of this kind, and has been
the subject of much controversy. The friend who accompanied
me, and believes in mesmerism as firmly as myself, was, like my-
self, thoroughly disgusted.

The Rey. Mr. Townshend, in his recent works, describes some
instances of it; and that of the young man at Antwerp is very
staggering. Mr. Wood was lately in Paris, and visited a man
who was said to see without his eyes, and also to have a know-
ledge of distant places to which he had never been; and of dis-
tant occurrences: but was as much disgusted as I had been
with the young lady two years ago. He afterwards went to
Antwerp, to meet Mr. Townshend and the young man just al-
luded to. Now I can place the utmost confidence in Mr. Wood.
Though he has resolution to disregard all ignorance and clamour
and to adhere firmly to truth, he is any thing but disposed to give
way to the tales of mesmerisers ; he examines every thing in the
most pains-taking and dispassionate manner ; and, like me, knows
many occurrences to have been absolute deceptions, which others
have pronounced realities. I can place the same reliance upon
his honour as upon the coolness and force of his judgment. I
will lay before my readers extracts from two letters which I
received last month, though they were written with no thought
of publication.

« Paris, Hotel des Etrangers,
Aug. 13. 1840.
% Ea * * * *

“In the first place, having found out B., I went with him to
see the case of elair-voyance, which he spoke of when in London.
I have so little time that I cannot describe the particulars of
what took place, beyond his having some cotton placed on his
eyes, and a handkerchief tied loosely over them; at least it ap-
peared to me so loose as to admit the possibility of his seeing
down in this way. He contrived to tell a few words, such as the
titles of books, which were in large characters, and also a few
words which were printed witha pen. Isuggested the possi-


& Facts in Mesmerism, with Reasons for a Dispassionate Inquiry into it. By
the Rey. Chauncy Hare Townshend, A.M. 1840. I would praise it as it de-
serves, were it not dedicated to me.


4H 4


1186 MESMERISM.


bility of his seeing down, —it was declared impossible, and he
himself was very anxious to convince me that he derived no
assistance from his eyes, and for this purpose threw his head
back, and desired me to examine the position of the bandage
and pads. ‘This was rather a curious thing for a somnambulist
to do; another not less so was that, professing, as he did, to
see with the epigastrium, he should have placed himself close to
the table, and crossed his arms directly before this seat of his
new sense; so that, if indeed it existed, he took the most
effectual means of impeding it or rendering it useless. On this
occasion there were several persons present, students of the
‘Polytechnic School, &c.; and, as the evidence was not conclusive,
it was arranged that we should see him alone the following day,
when I was to bandage the eyes myself and take any other pre-
caution I thought necessary. Accordingly, we arrived at the
appointed hour, and after he had been thrown into his usual
state, I began my part of the play. I was about to put some
solid substance, as coins, inside the cotton, but that was not per-
mitted —it would interfere. I then applied for a larger allow-
ance of cotton, and, having pretty effectually closed his eyes with
it, proceeded to apply the bandage; but, when I attempted to
tighten it, he called out that I was about to smother him and
that I hurt his eyes. In short, he would not allow it to be effec-
tually applied. I then gave it up, declining to operate, and left
B. to apply it; and then put another bit of cotton on each
side of his nose, at the same time declaring that I did not believe
that his eyes were: sufficiently closed, and proposed to do away
with all bandages, and simply hold a large book, or something of
that sort, under his chin. This he would not agree to at all,
With the bandage thus applied, as he was evidently determined
to suffer no other impediment, he contrived, as before, to tell a
few words, and to play at écarté, now and then saying what cards
I held, principally by guess, and partly by seeing something of
them. After this he agreed to accompany B. in a ‘ voyage
mentale’ to, London, The locality fixed on was your house, and
of all the absurdities we had hitherto witnessed this altogether
distanced them. He professed to describe the house, the en-
trance, the hall, stairs, &c. This description would have done as
well for Buckingham Palace or any house in one of the small
streets of London. I almost dread seeing Mr. Townshend’s case


MESMERISM. 1187


after this, lest I should find that he also has been grievously


deceived.”
* * * * * *


In less than a week I received the following : —


“ Antwerp, Hotel du Grand Laboureur,
Aug. 18. 1840.
* * * * * *

«7 cannot allow this day’s post to leave without sending you
a few words, to say that within the last half hour we have had
undeniable proof of the existence of clair-voyance. I am com-
pelled to renounce my incredulity on the subject; and can
assure you I do not do so without having satisfied myself beyond
the possibility of further doubt. I had scarcely dared to hope
for such success, after the very imperfect exhibition at Paris. The
patient E. A., mentioned in Mr. Townshend’s book, arrived here
this morning. Mr. T. mesmerised him, and, having thrown him
into his usual state of sleepwaking, proceeded to bandage his
eyes. In this state he astonished me by the invariable correctness
with which he told cards, &c.; but, what was much more decisive,
he was able to do the same when Mr. T. closed his eyes with his
fingers. The bandage being removed, he now told cards and read
out of a French book that I fetched out of my own room. I
asked and obtained permission to apply my own fingers to his
eyes, and, having done this in the most effectual manner, was
astonished to see him read correctly a whole line at a time out
of my French book of 300 pages at least and opened repeatedly
and at different parts: he did the same when my brother closed
his eyes in the same manner. I am quite certain that he could
not by possibility see with his eyes; and the frequency of the
experiments completely did away with any thing like chance
or accident in his mentioning words, to say nothing of the number
which he repeated at a time, and this several times over.”

On his return to town Mr. Wood has been kind enough to write
me out the following detail of all that he witnessed.

August 18th.— The patient described in Mr. Townshend’s
work on Mesmerism by his initials E, A. was this day mesmerised
again by Mr. T., for the first time after an interval of nearly two
years.

E, A. is a native of Belgium, about 18 years of age, of rather


1188 MESMERISM.


small figure, but robust, of very healthy appearance, with a very
intelligent countenance.

Notwithstanding his prepossessing appearance, and the high
terms in which he was spoken of by my friend Mr. Townshend,
together with an account of the extreme caution that had been
used in closing his eyes during his mesmeric state, I confess I
could not bring myself to believe that the being before me was
capable of exhibiting the extraordinary phenomena, the astound-
ing facts, I was invited to witness, of seeing without the use of his
eyes. Not that Ifor a moment doubted the perfect good faith and
sincerity of the operator; on the contrary, I had every reason to
be satisfied that his sole object was the establishment of truth;
but I was willing to believe that he had, notwithstanding all his
precautions, been deceived,—that the closing of the eyes had not
been so effectual as he imagined—in short, any thing rather than
the possibility of clazr-voyance.

The patient being seated, Mr. T. placed himself immediately
in front of him, also sitting, at the same time holding his hands
and looking him steadily inthe face. After continuing in this po-
sition about ten minutes he became drowsy, having evidently
_ great difficulty in keeping his eyes open: a few passes in front

of his face continued downwards towards his feet completed his
sleep: he did not, however, show any symptoms of falling ; on the
contrary, appeared to rouse himself into a new state, the eyelids
remaining closed. He was very restless and apparently uneasy,
but did not speak; he would, however, answer any questions put
to him by Mr. T., but took no notice of any other voice, unless
the person had previously been in contact with Mr. T.: he seemed
to cling to his mesmeriser, and was very unwilling to leave him
fora moment. He continued for a long time very fretful, and
showed great reluctance at exerting himself in any way; and,
when asked by Mr. T. if he could see, expressed by his manner
great unwillingness to try, and said “ What for?” “ Mais pourquoi
donc?” With a little persuasion he allowed his eyes to be
bandaged and cotton to be placed by the sides of his nose, so as
I believe effectually to close them and prevent his seeing any
object presented; but if there had been any space left by the
side of his nose which could have enabled him to see down, he
made no attempt to avail himself of it, but invariably presented
the card or any thing else that was given him to his forehead,


.


MESMERISM. 1189


and I am quite certain that he repeatedly told correctly a card,
which from the time I drew it from the pack to the moment he
mentioned it had never been below the level of his eyebrows.
With his eyes thus bandaged, Mr. T. presented a card, at the same
time asking what it was: after a little persuasion he was induced
to direct his attention to it, and after holding it to his forehead,
at the same time moving it about as if to get it into the proper
light, he told it correctly and threw it on the table: this was
repeated several times with uniform success. ‘The bandage was
now removed, and Mr. Townshend covered his eyes with the palms
of his hands, the fingers being directed upwards, and so covering
the greater part of his forehead: he told the cards just as well,
and never once named a wrong one. Mr. T. kept his eyes closed
in the same manner with the palms of his hands while I presented
a French Guide-book, which I had the minute before fetched from
my ownroom and opened at random. He presented it to his fore-
head, and made some remark about its being very small print: he
read some word which was printed in larger letters, and then
turned over the leaves at random backwards and forwards until a
long table of figures attracted his attention: he said with some
surprise, “O quest ce que c’est que cela?” and repeated several
of the figures, at the same time pointing to them with his fingers,
but not touching the figure that he mentioned: he continued for
some time turning over the leaves, stopping at every thing remark-
able, as tables, plans of towns, &c., and always describing them
accurately. Mr. T. now closed his eyes by placing the ends of
his fingers over the lids: he told every card that was presented to
him, and read out of the book without making a single mistake,
I now asked for and obtained permission to apply my own hands
to his eyes, and did so in such a manner as to preclude the pos-
sibility of his seeing any thing with them. Cards were again
presented to him: he told them correctly and without hesitation,
without being wrong once: the book was again given him, and he
read slowly, but without the least hesitation, several lines, tracing
his finger along a little under each as he read. The longer the
experiments were continued, the more perfect became his power
of seeing, and the irritability diminished. Mr. T. now asked him
to write some music. Every new effort required persuasion. He at
last consented, The bandages were reapplied as carefully as before:
a sheet of note paper was laid before him, with a penand inkstand


MESMERISM.


the opening at the top of which would
scarcely admit a swan’s quill. He took an-
other book as a ruler, dipped his pen without
difficulty into the small inkstand, and at once
proceeded to rule the music lines: about the
middle of the third the pen missed; he in-
stantly saw the deficiency, and, without car-
rying his pen ontotheend of the line, stopped,
took another dip out of the small-mouthed
inkstand as easily as if his eyes had been wide
open, and again placed the point of his pen
exactly where it had missed, and continued
the line; but, before proceeding far it again
missed. He appeared to be quite aware that
it was not from deficiency of ink, and, turning
his pen a little, he went back to the point
where he left off, and with one stroke con-
tinued it to the end. A little difficulty of
the same sort occurred in the fourth line,
and was equally well managed; he was not
so particular about the fifth. Having com-
pleted the lines, Mr. T. whistled a part of a
tune, and asked him to write it in music:
he presented his forehead to the paper, and
with great rapidity wrote a few notes, and
then stopped to ask Mr. T. to repeat it;
when he immediately resumed, and presently
filled the line. Whilst in the middle of it,
I suddenly placed my hand between his head
and the paper: he immediately stopped,
turned his forehead towards me, saying,
*“ Quest ce que vous voulez donc?” and
then immediately finished the line. He
now begged Mr. T. to awake him, which
was accordingly done by a few transverse
movements of the hands in front of his
face.

After an interval of two or three days,
E. A. was again mesmerised: on this oc-
casion it was at the house of a gentleman
where a small party was assembled, and


MESMERISM. 1191


where E. A. had been invited to in his capacity of musician.
Not being aware of the real object of his visit, he objected very
strongly when it was proposed to mesmerise him, but at last
consented on condition of its being done in another room with
only two or three present. It was accordingly so arranged ; and,
after the sleep had been produced as on the former occasion, the
rest of the company were admitted. His lucidity was now even
greater than before. His eyes were stopped as before by bandages
or by the hands of any of the company, and he told without
hesitation every card that was presented, with one exception;
and this was the only mistake I ever saw him make:—the Knave
of Diamonds was presented: he said it was the Queen of Dia-
monds: but I ought here to observe, that the difference between
the Knave and Queen in French cards is not nearly so well
marked as in the cards used in England,—indeed, with my eyes
open, I frequently mistook the one for the other. While the
bandages remained on his eyes, a thin music book containing
about twenty pages of music was held before his face and
cards held behind it, so that his only chance of seeing them
was to see through the book: he never failed to tell them cor-
rectly. I now took the pack of cards into my own hand, and,
taking care that no person should see what card I took, chose the
Ace of Clubs, — thinking that, if he saw through the music, this
card with only one spot upon it, and that of the same colour as the
notes through which he had to arrive at it, would be as puzzling
as any that could be selected. To make assurance doubly sure,
having previously ascertained that the bandages remained safely
applied, and the same music being held before his eyes, I presented
the back of the Ace of Clubs on the further side of the music
book: he first turned it over with its face towards him, moved it
a little backwards and forwards as if to get it into the right posi-
tion, but without any attempt to get it nearer the edge of the
music book, suddenly exclaimed, ‘Oh! il n’y a qu'un point,”
named the card correctly, and threw it down. A gentleman
presented his closed hands to him, at the same time asking what
they contained : nobody present but the gentleman himself knew
that it contained a purse, but E. A. told it correctly. While his
eyes were bandaged, I presented my watch to his forehead: he
could not possibly have seen it with his eyes, but he told the
hour to half a minute; it was between eight and nine minutes


1192 MESMERISM.


past 10 p.m., although by the Antwerp time it was not quite 10,
—my watch being about ten minutes faster than the clock of the
Cathedral. A large silk handkerchief was doubled three times
and hung over his head so as to cover his forehead and face, the
bandages still remaining on his eyes, but he still told correctly
any card that was presented to his forehead. A sentence was
written in French and another in English: he read them both
correctly, but, from his not knowing any thing of the latter lan-
guage, his pronunciation of it was rather peculiar.

21st.—I again saw E. A. mesmerised and the same experiments
repeated: in addition to the precautions which had been used on
former occasions, some eye-goblets made of porcelain were used.
This was perhaps as effectual a method of closing his eyes as any
that could be devised; but, when carefully applied over his eyes,
they did not appear to offer the slightest impediment ; he told all
the cards as fast as they were presented, never failing to turn
them when their backs were held towards him, and never once
naming a wrong card. With his eyes bandaged, he read out of a
French newspaper and a book which was accidentally lying on
the table. I took the newspaper, turned it backwards and
forwards, and folded it up so as to present only a very small
portion of a column; consequently, had he known every word of
the paper by heart, he could have had no idea what part was
placed before him. However, without hesitation he pointed to the
commencement of a sentence, and tracing his finger under the
line as he went on, read several successive lines without making a
single mistake. From the position in which the paper was held, I
believe it would have been impossible for him to have read it
with his eyes, had they been wide open at the time and free from
all impediments, as bandages, &c. His eyes on this occasion
were also closed by sponges held tightly against them.

25th.—E. A. was again mesmerised for the fourth and last time :
the same things were repeated as on the three former occasions ;
there was not a single failure. He could not see so well if any
thing was placed between him and the candle, and evidently
preferred that the light of the candle should be made to shine on
the object to which tis attention was directed, particularly if it
was any thing hewas required to read. He told all the cards without
difficulty, and at last took up the pack, and as fast as he could
present them to his forehead told their names and threw them


MESMERISM. 1193


down on the table: all this time his eyes were securely bandaged.
Mr. Townshend asked him if he could see a card at the back of his
head: he declared he could not, and was very unwilling to try: it
appeared to require a great effort ; but, after a good deal of persua-
sion, he sat up in his chair as if to get the back of his head nearer
a card which Mr. T. was holding there, and after a short interval,
during which he had no opportunity of seeing with his eyes,
named it correctly. He again wrote some music with the same
correctness as already described on a former occasion ; and, when
Mr. T. asked him to play it on his flute, he took up the small case
which contained it, and applied a small key to the small lock with
as much precision as if his eyes had been wide open; then, having
correctly adjusted the different joints, played over the music he
had just written.


Mesmerism is a most useful addition to our remedial means.
By it, without giving any medicine, I have several timés cured
epilepsy ; but, as the causes of this disease, as of paralysis, are
variable, and often irremediable, general success cannot be ex-
pected. A case of violent and singular jumping and striking fits
of twelve years’ duration, lasting six weeks spring and autumn,
has yielded to it. A case of chorea was presently cured. A
case of intermittent hemiplegia, recurring every few days, and
leaving the poor woman in a wretched state for two or three
days, has been permanently cured, after resisting all means in
Iissex for five years. Hysterical insanity, and palsy of the lower
extremities, as well as the strangest hysterical symptoms, have
yielded to it: and the most distressing hypochondriasis, obstinate
hiccup, and that distressing affection termed sick-headache, have
been cured with it among my patients. Like every other remedy
it a adapted to a certain number only of diseases, and can
succeed in a certain number only of modifications of these.

The Marquis de Guibert has just published a tract 4, contain-
ing the results of his experiments ; and assures me that he has
bestowed such care upon all his experiments that the results may
be implicitly relied upon. He mesmerises the poor of the country
in which his chateau (Fontchateau) stands.

“ Result of the magnetic treatment, from January 1. 1834, to
January 1. 1840:—


» Résultat des Opérations Magntiiques, Tarascon, 1540,


1194 MESMERISM. |


“ 3315 patients: — 1194 men, 212] women.

«“ 494 men became somnambulists; 663 were cured; 180 re-
lieved; 171 did not make known the results; 180 derived no
benefit.

«© 1279 women became somnambulists; 1285 were cured ; 195
relieved; 317 did not make known the results; 324 derived no
benefit.

«Of the 424 somnambulist men, 28 presented the 2d degree
(mesmeric blindness),” (I presume inability to open the eyes,
which is a curious effect); “157 the $d degree (magnetic sleep) ;
237 the 4th degree (magnetic somnambulism); and 2 the 5th
degree (magnetic ecstasy ).

“ Of the 1279 somnambulist women, 228 presented the 2d
degree ; 327 the 3d; 720 the 4th; and 4 the 5th degree.”


THE END.


Lonpon.
Printed by A. Srorrrswoope,
New-Street-Square.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


On the Recent Improvements in the Art of distinguishing the
various DisEASES OF THE HEART. With Copper-plates, illustrating
the chief structural changes.


On the Erricacy or Hyprocyanic Acip in Affections of the
Stomach, &c. &e.


:
The Inrropuctory Lecture of a Course upon State Medicine.


An Appress delivered in the University of London, on the
Opening of the Session of 1832-3.


, < ripe ;
at GAM AHeeTa a
i ny


add. nau jedi agiatiel ly ‘ho MA oud nt ahi yal tio’, yi al agi
| yititovteullt patois “et IVP taanht ay apes jopanrG «


‘ skohied | th a ary


: i— a7 >
7 4 a
« ade 1 mcoliaeA ui O17, Shas meth.w woe Tigee we of 7
es ob 24) ube >
a | * |
7 j > AS
aie oe PG OPS uri ne je ' l omeeree ereh off :
a 7 f
1th. truss ¥ %e ¥ went ah a Ar wi v hg ; hg TA ity 7
Ag rum st 9
O45
ee


(Corrected to January 1847.)


A CATALOGUE OF WORKS


IN THE VARIOUS BRANCHES OF


MEDICAL,


SCIENTIFIC


SURGICAL,


AND


LITERATURE,


PUBLISHED BY


LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS,


39, Paternoster Row, London.


CLASSIFIED INDEX OF CONTENTS.


ANATOMY.
. PAGES
Cooper’s (Sir A.) Anatomy of the Breast .. 6
Owen’s Comparative Anatomy, &c. of the
WMEIMGUY AUC tose sscieacatiees nevoncinceceis 11
-Comparative Anatomy, &c. of the
UV EUG DUAL Pay arc. cris/ uss ocwiss ALaikyeisialsim sie rei sveie\ eve 12
Solly On the Structure of the Brain........ 14
Von Behr’s Handbook of Anatomy........ 15
Wagner’s Comparative Anatomy.......... 16
Wilson’s Practical Anatomy .............. 16
BOTANY.


Henslow’s Descriptive&Physiological Botany 7
Hooker’s British Flora 7
Lindley’s (Dr.) Synopsis of the British Flora 10


——__— introduction to Botany .... ‘9
BlOnaNediGar..... senses. 9
Loudon’s Encyclopedia of Plants.......... 10


Smith’s (Sir J. E.) Introduction to Botany.. 13


Be lishlona,..o. ass. a 13

Compendium of the Eng-
TSWEHLOLA sav sates > «/s's 2 SONOs.oe wan x 13

CHEMISTRY & GENERAL SCIENCE.

Acton’s Modern Cookery ................ 3
Balmain’s Lessons on Chemistry.......... 3
Brande’s Dict. of Science, Literature,& Art 3
Donoyan’s Treatiseon Chemistry.......... 6
Esdaile On Mesmerism in India .......... 6
Humboldt’s Cosmos, by Sabine........... 7
Hunt’s Researches on Light .............. 8
Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopedia ............ 8
-and Walker’s Electricity ........ 8
Peschel’s Elements of Physics ............ 13
Rees Ou the Analysis of the Blood and Urine 13
Reid (Dr. D. B.) On Ventilation .......... 13

Ure’s (Dr.) Dictionary of Arts, Manufac-
UUIMES ANOIVIIOS) nrorereyaiciers «side eereeres co i5


MATERIA MEDICA, PHARMACY, AND
TOXICOLOGY.


PAGES


Pereira’s (Dr.) Elements of Materia Medica
andFDRerapeutiest: ae\.sesisecenoeeeeeee


Thomson’s (Dr. A. T.) Conspectus ........
Materia Medica ....
LondonDispensatory


WIEDICINE—GENERAL.


Copland’s (Dr.) Dictionary of Medicine....
Esdaile On the Application of Mesmerism
IDYIMCCICINGMasc= Jsiteos cme ce eee ae see
Hoiland’s (Dr. H.) Medical Notes and
Reflection se: 6 att. vite setie. 40 SSE
Hooper’s (Dr.) Medical Dictionary ........
Latham’s (Dr. P. M.) Lectures on Clinical
NICHICING asl asaraechine catoMeanok Camere
Neligan’s Medicines, their Uses and Mode
of Administration


re a ee eee ee ac ry


MEDICINE—POPULAR.


Bull’s (Dr.) Hints to Mothers..............
On the Maternal Management
OPAGHITGNEN oc, g2,0-4)5 ote ne save ce nie
Lane On the Water-Cure at Malvern......
Moore (Dr.) On the Power of the Soul over
the Body


On the Use of the Body in re-
FACIONNCO UNS VNC eeeteeieemenicieeieee etic


Pereira’s (Dr.) Treatise on Food and Diet..


Thomson’s (Dr. A. T.) Domestic Manage-
ment of the Sick Room


i ee ey


MEDICINE—FORENSIC.


Beck’s (Drs. T. R. and J. R.) Medical Juris-
prudence


2 4 oa jane e eon ep Lee \ofe We .w ie) eipieile.6.e'k win


14
14
14


5


12


nae


2 CLASSIFIED INDEX.


—aa OOOO SSS SSS _—GS


MEDICAL LITERATURE.
PAGES
Fergusson’s Professional Notes and Recol-

RE QHTOTIG OM oie ates 0:0 9/2. ofeie te a MSEtIg > bm as Hl
London Medical Gazette ........s..eserree 10
Mayo’s Clinical Facts and Reflections...... 10
Moore (Dr.) On the Power of the Soul over

He BOY .s« meine catia see) ate lotee smirk 10
On the Use of the Body in re-

Tation to te inn Gass cc. cet c eieieta ates e's 11
Ormerod’s Clinical Collections and Observa-

LUKO RS IE Rein tals TORRE SEO TFIID AICO IEED Or ll
Transactions of the Medicaland Chirurgical

SOGGUY A. Vavettrts tuepai sdele ean oueeien 15


MIDWIFERY, ETC.


Burns’s (Dr.) Principles of Midwifery...... 4

Clarke (Sir C. M.) on the Diseases of Females 5

Lee’s (Dr.) Lectures on the Theory and
Practice(of-Midwiteny (1. .0.s0 + see oes 9


NEUROLOCY.


Brodie (Sir Benjamin) on Nervous Affections 4

Burrows On Disorders of the Cerebral Cir-
COUT EN (0) Os care Me III CRDCR ICI ECRCRE EI CSICICI TG 5

Laycock(Dr.)On Nervous DiseasesofWomen 9


OPHTHALMOLOGY.
Mackenzie (Dr.) On Diseases of the Eye.... 10


PATHOLOCY.
Alderson On Diseases of the Stomach...... 3
Annesley (Dr.) On the Diseases of Warm
GLINTATOS Shox Arata tate onl oae a ste ree om ee ere 38
Bateman (Dr.) On Cutaneous Diseases .... 3
Bright’s Reports of Medical Cases ........ 4
Brodie (Sir Benjamin) On Diseases of the
Urinary Orsans <tr. Wal ate na bienats ack +
Bo Diseases of the
TOMES as: cee see ah uniseke Ree ees Weer 4
— Lectures illustra-
tive of various Subjects in Pathology and
SUPPOLY save fh cia cee arcs UES s Shine wleeuntnnle 4
Burrows On Disorders of the Cerebral Cir-
CULATLON: «-<heeuiaw canis eaheasneme eiera eile 5
Coley On the Diseases of Children ........ 6
Curling On the Diseases of the Testis, &c.. 4
Graves’s System of Clinical Medicine...... 7
Hughes’s (Dr. H. M.) Clinical Introduction
TOPAUSGUILATION: ....e cape ak penn sickoen leds 8


Latham (Dr.) On Diseases of the Heart.... 9
Lever (Dr.) On Organic Diseases of the
WRONUR Veer tiie ce se sera aeuneabe 9


PATHOLOGY—continued.

PAGES

Parkes (Dr.) On the Hepatitis and Dysen-
CONVOL LOI. Fo tenie wis) sighorebere steaptels osteo a6 12

Seymour (Dr.) On the Nature and Treat-
MENVOLDISCARES. a0 su uly meine eee rms «is 13
Solly on the Diseases, &c. of the Brain.... 14

Teale’s (Mr: T. P.) Treatise on Abdominal


ETO YIN Sa. te nasie tet caw ite Rin vie ims Hotere singel 14
Thomson’s (Dr. A. T.) Atlas of Cutaneous

MUP MONS)... nes ooo se hi nie eee elemiee 14

Walne’s Cases of Dropsical Ovaria ........ 16

PHYSIOLOGY.

Elliotson’s (Dr.) Human Physiology ...... 6
Owen’s Comparative Physiology, &c. of the

NGNDEDIAIA <.:.c v0 cuter ete a cum ree weet 11
Comparative Physiology, &c. of the

TQ YCTEG DIAG iyo acy covets nla (s isis Wate = pip ale ore 12


Solly On the Physiology, &c. of the Brain.. 14


STRUCTURAL DEFORMITY & FRACTURES.


Tamplin’s (Mr. R. W.) Lectures on De-
LOLMIIES jie eeieaie mains Osaka eeu es 14


SURCERY.


Brodie’s (Sir B. C.) Lectures illustrative
of various Subjects in Pathology and


SLUTS A PA ORE econ b].) aad Fee 4

Cooper’s (S.) Dictionary of Surgery........ 6
First Lines of the Theory and

Practice, of Surgery. 2.:.cic, seeana eveeee 6
Esdaile On the Application of Mesmerism

in. SUNPELY 65 sis sic han Vesey ated os See 6

Liston’s Elements of Surgery.............. 10
Ormerod’s Clinical Collections and Obserya-

TORS AN SURpBnNG S..5 seaekia eee eee 11


Vincent’s Science of Surgical Practice.... 15


VETERINARY ART.


Field’s Extracts from the Veterinary Records


of Jobn Wield . «.......ceateaeeeinkc a eee 6
Knowlson’s Cattle Doctor and Farmer .... 8
Miles (W. Esq.) On the Horse’s Foot ...... 10
Morton’s Toxicological Chart.............. 11

— Manualof Veterinary Pharmacy 11
Percivall’s Anatomy of the Horse.......... 12
— Hippopathology................ 12
Turner On the Foot of the Horse.......... 15
Weterinarian (The). tau scan cee ee 15
Veterinary Record(Dhe)iv; access chiens es: 15
Winter On the Horse, in Health and Dis.
CARO) .cacSaurantee ceva yond Ow Re eaew EO hCG fe 16


ACTON (ELIZA).—MODERN COOKERY,


Tn all its Branches, reduced to a System of Easy Practice. For the use of Private Families.
In a Series of Receipts, all of which have been strictly tested, and are given with the most
minute exactness. By Et1za Acron. Dedicated to the Young Housekeepers of England.
New Edition, with Directions for Carving. Fcep. 8vo. with Plates and Woodcuts, 7s. 6d. cloth.

“The whole of Miss Acton’s recipes, ‘with a few trifling exceptions, which are scrupulously
specified, are confined to such as may be perfectly depended on from having been proved be-
neath our own roof, and under our own personal inspection.’ We add, moreover, that the
recipes are all reasonable, and never in any instance extravagant. They do not bid us sacrifice
ten pounds of excellent meat, that we may get a couple of quarts of gravy from it ; nor do they
deal with butter and eggs as if they cost nothing. Miss Acton’s book is a good book in every
way ; there is right-mindedness in every page of it, as well as thorough knowledge and ex-
perience of the subjects she handles.”—MrEpIcAL GAZETTE.


Medtral, Surateal, any Srientific orks,


PuBLisHED BY Messrs. Loneman, Brown, anp Co.


ALDERSON (DR. JAMES).—PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS


on some of the DISEASES of the STOMACH and ALIMENTARY CANAL. By JAMES
ALDERSON, M.D. F.R.S. Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, late Senior Physician to
the Hull General Infirmary, and formerly Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge. S8yo.
With numerous coloured plates, 10s. 6d. cloth.


ANNESLEY.—RESEARCHES INTO THE CAUSES, NATURE,


and TREATMENT of the more prevalent DISEASES of INDIA, and of WARM CLIMATES


generally. By J. ANNESLEY, F.R.S. F.S.A. late President of the Medical Board, Madras. 2d


Edition. 8vo. 12s. cloth.
The object of the anthor has been to revise, correct, and condense the former edition, so


as to present to the reader a Practical Manual, founded on personal experience, of the diseases +


of warm climates, and more particularly of India.


A few copies of the First Edition are left. 2 thick vols. imperial 4to. with numerous splendid
coloured Plates of Morbid Structures, £14. 14s. boards.


BALMAIN.—LESSONS ON CHEMISTRY,


For the use of Pupils in Schools, Junior Students in Universities, and Readers who wish to —
learn the fundamental Principles and leading Facts: with Questions for Examination, a ~


Glossary of Chemical Terms and Chemical Symbols, and an Index. By WiLiiAm H.
BALMAIN. Fep.8vo. with Woodcuts, illustrative of the Decompositions, 6s. cloth.


BATEMAN.—A PRACTICAL SYNOPSIS OF CUTANEOUS


DISEASES, according to the arrangement of Dr. WrLLAN; exhibiting a concise View of the
Diagnostic Symptoms and the Method of Treatment. By T. BATEMAN, M.D. 8th Edit.
edited by Dr. A.T. THOMSON. 8yo. 15s.


BECK (T. R. & J. R.)-ELEMENTS OF MEDICAL JURISPRU-


DENCE. By Dr. T. R. Becx, and Dr. J. R. Beck, of New York. 7th Edition, brought
down by the authors to the present Time, with the Notes of Dr. Dunlop and Dr. Darwall,
8vo. 21s. cloth.

The present edition is reprinted from the latest (sixth) issued in America, with various MS.
additions communicated directly to the Publishers by the Authors


BRANDE.— A DICTIONARY OF SCIENCE, LITERATURE,


and ART; comprising the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch of
Human Knowledge: with the Derivation and Definition of all the Terms in general Use.
Edited by W. T. Branpe, F.R.S.L. & E. assisted by J. CAuvin, Esq. The various De-
partments by gentlemen of eminence in each. Syo. with Wood Engrayings, 60s. cloth.


4 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


SS SSS


BRIGHT.—REPORTS OF MEDICAL CASES:


Selected with a view of illustrating the Symptoms and Cure of Diseases by a reference to
Morbid Anatomy. By RicHArpD Bricut, M.D. F.R.S. Physician Extraordinary to Her
Majesty, &c. 2 vols. 4to. with 54 coloured plates, £14. 14s. boards.

Vol. I. Dropsy, Inflammation of the Lungs, Phthisis, and Fever:
Separately with 16 coloured Plates, #4. 4s.

Vol. II. Of the Brain and Nervous System: 38 coloured Plates, £9. 9s.


BRODIE (SIR BENJAMIN C.)—LECTURES ILLUSTRATIVE


of various subjects in PATHOLOGY and SURGERY. By Sir Benjamin C. Bronte, Bart.
F.R.S. Serjeant-Surgeon to the Queen, Surgeon to H.R.H. Prince Albert, Foreign Correspon-
dent of the Institute of France, &c. 8vyo. 12s. cloth.

“ Sir B. Brodie has rendered his clinical lectures—what all clinical lectures should be—
clear, impressive, and practical expositions of curative measures, in which all the most
important features of the subject are plainly set forth, without being unnecessarily encum-
bered with details. We attach a very high value to these Lectures. Their style is clear,
demonstrative, and unaffected, decided and energetic; but altogether free from dogmatism
or over-confidence. They are strictly practical; and much of the information which they
contain will assuredly do the reader and his patients good service in time of need.”

MEDICAL GAZETTE.

““The topics are very various, the lecturer’s design being to narrate the miscellaneous
results of his long experience upon the subject of disease in general, incidentally touching
upon particular ailments, rather than to pursue stated themes. The lectures are remarkably
free from technicalities : they affect none of the mystery of the schools ; the simplest descrip-
tions are given; the seemingly most obvious illustrations are offered. These excellent qualities
make Sir Benjamin Brodie’s Lectures as interesting to the general as to the professional
reader.”’—CrirIc.


BRODIE.—LECTURES ON THE DISEASES OF THE URINARY


ORGANS. By Sir Bensamin C. Bropie, Bart. F.R.S. Serjeant-Surgeon to the Queen.
Surgeon to H.R. H. Prince Albert, Foreign Correspondent of the Institute of France, &c.
3d Edition, with alterations and additions. 8vo. 12s. cloth.

The work has throughout been entirely revised, some of the Authors views have been
modified, and a considerable proportion of new matter (among which is a Lecture on the
Operation of Lithotrity) has been added.


BRODIE.—LECTURES ILLUSTRATIVE OF CERTAIN LOCAL


NERVOUS AFFECTIONS. By Sir BENJAMIN C. Bropik, Serjeant-Surgeon to the Queen,
Shae ra Prince Albert, Foreign Correspondent of the Institute of France, &c. Post
8vo. ts. boards.


BRODIE.—PATHOLOGICAL & SURGICAL OBSERVATIONS


on DISEASES of the JOINTS. By Sir BENJAMIN C. Broptg, Bart. F.R.S. Serjeant-
Surgeon to the Queen, Surgeon to H.R.H. Prince Albert, Foreigu Correspondent of the Insti-
tute of France, &c. 4th Edition, with alterations and additions, 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


BULL.—HINTS TO MOTHERS,


For the MANAGEMENT of HEALTH during the period of PREGNANCY and in the
LYING-IN ROOM; with an Exposure of Popular Errors in connection with those subjects.
By THomas Buu, M.D., Physician-Accoucheur to the Finsbury Midwifery Institution,
&c. &c. 4th Edition, revised and considerably enlarged. Fcp. 8vo. 7s. cloth.


BULL.—THE MATERNAL MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN,


In HEALTH and DISEASE. By T. BuLL, M.D. Member of the Royal College of Physicians,
Physician-Accoucheur to the Finsbury Midwifery Institution, Author of ‘‘ Hints to Mothers
for the Management of their Health during Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Room.”’ 2d Edit.
revised and enlarged. Fep. 8vo, 7s. cloth.


« Excellent guides, and deserve to be generally known.””
JoHNSON’s MEDICO-CHIRURGICAL REVIEW.


BURNS.—PRINCIPLES OF MIDWIFERY ;


Including the Diseases of Women and Children. By JoHNn Burns, M.D. Regius Professor of
Surgery, Glasgow. 10th Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. 16s. boards.


x,* The Tenth Edition has been carefully revised, in some parts re-written, and new
matter added.


PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, & CO. 5


BURROWS (DR. G.)—ON DISORDERS OF THE CEREBRAL


CIRCULATION, and on the CONNEXION between AFFECTIONS of the BRAIN and
DISEASES of the HEART. By GrorGe Burrows, M.D. iate Fellow of Caius College, Cam-
bridge ; Feilow of the Royal College of Physicians, London ; Physician to, and Lecturer on the
the Princeinles and Practice of Medicine at, St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, &c. 8vo. with
coloured Plates, 10s. 6d. cloth.


“The work, taken as a whole, is excellent; it has the characteristics of an English produc-
tion in an eminent degree; it is lucid, precise, practical; and will, we think, establish
Dr. Burrows’s reputation.””—BriTISH AND FOREIGN MEDICAL REVIEW.

** We have derived much gratification from the perusal of Dr. Burrows’s very able work,
and strongly recommend its perusal] to our readers. It is replete with interestIng and prac-
tically useful facts, and well supports the author’s reputation as a careful and judicious
observer.”,—MEDICAL GAZETTE.


CLARKE.—OBSERVATIONS ON THE DISEASES OF


FEMALES. Illustrated by Plates. By Sir C. M. CLARKE, Bart. M.D. F.R.S. 3d Edition.
2 vols. royal 8vo. 36s. boards.


COLEY (DR. JAMES MILMAN).—A PRACTICAL TREATISE


on the DISEASES of CHILDREN. By James MItman Couey, M.D. Member of the Royal
College of Physicians in London, &c.; Author of ‘ A Treatise on the Remittent Fever of
Infants,”’? &c. and of “ Essays on Phlegmonous Erysipelas,’”? on “ Schirroide, Keloide, or
Cancroide,”’ &c. &c. 8yo. 14s, tloth.


“Dr. Coley has in this volume presented to the profession a very useful and interesting
addition to medical literature. We can recommend his work as the production of a diligent
and experienced investigator in the difficult path of the curative science. The diagnosis of
disease in young children requires the exercise of all our perceptive faculties, and every aid
which the experience of others can suggest ; and Dr. Coley seems generally well fitted for
consultation on this subject through the medium of the pages which lie before us. To his
other qualifications we add, that his work affords ample testimony of an extensive acquaint-
ance with the opinions of his brother authors. The chapters on the diseases of the intestinal
canal are replete with sound observation, and point out methods of treatment that are evi-
dently the result of extensive practice.”—LANCET.


COPLAND.—DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL MEDICINE;


A Library of Pathology, anda Digest of Medical Literature. Comprising—General Pathology :
a Classification of Diseases according to Pathological Principles; a Bibliography, with Re-
ferences ; an Appendix of Formule; a Pathological Classification of Diseases, &c. By
JaAMEs CoPLAND, M.D. F.R.S., Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, &c. &c. 8vo.


Vols. I. and II. 30s. each, cloth.
Parts I. to XI.—ABDOMEN to PLEURA (DISEASES OF).
Parts I. to IV, 9s. each; Parts V. to XI. 4s. 6d. each.
*,* Part XII. will shortly be published.—To be completed in One more Volume.


The Prerace, with a Pathological Classification of Diseases, &c. forming a Key to the
Systematic Study of Practical Medicine, as well as an arranged Table of the Contents of the
Work, will accompany the last Part.


An INpEx of the Individual Topics comprised under the various Chapters and Sections ot
each article will also be given in the last Part.


“We feel it a great duty to record our opinion—that, as there is no medical practitioner in
this country, old or young, high or low, who will not derive great pleasure and great profit
by consulting Dr. Copland’s Dictionary, so we think there is no one who should not add the
work to his library. The information amassed in these volumes is literally enormous, and
contemplated simply as an accumulation, it must excite astonishment as the production of an
individual; but when it is further considered, that the whole of the materials have been most
carefully selected from all existing sources, most patiently studied, valued, winnowed, digested,
elaborated, and arranged into compact and simple forms, easily accessible, and readily
available in practice, it is not easy to point out, in the whole range of medical literature, any
work by a single hand so much calculated to excite admiration of the industry and talents
of the author. On every article contained in the volumes, the reader cannot fail to be
struck with the writer’s most extensive learning, which has enabled him to collect knowledge
from all authorities, ancient and modern, foreign and domestic ; and he will, at the same
time, be no less surprised than gratified at the singular power which has arrang2d the whoe
so lucidly and in such systematic order.”—BR1TISH AND FOREIGN MEDICAL REVIEW.


COOPER.—A DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL SURGERY;


With all the mostinteresting Improvements down to the present period; an Account of the
Instruments and Remedies employed in Surgery; the Etymology and Signification of the
principal Terms ; and numerous References to Ancient and Modern Works, forming a Cata-
logue of Surgical Literature, arranged according to subjects. By SAMUEL CoopER, Senior
Surgeon to University College Hospital, &c. 7th Edit. revised and enlarged, 8vo. 30s. cloth.


6 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


COOPER.—THE FIRST LINES OF THE THEORY -AND


PRACTICE of SURGERY; explaining and illustrating the Doctrines relative to the Princi-
ples, Practice, and Operations of Surgery. By 8. Cooper. 7th Edition, corrected and
augmented. 8yo. 18s. boards.


This Edition has received numerous corrections, so as to adapt it to the present state of
Surgery, and to the wants of the Student and Young Practitioner. Italsoserves asa text-book
for the Lectures annually delivered by Mr. Cooper to his Surgical Class.


COOPER (SIR A. P.)—ON THE ANATOMY OF THE BREAST.


By Sir A. P. Cooper, Bart. F.R.S., &c. 4to. with 27 Plates, several coloured, 63s. cloth.


CURLING.—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE DISEASES


of the TESTIS, and of the Spermatic Cord and Scrotum. By T. B. Corina, Lecturer on
Surgery, and Assistant-Surgeon to the London Hospital, Surgeon to the Jews’ Hospital, &c.
Author of ‘* A Treatise on Tetauus.”? S8yvo. with Ulustrations by Bagg, 18s. cloth.


“The author has not only been happy in the selection of his subject, as a treatise embracing
within a moderate compass all the diseases of the testis, and of the scrotum, was very much
wanting, but he has executed his undertaking with praiseworthy industry and zeal, aided by
asound practical judgment. In his book he has moreoyer thrown much new light on the
nature and treatment of the disorders of the testicle, and produced a work on those diseases,
not only superior to any yet published, but which, we imagine, is not likely to be soon super-
seded by a better. ‘The volume is elegantly printed, and the woodcuts, by Bagg, are
beautifal.”’—Britisd AND FoREIGN MEDICAL REVIEW.


DONOVAN.—A TREATISE ON CHEMISTRY.


| By MicHaEn Donovan, M.R.IL.A. 4th Edition. ep. 8vo. Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.


ELLIOTSON.—HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY.


With which is incorporated much of the elementary part of the InsTITUTIONES PH YSIOLOGICm
of J. F. Blumenbach, Professor in the University of Gittingen. ByJoHNn ELLiorson, M.D.
-Cantab. F.R.5. Fifth Edition. 8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, £2. 2s. cloth.


Separately, in Three Parts, as follows :— .


Part 1, General Physiology, and the Organic Functions. 5th Edition. 10s. 6d.
«9, The Animal Functions. 5th Edition. 14s.
« 3. Human Generation; the Growth, Decay, and Varieties of Mankind: with an
Appendix on Mesmerism. 17s.


| ESDAILE (DR. JAMES).—MESMERISM IN INDIA;


and its practical Applications in Surgery and Medicine. By James EspArLr, M.D. Civil
Assistant Surgeon, H. E. 1. C. 8. Bengal. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 6d. cloth. 3


“This is one of the most notable works that have yet appeared on the curious subject of
Mesmerism. It is remarkable not only for the facts it contains, but for its freedom from any
thing like passion or advocacy. We will not inflict any of these narratives upon our readers,
who, not having the advantage of being mesmerised, might many of them suffer from Dr.
Esdaile’s knife what his patients were spared. ‘Lhose of them, however, who have a taste for
such sanguinary reading, may be conscientiously recommended to procure the volume itself,
not a page of which will they find tedious or uninteresting.””—EXAMINER.


“ But, did we know nothing of the character and condition of the man, there would be
enough in the book before us to bring conviction to our minds that Dr. Esdaile is neither a
dupe or acheat, but one who records, and that without any of the zeal of the enthusiast, or
the eagerness of the advocate striving to establish a point, his own genuine experiences. Dr.
Esdaile’s, though the most candid and calm, is the most startling work on Mesmerism which
has yet made its appearance.” —ATLAS.

“From eight months’? mesmeric treatment in a country charity hospital in Bengal, Dr.
Esdaile attests its efficacy in rendering surgical operations painless, and aiding medical ap-
plications in every form. He is an earnest apostie of the science, and has stated a multitude
of facts and cases in support of his opinion.—The conclusion is, that the author cures every
disease, incipient, recent, or long-standing, without medicine.”—LirERARY GAZETTTE.


FIELD.—POSTHUMOUS EXTRACTS FROM THE VETERI-


NARY RECORDS of the late JOHN FIELD. Edited by his Brother, W1LLIAM FLELD,
Veterinary Surgeon, London. 8vo. 8s. boards.


————


a TT


PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 7


FERGUSSON (DR. WILLIAM).—NOTES AND RECOLLEC-


TIONS of a PROFESSIONAL LIFE. By the late WiLttam Fereausson, Esq. M.D. In-
spector-General of Military Hospitals, and late of Windsor. Edited by his Son, James
Fergusson. 8yo. 7s. 6d. cloth.

“° We would recommend the perusal of the work. to every army medical officer who feels
really interested in the soldier, and takes a pride in the service to which he belongs, as the
production of an able and intelligent officer, and containing many excellent observations on
subjects connected with the health of troops; it has also the advantage of being written in an
amusing and very readable style.”—BRriITISH AND FOREIGN Mrpicau REVIEW.


** Philanthropy, sound argument, and acute practical judgment, are the leading characte-
ristics of this well-digested and informing book; which, to the medical officer, and, we may
add, in many instances, to the civil practitioner also, cannot fail to prove both interesting and
useful. Dr. Fergusson’s experience, as one of the most efficient, skilful, and popular medical
ofticers in the army, resulting from along period of active service on the Continent of Europe,
and. in the Tropics, has-been turned to good account in this volume.”

UNITED SERVICE GAZETTE.


GRAVES.—A NEW SYSTEM OF CLINICAL MEDICINE.


By R. J. Graves, M.D. M.R.I.A. one of the Physicians to the Meath Hospital and County of
Dublin Infirmary; formerly Professor of the Institutes of Medicine, Honorary Corresponding
Member of the Royal Medical Society of Berlin, the Imperial Medical Society of Vienna, and
of the Medico-Chirurgical Societies of Hamburgh, Tiibingen, Bruges, Montreal, &c. &c. 8yo.
18s. cloth.


HENSLOW.—THE PRINCIPLES OF DESCRIPTIVE AND


PHYSIOLOGICAL BOTANY. By J.S. Henstow, M.A. F.L.S. &c. Fep. 8vo. with Vig-
nette Title, and nearly 70 Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.


HOLLAND.—MEDICAL NOTES AND REFLECTIONS.


By Henry Houuanp, M.D. F.R.S. &c., Physician Extraordinary to the Queen, and Physician
in Ordinary to H.R.H. Prince Albert. 2d Edition. 8vo. 18s. cloth.

ContTENTs.—On Hereditary Disease—On Bleeding in Affections of the Brain—On the
Abuse of Purgatives—On points where a Patient may judge for himself—On Gout, and the
use of Colchicum—On the Epidemic Influenza—On Insanity, Intoxication, &e.—On Mercurial
Medicines—On the Medical Treatment of Old Age—On Diet, and Disorders of Digestion—The
Influence of Weather in relation to Disease, &c.


HOOPER.—LEXICON MEDICUM:


A MEDICAL DICTIONARY; containing an Explanation of the Terms in


Anatomy, Materia Medica, Physiology,
Botany, Midwifery, Practice of Physic,
Chemistry, Pharmacy, Surgery,


And the various branches of Natural Philosophy connected with Medicine: compiled from
the best Authors. By the late Dr. Hooper. 7th Edition, revised and enlarged, by KLEIN
Grant, M.D. &c. Lecturer on Therapeutics. S8vo. 30s. cloth.


HOOKER.—THE BRITISH FLORA,


In Two Vols. Vol. 1; comprising Phenogamous or Flowering Plants, and the Ferns. By
Sir Wittiam JAcKSON Hooker, K.H. LL.D. F.R.A. and L.S. &c. &c. &c. 5th Edition,
with Additions and Corrections, and 173 Figures illustrative of the Umbelliferous Plants, the
Composite Plants, the Grasses, and the Ferns. 8yo. with 12 plates, 14s. plain,; with the
plates coloured, #1. 4s, cloth.


Vol. 2, in Two Parts, comprising the Cryptogamia and Fungi completing the British Flora
and forming Vol. 5, Parts 1 and 2, of Smith’s English Flora, £1. 4s. boards.


HUMBOLDT (BARON VON).—COSMOS.


A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe. By the Baron Von HumBoupt. Trans-
lated, with the Author’s sanction and co-operation, under the superintendence of Lieutenant-
Colonel EDWARD SABINE, R.A. For. Sec. R.S. Vol. I. Post 8vo. 12s. cloth.
(Vol. IT. nearly ready.

‘In following the author through these extensive surveys, we are equally surprised at the
fulness and minuteness of his knowledge, and the masterly clearness with which his facts
are arranged. Indeed, Cosmos is a work of art almost as much as of philosophy; and we
know not where to point out its fellow as a composition.”—SPrcraror.

“ The present translation was undertaken in compliance with the author’s wish, and is ably
executed, reading like an original work.”—SPEcraTor.


pee aanEe ete Oo RE EOP
8 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


HUGHES (DR. H. M.)—A CLINICAL INTRODUCTION TO


THE PRACTICE OF AUSCULTATION, and other Modes of Physical Diagnosis; intended
to simplify the Study of the Diseases of the Lungs and Heart. By H. M. Hucues, M.D.
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Assistant-Physician to Guy’s Hospital, &c.
Fep. 8yo. 6s. cloth.


* With the author’s object, it is worthy of every commendation.””—RANKING’s ABSTRACT.


“ No one can examine it without admitting that it is a very useful book, and well adapted
to the wants of beginners in the study of the physical signs of disease.”
PHILADELPHIA MEDICAL EXAMINER.


“No one who peruses with candour the volume before us ean fail to admit that it is the pro-
duction of a physician who is practically acquainted with auscultation and percussion .... Dr.
Hughes has produced a useful work.”—EpINBuRGH MONTHLY JOURNAL.

“* Comparing the work with others of English origin, it must be admitted to be the best
elementary exposition of the signs and causes of the signs of thoracic disease, and of the mode
in which a knowledge of them is to be abtained.... For the beginmer, especially for one whose
opportunities of oral instruction are imperfect, Dr. Hughes’s work appears to us peculiarly
adapted.”,—AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL SCIENCE.


HUNT.—RESEARCHES ON LIGHT:


An Examination of all the known Phenomena connected with the Chemical Influence of the
Solar Rays; embracing all the published Photographic Processes, and many new Discoveries
in the Art, &c. By R. Hun, Keeper of Mining Bedard: Museum of Economic Geology.
8vo. with Plate and Woodcuts, 10s. 6d. cloth.


KNOWLSON.—THE YORKSHIRE CATTLE DOCTOR AND


FARRIER: a Treatise on the Diseasesof Horned Cattle, Calyes, and Horses, written in plain
language, which those who can read may easily understand. The whole being the result of ©
70 years’ extensivé practice of the Author, Joun C. KNowison. New Edition, revised, cor-
rected, and enlarged. Many of the Recipes in this book are worth 10 guineas each, and the
whole are new to the world. 8vo. boards, 7s.


LANE (RICHARD J).—LIFE AT THE WATER-CURE; OR, A


MONTH at MALVERN: a Diary of Facts and Fallacies. To which is added, the Sequel.
By Ricuarp J. Lane, A.R.A., Lithographer in Ordinary to Her Majesty and H.R.H. Prince
Albert. Post 8vo. with numerous Illustrations, 14s. cloth.


“* Life at the Water-Cure’ consists of Mr. Lane’s experiences, observations, and outpourings
during his month at Malvern, mingled with sketches of the company and doings of the place.
He tells us how he felt on waking in the morning, and what sensations he experienced under
the different water processes, from the ‘ shallow bath’ to the ‘ douche.’ His walks, his water-
drinkings, bis rides, the aspect of nature, and the incidents of the road, are all chronicled,
along with the sayings and doings of his fellow-patients at Malvern ; the persons, excepting
Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, being concealed under fictitious names. These topics Mr. Lane
varies by reminiscences and remarks connected with different subjects in literature and art.
What he calls the Sequel, or the story of his case to the time of publication, contains a similar
freedom in the choice of topics, but with less range, as he has not in the Regent’s Park the
variety of Malvern’s walks or patients.

“‘ With many, perhaps with most men, such a book would have been insufferably tedious, or
offensive from its flimsiness, levity, pertness, or artifice. None of these failings are felt in
Mr. Lane’s‘ Life at the Water Cure’; every thing is so obviously natural, and full of good feel-
ing and animal spirits. Mr. Lane must have been the very kind of patient that any medical
man would have chosen for an experiment, where it was sought by change of air, and the sti-
miulus of novelties, to tone a relaxed system, renovate shattered herves, and give a fillip to
the constitutional springs, whatever and wherever they may be. With his cheerfulness his
bonhommie, his disposition to be pleased with every thing and every body, his eye for natu-
ral beauties, his facility in depicting to the eye the various operations of the Cold Water
House, and such incidents or effects as struck him during the morning walks, he must have
been as great an acquisition to the patients as to the physician. Even the distant reader can-
not altogether resist the heartiness which imparts a freshness and charm to the manner of
the book,””—SPECTATOR,


LARDNER’S CABINET CYCLOPADIA ;


Comprising a Series of Original Works on History Biography, Literature, the Sciences, Art
and Manufactures. Conducted and edited by Dr. LARDNER, A : ‘
The Series, complete, in One Hundred and Thirty-three Volumes, £39. 18s.
The works, separately, 6s. per volume.


LARDNER & WALKER.—A TREATISE ON ELECTRICITY


MAGNETISM, and METEOROLOGY. By D. Larpner, LL.D, F.R.S., and C. V. WALKER,
Secretary of the Electrical Society. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. 12s. cloth. .


ee


PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 9


LATHAM.—ON DISEASES OF THE HEART.


Lectures on Subjects connected with Clinical Medicine; comprising Diseases of the Heart.
By P.M. Larnam, M.D. Physician Extraordinary to the Queen; and late Physician to St.
Bartholomew’s Hospital. 2 vols. 12mo. 16s. cloth,


“We gladly seize this opportunity of expressing our cordial approbation of these Clinical
Lectures. We know of no work where the reader will find so clear and easily-intelligible a
view of a difficult practical subject —the Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart, as in Dr.
Latham’s two volumes. His interspersed remarks, too, on many questions of general patho-
logy, stamp him as one of the most enlightened writers of the day.’’

MeEp1co-CHIRURGICAL REVIEW.


‘* The second series of these Lectures amply sustains the reputation of the first; and to set
down our general opinion of their merit would be but to repeat the strong eulogia with which
we conveyed our impression of the signal excellence of the tormer volume. ‘The volumes are
well entitled to the name of classical; and they will, we doubt not, take a place among the
very small number of medical books that will be prized and read by men of other generations,”

BritisH AND FoREIGN MepicaL REVIEW.


LAYCOCK.—A TREATISE ON THE NERVOUS DISEASES OF


WOMEN ; comprising an Inquiry into the Nature, Causes, and Treatment of Spinal and
Hysterical Disorders. ByTHomas Laycock, M.D. Member of the Royal College of Surgeons
in London. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


LEE.—LECTURES ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF


MIDWIFERY, delivered in the Theatre of St. George’s Hosp. By Rospert Lex, M.D. F.R.S.
Fellow of the Roval Coll. of Physicians, Physician to the Brit. Lying-in Hosp., and Lecturer
on Midwifery at St. George’s Hosp. 8yo. with nearly 70 Wood Engravings, 15s. cloth.


“A truly practical work, containing not only the author’s opinions on the different sub-
ects connected with midwifery, but the results of his experience, founded on an accurate
nowledge of medical science, great industry and perseverance, and extensive Opportunities
of practice in the art of delivery at the British Lying-in Hospital. It forms a most excellent
book of instructions, and will be found usefui for the student, and also for the general prac-
titioner, who will obtain from it the best kind of information on the various and indeed all
peints of material difficulty and of less frequent occurrence.”—LaNCcET.


LEVER.—PRACTICAL TREATISE ON ORGANIC DISEASES


of the UTERUS: being the Prize Essay to which the Medical Society of London awarded the
Fothergillian Gold Medal for 1843. By Joun C. W. Lever, M.D. Member of the Royal
College of Physicians, London, Assistant-Accoucheur at Guy’s Hospital, &c. 8vo. 9s. cloth.


“ Dr. Lever is one of those physicians who have aright to address the medical public. He
has not written before he has seen, but, on the contrary, he has seen before he has written.
The result is a sound, practical work ; not an analysis of other people’s opinions, but founded
on the author’s own personal experience ; and, as such, well deserving our serious considera-
tion. We may safely pronounce his treatise one of the most practical and useful that have
yet been published in our country; one which will undoubtedly tend to promote the study
of uterine pathology.”,—LANCET. .


LINDLEY.—AN INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY.


3d Edit. with Corrections and considerable Additions. By Dr. John LINDLEY, F.R.S, LS. &c.
8yo. with numerous Plates and Woodcuts, 18s. cloth.


The Author has followed very nearly the method recommended by De Candolle. He has
adopted tour great divisions, under the respective heads of Organography, Vegetable Phy-
siology, Glossology, and Phytography. The present edition has received a great accession of
new matter, especially in what relates to Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology.


LINDLEY.—FLORA MEDICA:


A Botanical Account of all the most remarkable Plants used in Medicine. By Joun
LINDLEY, Ph. D. F.R.S. L.S. &c. Professor of Botany in the London University College, &c.
8vo. 18s. cloth.

Few persons engaged in teaching Medical Botany have not experienced great inconvenience
from the want of some work in which correct systematical descriptions of medicinal plants
might be found, and cheap enough to be used as aclass-book. ‘The necessity that Students
should have access to a botanical account of this nature became so urgent as to induce the
appearance of the above volume.


10 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


LINDLEY.—A SYNOPSIS OF THE BRITISH FLORA,


Arranged according to the Natural Orders: containing Vasculares, or Flowering Plants.
3d Edition, with numerous Additions, Corrections, and Improvements. By JoHN LINDLEY,
Ph.D. F.R.S. L.S. &c. Fep. 8yo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


LISTON.—THE ELEMENTS OF SURGERY.


By RosBert Liston, Surgeon to the North London Hospital. New Edition, almost entirely
re-written. 8vo. with 3 Plates and upwards of 150 Woodcuts, 25s. cloth.


The general principles which ought to guide the practitioner in the management of consti-
tutional disturbance are here laid down. The descriptions of particular diseases have been
faithfully sketched from nature.


LONDON MEDICAL GAZETTE (THE);


Or, JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL MEDICINE. A new Series, under new Editors, In
Weekly Numbers, demy 8yo. printed in double columns, 8d.; or 9d. stamped for transmission
by post; also in Monthly Parts, 2s. 8d. or 3s. 4d. each. [Published every Friday Morning.


*,* Subscription to the Stamped Edition, £1. 19s. per annum, or 9s. 9d. per quarter, payable in
advance. Orders for the Stamped Edition received by all Newsvenders.


LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF PLANTS.


Comprising the Description, Specific Character, Culture, History, Application in the Arts, and

every other desirable particular, respecting all the Plants Indigenous to, Cultivated in, or

Introduced into, Britain. Edited by J. C. Loupon, F.L.S. H.S. &c.: the Specific Characters

by Prof. LinpLry; the Drawings by J. D. C. Sowerby, F.L.S.; and the Engravings by

: Se New Edition, corrected, 8vo. with upwards of 10,000 Engravings on Wood,
3s. 6d. cloth.


MACKENZIE.—PRACTICAL TREATISE ON DISEASES OF


the EYE. By W. Mackenzirz, M.D. Surgeon Oculist to the Queen for Scotland, &c. 3d

’ Edition, corrected and enlarged, with an Introduction, explanatory of a Horizontal Section
of the Eye, by T. WHARTON JoNEs, Surgeon; and an APPENDIX On the CurE of STRA-
BISMUS, by SURGICAL OPERATION (which may be had separately, 1s. sewed). 8yo. with
a Piate, and above 100 Woodcuts, 25s. cloth.


“The methods of treatment are in every case judicious, and appear to be founded rather on
practice than on theory—rather on his own experience than on the reports of others. Wecan
most strongly recommend the work.’”’—LANCET.


MAYO (DR. THOMAS).—CLINICAL FACTS AND REFLEC-


TIONS; also, Remarks on the Impunity of Murder in some Cases of Presumed Insanity.
By Tuomas Mayo, M.D. F.R.S., Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and late Fellow
of Oriel College, Oxford. 8yo. 8s. cloth.


MILES (WILLIAM. ESQ.)—THE HORSE’S FOOT, AND HOW


TO KEEP IT SOUND. By W. Mives, Esq. 4th Edition. Imperial 8vo. with Illustrations,
5s. cloth.


‘Mr. Miles has treated his very important topic with great research and labour, and displays
much natural sagacity, and that perfect mastery of details which only practical experience
can teach. He has besides illustrated his lessons with a number of drawings on stone. To
all who have the care of horses this volume will be a valuable acquisition, because it is a
perfectly practical and intelligible informant.’’

EDINBURGH MEDICAL AND SURGICAL JOURNAL.


MOORE.—THE POWER OF THE SOUL OVER THE BODY,


Considered in relation to Health and Morals. By Grorcr Moore, M.D. Member of the
Royal College of Physicians, London, &c. 3d Edition. Post 8vo. 7s. Gd. cloth.


«4 most interesting work.””-—MEDICAL GAZETTE.

« Pleasing, earnest, eloquent.””—LANCET.

“4 valuable work, ahd its literary merits are great.””—CriTIc.
* Read the book, and judge for yourself.’—ATHEN@UM.


PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. Il


MOORE.—THE USE OF THE BODY IN RELATION TO THE


MIND. By Georcr Moore, M.D. Member of the Royal College of Physicians, London, &c. ;
Author of“ The Power of the Soul over the Body.” Post 8vo. 9s. cloth.


“This is a useful book, on a subject of all others the most interesting—the constitution of
man, physical and mental; and the influence of the spiritual and material parts of man’s
nature upon each other.”’—Taivr’s MAGAZINE.


‘* Many of these facts are very striking in a physiological point of view, and the author’s
deductions from them are sometimes equally striking, with reference to self-discipline, and
the influence of health or disease upon our temper, industry, enjoyment, and almost our
moral dispositions.” —JOHN BULL.


“<The whole work is marked by pure benevolence and sincere piety, as well as by learning,
sagacity, and eloquence. It is a valuable addition to our stock of Christian philosophy—the
author’s conclusions being all drawn from authenticated facts, and illustrated by a great
number of curious cases and anecdotes. No author has more ably traced the connexion
between mind and body, or has more finely and conclusively established the relation between
man and his Creator.”—BRITANNIA.


_ © Dr. Moore’s volume will be sure to command a large circulation—not alone from the
interest of the subject, but from the popular manner of the composition, and the abundance
of information with which the pages are filled. It is precisely the sort of publication for the
Book Club and the Mechanics’ Institution. It will be a favourite with families. It will not
only be bought, but read. Such a book must be of signal service, and deserves a hearty
welcome from all who have at heart the moral and physical welfare of the world.”’—Criric.


MORTON.—A VETERINARY TOXICOLOGICAL CHART;


Containing those Agents which are known to cause Death in the Horse: withthe Symptoms,
Antidotes, Action on the Tissues, and Tests. By W. J.T. Moron, Lecturer on Veterinary
Surgery, &c. 3s. 6d. sheet; 6s. case; 8s. 6d. rollers.


MORTON.—A MANUAL OF PHARMACY FOR THE STUDENT


of VETERINARY MEDICINE; Containing the Substances employed at the Royal Veterinary
Coll., with an Attempt at their Classification, &c. By Mr. Morton. 3d Edit. 12mo. 10s, cloth.


NELIGAN.—MEDICINES,


Their Uses and Mode of Administration; including a Complete Conspectus of the Three
British Pharmacopeeias, an Account of all the New Remedies, and an Appendix of Formule.
By J. Moors Nevican, M.D.; Physician to the Jervis Street Hospital, Dublin; and Lec-
turer on Materia Medicaand Therapeutics in the Dublin School of Medicine. 8yvo. 12s. 6d. cloth,


“Dr. Neligan is fully competent to write ably on any medical subject to which he directs
his attention; and is evidently a man of highly cultivated mind, of liberal and most enlightened
views, and withal a sound practical physician. His work on medicines is a very valuable and
accurate compilation.”—Mrp1co-CHIRURGICAL REVIEW.


ORMEROD (W. P.)—CLINICAL COLLECTIONS AND OBSER-


VATIONS in SURGERY, made during an attendance on the Surgical Practice of St. Bar-
tholomew’s Hospital. By W. P. OrmrRop, Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of
England, and late House-Surgeon at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


“ The book is of a professional, and in the main of a technical character; embracing the
cream of an attentive observer’s notes upon the most striking facts exhibited in a large
hospital, during a period very much longer than students, or young practitioners, usually can
devote to such a a course of study. It is therefore, in some sort, a substitute for an extended
‘walking the hospital,’ presenting the most remarkable cases brought together under their
general heads, and so exhibited as to throw light upon each other, and to help to conclusions.”’

SPECTATOR.


“Tn concluding our notice of Mr. Ormerod’s ‘ Clinical Collections,’ we may again repeat
our opinion that the work does him great credit. It supplies a good and long-wanted account
of the practice prevailing in the surgical wards of one of our largest hospitals, and may be
advantageously perused by both student ana practitioner. It is just such a work as a hard
student ought to produce, and is not liable to an objection that attaches to the published
lucubrations of severai junior practitioners.””—Mrpi1co-CHIRURGICAL REVIEW.


OWEN.—LECTURES ON THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY


and PHYSIOLOGY of the VERTEBRATE ANIMALS, delivered at the Royal College of
Surgeons in 1844 and 1846. By Ricuarp Owrn, F.R.S. Hunterian Professor to the College.
In2 vols. Vol. I, 8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, 14s. cloth. (Vol. Lf. is in the press.


ee et eee ee ee es ee ee
12 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


OWEN.—LECTURES ON THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY


and PHYSI)LOGY of the INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS, delivered at the Royal College of
Surgeons in 1843. By RicHARD Owen, F.R.S. Hunterian Professor to the College. From
Notes taken’by WILLIAM WHITE Coorer, M.R.C.S. and revised by Professor OWEN. With
Glossary and Index. 8vo. with nearly 140 Wood Engrayings, 14s. cloth.


PARKES (E. A..—REMARKS ON THE DYSENTERY AND


HEPATITIS of INDIA. By E. A. Parkes, M.B. late Assistant-Surgeon, H.M. 84th Regt.
8vo. 9s. cloth.

“Tt is long since we have met with any work of research published by a military surgeon
which has satisfied us more than this. Dr. Parkes’s remarks are evidently the results of
actual and accurate observation, commenced with no small amount of sound knowledge, and
conducted in the right direction. The facts which have resulted from his inquiry are
highly interesting; they bear upon those parts of the history of hepatitis and dysentery
which require elucidation, and they are stated with great method and clearness.”—MEDICAL
GAZETTE,

«Dr. Parkes, availing himself of the opportunities afforded by his appointment as assistant-
surgeon to one of Her Majesty’s regiments serving in India, has confined his attention to
those diseases which are presented in that climate. ‘The result is a work which, conferrin
inestimable advantages on all, whether those who suffer, or those whose duty it is to affor
relief, must be a source of great satisfaction to the honourable director-general of the army,
to whom the present volume is dedicated, and to whose discrimination in selecting a dis-
tinguished student for an unsolicited appointment, the profession is indebted for this result ~
of his labours. Dr. Parkes’s volume, with its unpretending title, is also a valuable contribu-
tion to this department of scientific medicine.””—LANCET.


PERCIVALL.—THE ANATOMY OF THE HORSE;


Embracing the Structure of the Foot. By WiLL1AM PrERCcIVALL, M.R.C.S. Veterinary
Surgeon Ist Life Guards. 8vo. 20s. cloth.

In this volume the Veterinary Lectures of the Author have been freely referred to; but the
old matter bas undergone much revision and emendation, and has been altogether fresh cast,
and arranged in a systematic form.


PERCIVALL.—HIPPOPATHOLOGY.


A Systematic Treatise on the Disorders and Lamenesses of the Horse, with their most
approved methods of Cure. 8yvo. Woodcuts, Vol. I. 10s. 6d.; Vols. If. and III. 14s. each, bds.


This work consists of 3 Volumes, which, though connected asa whole, may be consulted
as distinct treatises. Vol. I. External Diseases; Vol. Il. Internal; Vol. 111. Lameness.


PEREIRA.—ELEMENTS OF MATERIA MEDICA AND THE-


RAPEUTICS; comprehending the Natural History, Preparation, Properties, Composition,
Effects, and Uses of Medicines. By Jon. PEREIRA, M.D. F.R.S. Assistant Physician to the
London Hospital, &c. Part I. contains the GENERAL ACTION AND CLASSIFICATION OF
MepIcINEs, and the MINERAL Materia Medica. Part IIl.—The VEGEraBLE and ANIMAL
Kingdoms, with a vast number of Woodcuts, including Diagrams explanatory of the Pro-
cesses of the Pharmacopceias, a Tabular View of the History of the Materia Medica, from the
earliest times to the present day, anda very copious INDEX. New Edition, thoroughly revised,
with the Introduction of the Processes of the New Edinburgh Pharmacopeeia, and containing
additional articles on Mental Remedies, Light, Heat, Cold, Electricity, Magnetism, Exercise
Dietetics, and Climate, with about a Hundred Additional Woodcuts illustrative of Pharma.
ceutical Operations, Crystallography, Shape and Organization of the Feculas of Commerce
and the Natural History of the Materia Medica. A New Edition, thoroughly revised. ‘
[In the Press.


PEREIRA.—A TREATISE ON FOOD AND DIET,


With Observations on the Dietetical Regimen suited for Disordered States of the Digestive
Organs: and an Account of the Dietaries of some of the principal Metropolitan and other
Establishments, for Paupers, Lunatics, Criminals, Children, the Sick, &c. By Jon. PEREIRA
M.D. F.R.S. & L.S. &c.; Author of *‘ Elements of Materia Medica.” S8yo. 16s. cloth. :


«The work of Dr. Pereira is not only an excellent text-book to be placed in the hands of
students, but one absolutely necessary for the use of every practitioner at the present moment
whether he has kept pace or not with organic chemistry in its recent rapid progression; it is
calculated, by enabling the regular practitioner to found his directions for diet on a scientific
basis, to prevent the abuse of the public mind by the empirical and frequently pernicious or
ridiculous precepts of homceopathists, hydropathists, and charlatans.”

BRITISH AND FoREIGN MEDICAL REVIEW.


‘PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 13


PESCHEL.—THE ELEMENTS OF PHYSICS.


By C. F. Pescuet, Principal of the Royal Military College, Dresden. Translated from the
German, with Notes, by E. West. 3 vols. fep. 8vo. with Woodcuts and Diagrams, 21s. cloth.


hawt 1. The Physics of Ponderable Bodies. Fep. 8yo. 7s.6d.
Separately ¢ Part 2. Imponderable Bodies—Light, Heat, Magnetism, Electricity, and Electro-
l Dynamics. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. 13s. 6d.

“ We trust the day is not far distant, when every medical student, who aims at taking a re-
spectable stand in his profession, shall have made himself fully master of Peschel’s ‘ Elements
of Physics,’ even if he proceed no further. The first volume, containing the physics of pon-
derable bodies, has been most favourably received by those best qualified to form a judgment
of it; and has, we believe, been introduced into several of our leading academies. It would,
therefore, be superfluous in us to offer any opinion of our Own upon its merits. But we may
state that a careful examination of the other two volumes, which have recently appeared, has
satisfied us that their merit is equal, if not superior, to that of the first; and that the whole
book may be most safely recommended to those who desire to obtain something more than an
elementary knowledge of physical scieuce.”’»—BRirIsH AND ForEIGN MEepIcAL REVIEW.


REES (DR. G. OWEN.)—ON THE ANALYSIS OF THE BLOOD


AND URINE, AND ON THE TREATMENT OF URINARY DISEASES. By G. OWEN REEs,
M.D. F.R.S. Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Principal Medical Officer to the
Pentonville Prison, and Assistant-Physician to Guy’s Hospital. 2d Edition. 8vo. with Plutes,
7s. 6d. cloth.


‘A precise and accurate treatise on the chemical history of the blood and the urine in
health and disease, and an useful and judicious guide in explaining the best methods of
conducting the analysis of these two important fluids. The second edition is very greatly
improved ; and the work, in its present form, may be regarded as a valuable text-book to the
student of chemical pathology, whether beginning or advanced; and as such we recommend
it to the professional reader.” —EpINBURGH MEDICAL AND SURGICAL JOURNAL.


“We need hardly say that we strongly recommend Dr. Rees’s unpretending treatise as a
most useful companion to the pathological chemist. It has the advantage, now-a-days
somewhat rare, of being equally instructive to the student and practitioner; and we know
of no better manual on the chemical analysis of the blood and urine to place in the hands of
those who are joining themselves as pupils to the newly-founded schools of practical chemistry
in this metropolis.’—MEDICAL GAZETTE.


REID (DR.)—ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE PRINCIPLES AND


PRACTICE of WARMING and VENTILATING, with Preliminary Remarks on Health and
Length of Life. By D. B. Rerp, M.D. F.R.S.E. 8yvo. with Diagrams, and 320 Engravings
on Wood, 16s.

“‘Dr. Reid has in this treatise most elaborately investigated the theory and practice of
ventilation in all its bearmgs, and accumulated such a mass of information as to render it by
far the most interesting and valuable work on the subject that has yet been published. We
most cordially recommend it to our readers. They will derive both knowledge and entertain-
ment from it; and, moreover, will learn how to protect themselves and their patients from
one of the most powerful and most insidious causes of disease.””—LANCET.


SEYMOUR (DR. EDWARD).—THOUGHTS ON THE NATURE


and TREATMENT of several SEVERE DISEASES of the HUMAN BODY ; ineluding—1.
Diseases of the Stomach.—2. Gout.—3. Melancholy (Mental Derangement).—4. Epilepsy.—
5. Neuralgic Affections—Brow Ague, Sciatica, &c. By Kpwarp J. Seymour, M.D. F.A.S.
late Senior Physician to St. George’s Hospital. 2 vols. 8vo. [Just ready.


SMITH.—AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BOTANY.


By Sir J. E. Smrrn, late President of the Linnean Society. 7th Edition, corrected, in which

the object of Smith’s ‘‘Grammar of Botany” is combined with that of the “ Introduction.”

Ey el Wed Cee K.H. LL.D. &c. 8vo. with 36 Plates, 16s.; with the plates coloured,
'2, 12s. 6d. cloth.


SMITH.—COMPENDIUM OF THE ENGLISH FLORA.


By Sir J. E. SmiruH. 2d Edition, with Additions and Corerctions, by Sir W. J. Hooker.
12mo. 7s. 6d. cloth. :


THE SAME IN LATIN. 5th Edition. 12mo. 7s. 6d. cloth.


SMITH.—THE ENGLISH FLORA.


ae ee J. E.SmiruH, M.D. F.R.S. late President of the Linnawan Society. 6 vols.8vo. £3. 12s.
oards. :


14 MEDICAL, SURGICAL, AND SCIENTIFIC WORKS,


SOLLY (SAMUEL).—THE HUMAN BRAIN: ITS STRUC-


TURE, PHYSIOLOGY, and DISEASES. By SAmuEt SoLty, F.R.S. Senior Assist.-Surgeon
to St. Thomas's Hospital, and Lecturer on Clinical Surgery ; Senior Surgeon to the Aldersgate —
Dispensary. 2d Edition. 8vo, with numerous Wood Engravings. [in the press.


TAMPLIN (MR. R. W.)—LECTURES ON THE NATURE AND


TREATMENT OF DEFORMITIES, delivered at the Royal Orthopedic Hospital, Bloomsbury
Square. By R. W. Tamp.in, F.R.C.S.E. Surgeon to the Hospital. Fep. 8vo. with Wood
Engrayvings, 7s. 6d. cloth.


‘To those numerous members 4f the profession desirous of making themselves acquainted
with the most recent and approved principles of treating a class of diseases which have hitherto
been considered to fall within the special domain of quackery, we cordially recommend Mr.
Tamplin’s valuable lectures.”—MerpicaL GAZETTE.


TEALE (T. P. ESQ.)—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON


ABDOMINAL HERNIA. By Tuomas PripGin TEALE, F.L.S. Fellow of the Royal College
of Sue One: and Surgeon to the Leeds General Infirmary. 8syo. with numerous Dlustrations,
15s. cloth.

“The book before us we at once pronounce to be unexceptionably good in every respect,
whether literary or professional, and fulfilling to the utmost the stated object of its publica-
tion. We consider that Mr. Teale is entitled to our warmest thanks for having given to the
profession so valuable a text-book in this important and intricate branch of surgery. The
subject is handled with that practical familiarity which cannot fail to engender confidence,
and at once to instruct and interest the reader. ‘The style is simple, terse, and pure, without
bordering on dogmatism on the one hand, or falling away into vagueness or indecision on the
other. Altogether, we may repeat, that we have rarely had it in our power to recommend
a work with such unmixed confidence and satisfaction to our readers: and this we do most
cordially to all classes, but especially to students and junior practitioners, who will find it
an invaluable and unfailing guide in their early operations and maiden difficulties.”

BriTisH AND Foreregn MEepIcAL REVIEW.


THOMSON.—ATLAS OF DELINEATIONS OF CUTANEOUS


ERUPTIONS; illustrative of the Descriptions in Dr. Bateman’s Synopsis of Cutaneous
Diseases. By A. Topp THomson, M.D. &c. Royal 8vo. with 128 graphic Illustrations,
carefully coloured on 29 Plates, €3. 3s. boards.


THOMSON.— ELEMENTS OF MATERIA MEDICA AND


THERAPEUTICS; including the Recent discoveries and Analysis of Medicines. By Dr.
AnTHONY Topp THOMSON, F.L.S. &c. &c. 3d Edition, enlarged and improved. 1 very thick
vol. 8vo. with upwards of 100 Wood Engravings, now first inserted, €1. 11s. 6d. cloth.


The author has collected, in one point of view, all the discoveries with which modern
chemistry has enriched Materia Medica, and those practical facts which clinical medicine
has furnished, for elucidating the doctrine of Therapeutics. He has availed himself of the
labours of Continental chemists aud medical writers, as well as those of our own country and
America. He has endeavoured to trace the nature and phenomena of Morbid action, and to
ascertain the influence exerted by Remedial agents in removing it.


THOMSON.—CONSPECTUS OF THE PHARMACOPQIAS.


By Dr. ANTHONY Topp THomson, F.L.S. &c. 15th Edition, thoroughly revised and greatly

improved; containing the alterations and additions of the last London Pharmacopeeia and >

ae Ae ee and American Remedies. 18mo. 5s. 6d. cloth; or, with roan tuck, as a pocket-
ook. 6s. 6d.


THOMSON.—THE LONDON DISPENSARY;


Containing Translations of the Pharmacopeias of London, Edinburgh, and Dublin; the
Elements of Pharmacy; the Botanical Description, Natural History, and Analysis of the
Substances of the Materia Medica, &c. &c.: witha copious Index of Synonyms. Forming a
Practical Synopsis of Materia Medica, Pharmacy, and Therapeutics: with Tables and Wood-
cuts. By AnrHony Topp THomson, M.D. F.L.S8. Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians,
Professor of Materia Medica, &c. in University College, London. 10th Edition, corrected
throughout, and materially improved. 8yo. 2Is.


THOMSON.—THE DOMESTIC MANAGEMEHT OF THE SICK


ROOM, necessary, in Aid of Medical Treatment, for the Cure of Diseases. By A. Topp
Tuomson, M.D. F.L.S. &c. 2d Edition. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

“ There is no interference with the duties of the medical attendant, but sound, sensible, and
clear advice what to do, and how to act, so as to meet unforeseen emergencies, and co-operate
with professional skill.”’”—LirerRaArRy GAZETTE.


ee ee a en Eres ae


PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 15


TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL AND CHIRUR-


GICAL SOCIETY of LONDON; comprising many valuable andimportant Papers on Medi-
cine and Surgery. Vol. XI. of the New Series. 8vo. with 11 Plates and numerous Woodcuts,
16s. cloth.


TURNER.—A TREATISE ON THE FOOT OF THE HORSE,


And on a New System of Shoeing, by one-sided nailing; also on the Nature, Origin, and Symp-
toms of the Navicular Joint Lameness, with Preventive and Curative Treatment. By
J.TURNER, M.R.V.C. Royal 8yo. 7s. 6d. boards.


URE.—DICTIONARY OF ARTS, MANUFACTURES, & MINE:


Containing a clear Exposition of their Principles and Practice. By ANDREW Ure, M.D.
F.R.S. M.G.S. M.A.S. Lond.; M. Acad. N.L. Philad.; S. Ph. Soc. N. Germ. Hanov.; Mulii.
&c. &c. 3d Edition, corrected. 8vo. with 1,241 Engravings on Wood, 50s. cloth.


URE.—RECENT IMPROVEMENTS IN ARTS, MANUFAC-


TURES, and MINES; being the 2d Edition of a Supplement to the 3d Edition of his Dictionary.
By ANDREW URE, M.D. F.R.S. &c. 8vo. with numerous Wood Engravingss, 14s. cloth.


VETERINARIAN (THE):


A Monthly Journal of Veterinary Science. Exited by Messrs. PreRcIvVALL and YOUATT,
assisted by Professor Dick ahd Mr. KARKEEK. 8yo. ls. 6d.


*,.* A New Series commenced on the Ist of January, 1842.


VETERINARY RECORD (THE),


And Transactions of the Veterinary Medical Association- Kdited by Messrs. SroonrEr,
Simonps, and Morton. §8yo. 2s. 6d. ,


*,* Published Quarterly—On the Ist of January, April, July, and October.


VINCENT (J. R.)—A SKETCH OF THE SCIENCE OF SOME


part of SURGICAL PRACTICE. By JoHn PAINTER VINCENT, Surgeon to St. Bartholo-
mew’s Hospital. 8yo. [In jhe press.


VON BEHR. — HAND-BOOK OF HUMAN ANATOMY,


General, Special, and Topographical. Translated from the Original German of Dr. ALFRED
Vow BeEHur, and adapted to the use of the English Student, by Joun Birkett, F.L.S. Fellow
of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, De .onstrator of Anatomy at Guy’s Hospital.
16mo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


“Mr. Birkett has, by the publication of this Hand-book, placed within the reach of English
students a useful elementary treatise, which, while it may serve as a Dissector’s Manual, has
the peculiar advantage of affording a correct description of the general anatomy of the body,
in conjunction with the most prominent facts which have of late years been established
respecting the constituents and structural arrangements of the animal tissues. The con-
struction of this work is excellent. The matter is well arranged, the index copious,
and the descriptions, while they are terse, are, upon the whole, clear, ample, and correct.
Mr. Birkett has certainly performed a difficult task in a very able and judicious manner, and
we can recommend this Hand-book as a useful and systematic guide to students of anatomy.’’

MEDICAL GAZETTE.


“Dr. Von Behr’s object was to produce a descriptive account of the human frame, which
should combine the ‘profundity’? of the Germans with the ‘clear summary and agreeable
detail’ of the French: in which purpose the Doctor has succeeded, but with a preponderance
in favour of the ‘ profundity,’ or minuteness, as people may think. In selecting this work
for translation as a student’s companion, Mr. Birkett has added to the explanations of the
original, where it seemed requisite, and appended to each section a list of the works that
treat more fully of the subject—as the bones, muscles, and so forth. The book will be found
a useful yade-mecum to the student, from the method of its arrangement, the minuteness of
its particulars, and the fulness of its description. It is to be regarded as a companion to the
dissecting-room, or a refresher to the professional man; the technical character of its ac-
counts rather seeming to remind, than furnishing a description per se. This, however, is’a
necessity. Popular descriptions and plates are mere succedanea. The student must bear in
mind, that the ‘subject,’ and the subject only, is the thing whence he is to draw his know-
ledge. All the numerous anatomical books, of some of which he will find lists in this volume,
derive their whole knowledge from the subject, profess to have no other end in view than truly
to describe the subject, and owe all their reputation to the truth of their descriptions. Their
use will facilitate, but can never supersede the study of nature.”—SrEcTaTor.


16


eee


SCIENTIFIC WORKS PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LONGMAN & C0.


WAGNER.—THE ELEMENTS OF COMPARATIVE ANATOMY.


Designed especially for the use of Students. By RupoLpH WAGNER, M.D. Professor of Com-
parative Anatomy and Physiology in the University of GOttingen, &c. Edited, from the
German, by ALFRED TULK, M.R.C.S, 8yo. 9s. cloth. :


“ Professor Wagner’s works are no less remarkable for perspicuity of arrangement than
for practical import. The one before us, which reflects great credit upon Mr. Tulk’s editorial
qualifications, evinces a thorough knowledge of the subject. As an elementary treatise, it
cannot fail to supersede the now obsolete manual of the author’s predecessor. In short, after
careful perusal, we have no hesitation in recommending it to every student of anatomy de-
sirous of gaining information regarding a collateral department which has served to clear up
many of the doubtful and uncertain points in physiological science.”— MEDICAL GAZETTE,


WALNE.—CASES OF DROPSICAL OVARIA REMOVED BY


the large Abdominal Section. By D. Henry WALNE, Surgeon. 8vo 3s. 6d. cloth.

“These cases were well chosen, the arrangements admirably made, the operation was well
performed, and the after-treatment most judicious: we have, therefore, to praise the judg-
ment, boldness, dexterity, and professional skill of Mr. Walne.”

DUBLIN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL SCIENCE.


“It is only justlce to Mr. Walne to say, that he appears to haye watched his patients with
unremitting care, and to have conducted their treatment very judiciously; to which the
successful result of the operations was no doubt in a great measure owing. The reports of
their progress, too, are full and explicit as could be desired.”

LRITISH AND FOREIGN MEDICAL REVIEW.


WHITE.—A COMPENDIUM OF THE VETERINARY ART;


W


Containing plain and concise Observations on the Construction and Management of the
Stable ; a brief and popular Oujline of the Structure and Economy of the Horse ; the Nature,
Symptoms, and Treatment of the Diseases and Accidents to which the Horse is liable ; the


Best Methods of performing various Important Operations ; with Advice to the Purchasers


of Horses; and a copious Materia Medica and Pharmacopeia. By JAMES WHITE, late Vet.
Surg. Ist Dragoons. 17th Edition, entirely reconstructed, with considerable Additions and
Alterations, bringing the work up to the present State of Veterinary Science, by W. C.
Spooner, Vet. Surgeon, &c. &c. 8vo. with coloured Plate, 16s. cloth. :


HITE.— A COMPENDIUM OF CATTLE MEDICINE;


Or, Practical Observations on the Disorders of Cattle and the other Domestic Animals, except
the Horse. By the late J. WHITE. 6th Edition, re-arranged, with copious Additions and
Notes, by W.C. Stooner, Vet. Surgeon, Author of a ‘‘Treatise on the Influenza,” and a
*« Treatise on the Foot and Leg of the Horse,” &c. 8vo. 9s. cloth.


WILSON.—PRACTICAL AND SURGICAL ANATOMY.


By W. J. Erasmus Witson, F.R.S. Teacher of Practical and Surgical Anatomy and Phy-
siology. 12mo. with 50 Engravings on Wood by Bagg, 10s. 6d. cloth.


WINTER (J. W.)—THE HORSE IN HEALTH AND DISEASE;


Or, Suggestions on his Natural and General History, Varieties, Conformation, Paces, Age,
Soundness, Stabling, Condition, Training, and Shoeing. With a Digest of Veterinary Practice,
By James W. WINTER, M.R.C.V.S.H., Member of the Association Littéraire d’Egypte, late
Veterinary Surgeon to Mehemet Ali and Ibrahim Pacha. S8yo. 10s. 6d. cloth.


‘A complete exposition of the subject, and an excellent guide to the practice of the vete-
rinary surgeon, this volume comprehends the natural history of the animal, traces its
affections and diseases to their origin, and teaches how to apply the most successful reniedies.
It is a book for every counting-house, be it landlord’s or tenant’s; and the most experienced
of practitioners will find much valuable information in Mr, Winter’s pages.”’

ITERARY GAZETTE.


_ “Mr. Winter is master of his subject, and hence writes with force and distinctness. He
is thoroughly cognizant of all the varieties of the horse, of the best methods of breeding, of


_all forms of disease, and of the most judicious modes of treatment. On these topics, and


various kindred ones, he discourses in this elaborate treatise with great ability, giving
the results of his enlarged knowledge and experience in a pleasing and intelligible manner.
From the popular style of the book, and the great amount of information it contains, it may
be read with profit by every one who is interested in the judicious treatment of the horse * in
heath and disease.’””—BRITANNIA.


Wilson and Ogilvy, 57, Skinner Street, Snowh ll, London.


Ae " aye err te ;


a. aa ao


~ ties
aie oa

es ee

ee. SF aM her Sey |

ee ; cae | ee


uy 4s ee ey


a


Py ee
mes a


Wit


te hae ne:
ie cae Ki wad PMCW Ler) i ¢ aie 82?
4 “ae AP “a hs +48 ¥ $e Ke oO ;
Pies ot! oy ui Mara 1 ACHR Se.” k
eee ed Crane ro oe
fe sh ens piel PBR ey Seth ;


; ih? Why a? ne AOE Fe by
ere bageeN ee bMS) og
