Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain in the Mesmeric State (John Elliotson, 1843)
===============================================================================================
John Elliotson — The landmark medical evidence for mesmeric anesthesia — the bridge text from mesmerism to spiritualism. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (39002011123057.med.yale.edu) — 1843 pamphlet.

YALE 
MEDICAL LIBRARY 

HISTORICAL 
LIBRARY 

The Harvey Cushing Fund 

j^IBFARX 

1.14. 

Elliotson ON Mesmerism London, 1843. 

Title: Numerous cases | of j surgical operations | without pain 
I in I the mesmeric state; | with | remarks | upon the opposi- 
tion of many members of the Royal Medical | and Chirurgi- 
cal Society and others | to the reception of | the inestimable 
blessings of mesmerism. | [5 lines of quotations] j by j John 
Elliotson, M.D. Cantab. F.R.S. | London: | H. Bailliere, 219, 
Regent Street. | [brief rule] | mdcccxlhi 

Collation: 8°. [1-5], 6-93, [94-96] PP- 

Contents: p.[i] title; p.[2] printers' notation; p-[3] dedication: 'To those, however 
humble their rank, who prize truth above the favour ot the ignorant or inter- 
ested," [etc.]; p. [4] blank; pp.[5]-93 text; p. [94] errata; p. [95] 'Also by the same 
author'; p. [96] blank. 

Note: This records in detail the case of a 42-year-old laborer with ulcerated knee 
who while mesmerized had his leg amputated by W. Squire Ward. A lively verbal 

tilt followed when the case was reported, and the bulk of the book is taken up 
with details of the controversy which Elliotson set down with all the zeal of a 
Scottish Covenanter. Other cases are then described. On page 65 Elliotson uses 
the word "aniesthesia": "For a length of time she had perfect loss of the sense of 
touch.— auicslhesia, in hei ecstatic deliriiuii." 

NUMEROUS CASES 

OP 

SURGICAL OPERATIONS 

WITHOUT PAIN 

THE MESMERIC STATE; 

WITH 

REMARKS 

UPON THE OPPOSITION OF MANY MEMBERS OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL 
AND CHIRURGICAL SOCIETY AND OTHERS 

TO THE RECEPTION OF 

THE INESTIMABLE BLESSINGS OF MESMERISM. 

" In the whole domain of human arguments, no art or science rests upon e.^periBlents 
more numerous, more positive, or more easily ascertained." 

"To me (and before many years the opinion must be universal) the most extraordinary 
event in the whole history of human science is, that Mesmerism ever could be doubted." 

Chenevlx. 

BY 

JOHN ELLIOTSON, M.D. Cantab. F.R.S. 

PHILADELPHIA: 

LEA AND BLANCHARD. 

1843. 

TO 

THOSE, 

HOWEVER HUMBLE THEIR RANK, 

WHO PRIZE TRUTH ABOVE THE FAVOUR OF 

THE IGNORANT OR INTERESTED, 

AND 

FEEL MORE SATISFACTION IN PROMOTING THE COMFORT, 

THE KNOWLEDGE, THE VIRTUE, AND THEREFORE THE 

HAPPINESS, OF THEIR FELLOW-MEN, THAN IN PROMOTING 

't WHAT IS COMMONLY CALLED THEIR OWN INTEREST, 

THESE PAGES 

ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED. 

CHAPTER I. 

CASE OF AMPUTATION OF A LEG ABOVE THE KNEE, WITHOUT PAIN, IN 
THE MESMERIC STATE. 

SECTION I. 

DESCRIPTION OP THE CASE. 

" I never said it was possible. I only said it was true." — M. G. Lewis. 
" Le vrai n'est pas tuujours vraisemblable." — Fontenelle. 

On the 22d of November last, the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of 
London assembled to hear read an "Account of a case of successful amputation 
of the thigh, during the mesmeric state, without the knowledge of the patient," 
in the District Hospital of Wellow, Nottinghamshire : and voted thanks for it 
without a dissentient voice. 

The mesmeriser was W. Topham, Esq., Barrister, of the Middle Temple: the 
operator, W. Squire Ward, Esq., Surgeon, of Wellow Hall. The patient was a 
labourer, six feet high and forty-two years of age, named James Wombell. He 
had suffered for nearly five years from neglected disease of the left knee, the in- 
terior of the joint of which was found after the amputation deeply and extensively 
ulcerated. " The slightest motion of the joint was attended by the most ex- 
cruciating agony; his nights were almost wholly sleepless, in consequence of 
the painful starlings of the limb; his pulse was weak and rapid ; his face con- 
stantly marked with a hectic flush; his tongue foul; appetite gone;" in truth, 
when Mr. Topham first saw him, on the 9th of September, " he was sitting up- 
right upon a bed in the hospital ; the only position lohich he could bear : he com- 
plained of great pain from his knee and oi much excitability and loss of strength, 
from his constant restlessness and deprivation of sleep, for he had not, during the 
three previous weeks slept more than two hours in seventy." . 

On this day he was first- mesmerised by Mr. Topham, and for five and thirty 
minutes. "The only effect produced was a closing of the eyelids, with that 
quivering appearance which so commonly results from the process; and, though 
awake and speaking, he could not raise them until after a lapse of a minute and 
a half" 

On the 10th he was sent to sleep in twenty minutes. On the 11th "he was 
suffering great agony, and distressed even to tears.'" Mr. Topham " com- 
menced by making passes longitudinally, over the diseased knee: in^iie minutes 
he was comparatively easy; and, on proceeding further to mesmerise him, at the 
expiration of ten minutes more he was sleeping like an infant. Not only his 
arms were then violently pinched, but also the diseased leg itself, without his 
exhibiting any sensation : yet his limb was so sensitive to pain, in his natural 
state, he could not bear even the lightest covering to rest upon it. That night 
he slept seven hours without interruption." 

" After constantly mesmerising him for ten or twelve days, a great change was 
observed in his appearance. The hue of health returned; he became cheerful; 
fell much stronger ; was easier, both in mind and body ; slept well, and reco- 
vered his appetite." So great was the change, that Mr. Ward, after having been 
absent from indisposition, " was as much astonished, on his return on the 27th of 
September, about three weeks after the commencement of the mesmerism," as 

he " was delighted to observe the improved condition of the man ;" and, had lie 
"not known the previous history of the case, inuch doubt must have arisen in his 
mind, as to the propriety nf immediately amputating the limb." 

"On the 22d of September the patient was first apprised of the necessity of an 
early amputation. The communication seemed almost unexpected, and affected 
him considerably, and destroyed his natural sleep that night." The next day he 
was still " fretting, restless, and in consequent pain." Yet he was put to sleep 
mesmerically in four minutes and a half 

Like many other susceptible patients, he could now be affected locally when 
in his natural state, — without coma. For example, passes without contact along 
his extended extremities would render them so rigid as not to be bent by me- 
chanical force short of danger, though breathing upon them constantly caused 
them to relax and drop to his sides. 

Although in this mesmeric coma the sensibility to mechanical causes of pam 
was fo far lessened that violent pinching, and sudden pricking, and of even the 
diseased limb, produced no evidence of sensation, and he lost all pain in his knee 
while this was in.perfect rest, the exquisitely sensitive interior of the diseased 
joint was not proof against the torture of motion, which, however slight, agouized 
and awoke him. In many cases I have seen excruciating internal pain of nerves, 
inflamed or otherwise under disease, give evidence of its fierce .shootings by the 
sudden agitation of the frame, expression of the countenance, and catching of the 
breath, when there was not sensibility enough for sensation from pinching, prick- 
ing, cutting, tearing, or even burning ; the excruciating internal pain not awaking 
them unless when at the very highest intensity, or when the coma was not at the 
greatest depth. When there is exquisite tenderness of a part, as in the knee- 
joint of this poor man, the coma must indeed be profound, — more profound than it 
seems ever to have been in this case, except perhaps when the precaution was 
taken of keeping the fingers on the eyes after the operation was begun, — for mo- 
tion of the part not to cause anguish. At the time of the operation, the 1st of 
October, it was found impossible, without such torture as aroused him from his 
mesmeric coma, to remove him from his bed to the table. Indeed, his coma was 
not so deep but that it was dissipated by attempting to converse with him ; and 
in general it ceased spontaneously in half an hour, his waking being " slow and 
gradual and without the least start." Instead of being placed upon a table, he 
was therefore lifled with his low bed upon a temporary platform, and "he was 
soon put into the mesmeric sleep, although he was considerably excited by hear- 
ing the cries of another patient upon whom Mr. Ward had been performing a 
tedious and painful operation." He was then "drawn by means of the bed 
clothes beneath him towards the end of the bed." Even this movement excited 
the pain and awoke him. But the pain soon ceased, and, his limb being " raised 
about two inches from the mattress" by a surgeon present (Mr. Wood), who 
" rested the heel upon his shoulder and supported the joint with his hand," he was 
mesmerised into coma again in four minutes. 

Mr. Topham continued to mesmerize him for fifteen minutes, and then inform- 
ed Mr. Ward that the operation might be begun, and " brought two fingers of 
each hand gently in contact with the patient's closed eyelids ; and there kept 
them, still further to deepen the sleep." This is a circumstance of no little im- 
portance to remember. Of all parts of the body, the eyes are the most ready re- 
ceivers and transmitters of mesmerism. I noticed this first in the cases of the 
I Okeys; and I may remark that all the exquisitely interesting phenomena which 

occurred m the perfectly genuine and wonderful cases of those two sisters, I 

repeat it as emphatically as I can, and hope my words will be read by the unin- 
formed, and presumptuous, and cruel writer of an article in the present number 
(CXLI.) of the Quarterly Review, who exclaims, " how many grave persons were 
deceived by the impostures of the Miss Okeys of St. Pancras," — the perfectly 
genuine and wonderful phenomena of those two sisters, I have verified again and 
again in numerous other cases, some in one, some in another. The moist mucous 

membranes are more susceptible than the skin; and of membranes, the surface 
of the eye and inner surface of the eyelid, to say nothing of the nervous 
interior of the eye to which there is admission through the pupil to projected 
mesmeric influence are the most susceptible. Intervening bodies impede mes- 
merism, and, cdcleris paribus, in proportion to their substance ; the eyelids there- 
fore prevent so strong an effect as would result if the mesmerizing body were 
applied to the eye itself Still the points of the fingers placed upon the eyelids 
would have a great elfect. The pointed parts of the body, as the ends of the fin- 
gers and the point of the nose, 1, in the same Okeys and subsequently in others, 
ascertained to be more powerful in mesmerising as well as in being mesmerised, 
cccteris paribus, than other parts. If the fingers had been kept on the eyelids 
before the patient was moved at all, he probably would have sufl^ered no more 
while he was moved than during the operation. 

The operation was now commenced. " Mr. Ward, after one earnest look at 
the man," in the words of Mr. Topham, " slowly plunged his knife into the centre 
of the outside of the thigh, directly to the bone, and then made a clear incision 
round the bone, to the opposite point on the inside of the thigh. The stillness at 
thi.s moment was something awful ; the cabn respiration of the sleeping man 
alone was heard, for all other seemed suspended. In making the second incision, 
the position of the leg was found more inconvenient than it appeared to be ;" and 
Mr. Ward, to use his own words, " having made the anterior flap," " was under 
the necessity of completing the posterior one in three stages. First, by dividing 
a portion of the flap on the inside; then a similar portion on the outside. This 
proceeding, which was of course far more tedious and painful than the ordinary 
one, was necessary to enable me to pass the knife through under the bone arid 
thus complete the whole, as I could not sufficiently depress the handle to do so, 
without the two lateral cuts." Yet, notwiihstanding all this, the patient's " sleep 
continued as profound as ever. The placid look of his countenance never 
changed for .\N instant; his whole frame rested, uncontrolled, in perfect still- 
ness and repose ; not a muscle was seen to twitch. To the end of the operation, 
including the sawing of the bone, securing the arteries, and applying the ban- 
dages, occupying a period of upwards of twenty minutes, he lay like a statue." 

Soon after the second incision, " a low moaning" was heard at intervals until 
the conclusion of the operation, that is, after the leg was off' and while the arteries 
were tying and the bandages putting on, giving "to all present the impression 
of a disturbed dream." That it arose from troubled dreaming I have no doubt; 
for in the mesmeric coma it is common for patients, after the lapse of a certain 
time, to dream and talk, and especially of any thing which has just before strongly 
impressed them; and this patient was very likely, and from my experience I 
should say, was almost certain, to dream of his having soon to undergo the opera- 
tion, the thoughts of which had so acutely distressed him and must have occupied 
his mind to the last moment of his waking state. I have at this moment three 
patients who in the coma always dream and talk of something which has very 
recently, generally the same day, interested them, or of something they expect 
on the same day. Had it arisen from the operation, it would have occurred during 
the most painful periods; would have occurred, as it did not, exactly and only at 
moments of the proceeding most likely to be painful, whereas it occurred as much 
at moments when nothing was doing to give pain. The man could not have 
moaned from pain in spite of himself at moments when there was nothing to make 
him moan in spite of himself It would have been increased, and indeed changed 
to a sudden and louder noise, v.'henever the end of the sciatic nerve was roughly 
treated. Tor, still farther to test his insensibility, Mr. Ward " twice foucAed" 
and, as he informs me, pretty roughly and with the points of the forceps, so that 
he in fact pricked, "(Ae divided end of the sciatic nerve, without any increase of 
the low moaning." The pain which such an experiment would occasion to a 
person in his ordinary state must be equal to a strong dart of tic douloureux; and 
I defy any human being, in his ordinary condition, to be subjected to such an ex- 

6 

periment without, not to say an increase of low moaning if lie was already moan- 
ing, but without suddenly giving some other more decided siqn of anguish, — 
without some interruption to the " perfect stillness and repose of a statue." Mr. 
Ward further informs me that he "once put his thumb roughly upon the nerve 
in taking the posterior flap in his liand to sponge, and also used the sponge very 
roughly." If the man had not been able to bear the pain of the operation without 
moaning, he would not have been able to retain the perfect placidity of his coun- 
tenance, the relaxed and motionless state of his lips and hands, and the undis- 
turbed regularity of his breathing. 

The " closed eyelids" quivered to the last, as they so frequently do in the mes- 
meric coma. 

The quivering of the e."cposed muscular fibres, and the retraction of the divided 
muscles, were less than usual, probably from the diminution of their irritability 
by mesmerism. 

The mesmeric state of the patient usually lasted half an hour; and after this 
lapse of time, the operation having been commenced in rather more than a quarter 
of an hour subsequently to its production, and having occupied, inclusively of ap- 
plying the bandages, above twenty minutes, he "gradually and calmly" as usual, 
awoke. Some sal volatile and water had just been given to him, and might have 
contributed to his waking, because his coma, according to its usual course, was 
probably near its end, and at this period stimuli which proved inert previously 
might lake more or less effect. This, however, is exceedingly doubtful, as the 
usual duration of his coma was completed, and as he was not suddenly aroused 
by the sal volatile, and gave no sign of irritation from it, but, on the contrary, 
awoke "gradually and calmly." In fact Mr. Wood, who mixed the sal volatile 
and water, assures me that it was very weak, and is persuaded equally with my- 
self that the man awoke independently of it. 

"At first, he uttered no exclamation; and for some moments seemed lost and 
bewildered," — a characteristic and striking phenomenon so familiar to mesmerists 
when any visible change in external circumstances has occurred while the patient 
was asleep. But, after looking around, he exclaimed, " I bless the Lord to find 
it's all over." 

"He was then removed to another room; and, following immediately," Mr. 
Topham "asked him in the presence of all assembled to describe all he felt or 
knew after he was mesmerised. His reply was 'i never knew anything more ; 
and never felt any pain at all: I, once, felt as if I heard a kind of crunching.^ " 
Mr. Topham "asked if that were painful? He replied ^ No pain at all; I never 
had any ; and knew nothing till I was awakened by that strong stuff' (the sal 
volatile)." Of course the moment he became sensible he must have lasted the 
sal volatile, and would fancy that it awoke him, and he must have continued to 
taste it for some time after he was awake. When mesmeric patients awake 
sponlaneously, they continually ascribe their waking to their first sensation, or 
even to something imagined. 

" The crunching no doubt was the sawing his own thigh bone." It is not 
uncommon for patients in the mesmeric coma, although insensible to mechanical 
causes of irritation, yet to hear more or less. As there are in mesmerism various 
degrees of insensibility to mechanical causes of irritation, from perfect to but 
slightly impaired sensibility, in different cases; sometimes in the same case at 
different mesmerisations ; and sometimes at different periods of the same mesmeri- 
sation ; and sometimes one part is insensible and another sensible: so there are 
various degrees of affection of hearing. In some cases patients hear not the 
loudest sounds; in others, they hear and answer questions; a'ud it is very common 
for them to hear well at one moment and appear perfectly deaf at another, as the 
mesmeric conditions fluctuate in intensity; and the slate of sensibility to mechani- 
cal causes of irritation and of hearing may bear no relation to each other. It 
would be wonderful were all this not to happen, since the very same observations 
hold in similar affections of a functional character independent of mesmerism. I 

\ ' 7 

have no doubt that the man did confusedly hear the sawing of the bone in his 
coma. 

" He was left easy and comfortable ; and still found so at nine o'clock that night : 
about which time" Mr. Topham "again mesmerised him (in a mmnte and three 
quarters) and he slept an hour and a half." 

Two days afterwards, when he was put into the mesmeric coma, Mr. -Topham 
proposed to Mr. Ward, who intended to dress the wound that day for the first 
time, to take this opportunity ; and the wound was accordingly dressed wilhout 
the man's knowledge, and therefore without the least pain. 

The man has done perfectly well. Within twenty-four hours after the opera- 
tion he was singing. In three weeks he sat up to dinner, " and had not a single 
bad symptom : none even of the nervous excitement, so frequently observed in 
patients who have undergone painful operations, and who have suffered much 
previous anxiety in making up their minds." 

Such was the artless tale ; beautifully true to nature in every incident, and at 
once recognised as pure truth by all who are not ignorant of mesmeric pheno- 
mena, or who do not unphilosophically allow unworthy feelings to supplant their 
judgment. 

\ 

V 

SECTION II. 

DETERMINA.TION OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL AND OHIRDRGICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON„ 
THAT THIS FACT WAS NOT A FACT. 

'* Whilst the unlearned were all busied in getting down to the bottom of the well, where I 
Truth keeps her litde court, were the learned in their way aa busy in pumping her up 
through the conduits of dialectic induction ; — they concerned themselves not wit/t facts, — 

THEV REASONED." 

" 'Tis above reason, cried the doctors on one side; 
'Tis below reason, cried the others. 
'Tis faith, cried one ; 
'Tis a fiddlestick, said the others. 
'Tis possible, cried one; 
'Tis impossible, said the others.'' 

Sterne. 

No sooner was this most interesting and important paper read, — the most in- 
teresting in a physiological point of view, and the most important as to the allevia- 
tion of suffering, that was ever brought before the society, than up rose Mr. CouL- 
SON, a surgeon practising in the city, anxious to distinguish himself as the leader 
of the opposition to mesmerism, and asserted that the paper ought never to have 
been read, for the only point of interest was the non-expression of pain, and that 
was a common thing, and he had no doubt ihe ma.n had been trained to it '. While \ i 
the paper was reading, he had turned round to one of the authors, as to a perfect J'.A 
stranger, without knowing him, as he has confessed to me, and said, " What 

(J d stuff this is :" so that his feelings were strong whatever was his judgment. 

Mr. Coulson has also confessed to me since the discussion, that he has never seen) 
a mesmeric fact and is quite ignorant nf mesmerism. What right therefore has 
bo not to believe that insensibility of touch can be induced by it, as those assert 
who have seen and practised it for years? Insensibility of all the five senses, or 
of one or more of them, is a common occurrence of disease. I will adduce, further 
on some striking cases, from the Transactions of this very society, of want of the 
sense of touch only, so that injuries were unfelt. What right then has he, totally 
ignorant as he is of mesmerism, to assert that the same conditions cannot be in- 
duced by the artificial processes of mesmerism] 

The only point of interest was the non-expression of pain ! It was not worthy 

8' 

of Mr. Coulson's attention, that the poor man before being mesmerised had not 
during three weeks slept more than two hours in seventy, but that after having 
been mesmerised three times, " lie slept seven hours without interruption ;' that 
after having been mesmerised about a dozen times a great change was remark- 
able in his appearance, " the hue of health returned, he became cheerful, kit 
7nuch stronger, was easier both in "mind and body, slept well, and recovered his 
appetite,"— that he looked "healthy and cheerful, his natural sleep was sound 
and regular, and his pain soothed and diminished ;" that the surgeon, Mr. Ward, 
after having been absent while Mr. Topham thus mesmerised him, declared " I 
was as much astonished as I was delighted, to observe the improved condition of 
the man ; he had now much more the hue of health, his nights were more tran- 
quil, his appetite had returned, and in fact such was his state that had I not 
known the previous history of the case, much doubt must have arisen in my 
mind as to the propriety of immediately amputating the limb." 

All this was beneath Mr. Coulson's consideration. The only point of interest 
was the non-expression of pain ! A friend, formerly a pupil of my own, Mr. Case 
of Fareham in Hampshire, thinking more rationally than Mr. Coulson of the 
facts of this case, determined to endeavour to render a woman, two and thirty 
years of age, insensible to pain previously to the amputation of a thumb, that had 
for some time been greatly diseased after an accident, resisting all treatment and 
severely injuring the constitution, which had long previously been in a state of 
debility and thus occasioned the bad condition of the thumb, that in its turn re- 
' fleeted injury on the constitution. But, after he had mesmerised her daily for ten 
days, the improvement teas so great that amputation appeared unnecessary, and 

I ,in a short time the thumb was absolutely welt, and her health improved so much 
that she declared she had never been so well and strong. The improvement of 
the general health, — the strength, the digestion, and the female functions, &c., 
from mesmerism is generally great, to say nothing of its power over various dis- 
eases, medical and surgical. A surgeon in Warwickshire, who was about to 
amputate a leg severely diseased, as in Mr. Ward's case, and, wishing to prevent 
pain, had been mesmerising the patient with the effect of such coma and insensi- 
bility in three minutes, that the man showed no pain and made no movement 
when goaded with a pin, when burnt with a hot iron, or when blazing sealing- 
wax was dropped and allowed to burn upon his limb, wrote, in a letter to Mr. 
Ward, — "as in your case, the man's health is wonderfully improved since mes- 
merising him." 

Then Mr. Coulson believed that the man had disciplined himself to bear pain 
without expressing his feelings. And what reason had he for all this credulity ? 
The poor man complained of great pain and could never bear any other than the 
sitting position for pain; had slept but for two hours in seventy during three 
weeks tor pain ; wa§ invariably awakened from his mesmeric sleep by violent 
pain; could not bear the "lightest covering" on his leg, when not in mesmeric 
coma, for pain; even shed tears from his intense agony; was greafly affected 
when the necessity of the operation was announced to him, and, in consequence, 
could not sleep that night, and the next day was fretting and restless; suffered, 
V the very morning of the operation, such anguish from the slightest movement 

\ that it was found impossible, without needless torture, to place him upon a table ; 

'■• and, on being drawn towards the toot of the bed with the bed-clothes under him 
for the convenience of the operator, such pain was produced that he awoke, — 
"There was something quite excruciating in the suffering which the state of the 
knee produced at this moment;" and immedediately before the operation he was 
considerably excited at hearing the cries of another patient who had just been 
operated upon in the next room. Truly he was well disciplined to bear pain! 
On waking from his mesmeric coma after the operation, he was filled with joy 
to find his anticipated sufferings were not to come, and exclaimed, not like a man 
who despised pain and was trained, " I bless the Lord to find it's all over!" Not 
bearing pain at all better on the day of the operation than when admitted into 

g 

tLe hospital; being, on llie contrary, very sensitive of pain, and irritable, lie is 
unhesitatingly pronounced by Mr. Cdiilson, without a shadow ot' grouml, Irom 
mere prejudice, ignorance, and want of penetration, to have been disciplined toj 
bear pain, — to he an impostor, and the barrister and surgeon to have been his' 
dupes or accomplices. Such folly is monstrous. 

Br. Moore, a physician-accoucheur, living in Saville Row, immediately fol- J 
lowed, and made no objections, hut protested, in a loud voice and rapid manner, 
that really such a statement ought to have been accompanied hy affidavits, and 
asked if affidavits before the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate had been 
made. Dr. Moore has the distinction of being the first person who, in a scien- 
tific society of gentlemen, required that the detail of philosophical experiments 
should be supported by affidavit. He had, hov;ever, equally forgotten himself 
last summer at the Phrenological Association, having been for some time in an 
incessant state of distressing morbid anti-mesmeric irritation, without knowing 
more of the subject than its unpopular name, and conducting himself precisely 
in the way in which he complains, as a phrenologist, that the medical profession 
conduct tiiemselves towards phrenology. When several gentlemen had related 
most curious e.xperiments in which, during the mesmeric state, individual cere- 
bral organs were at pleasure excited or stiipified mesmerically, he exclaimed that 
it was a very pretty thing indeed for gentlemen to come down and tell us that 
they had seen this and that. I replied that no experimenters could do more at a 
public discussion, or in writing, than detail their facts faithfully, and put others 
in the way of repeating their experiments : and he was at once put to silence for 
the night. 

Thus Dr. Moore made no objections, but called loudly for affidavits and then 
sat down again. No other notice was taken of this speech than to laugh at it. 

The next in eagerness to speak was Mr. Blake, a young surgeon. He iirijed i 
that this man shammed, because persons often bear operations without expre,s-ing! 
pain : and mentioned that he had seen a tooth extracted from a girl who was not,/ 
but pretended to be, in the mesmeric state, in University College Hospital, with- 
out ANY sign of pain, although she was strictly observed and even her pvlsc felt. 
Now he knew well formerly, for he was present as well as myself, that a friend 
of his, who counted her pulse during the extraction, declared to us all, truly or 
not I cannot of course say, that the pulse rose eight beats during the extraction. 

Another young surgeon named Alcock, followed in the same line of argument; 
not thinking that the absence of pain ever admitted of evidence, and di-credi;ing 
the reality of the case because he had often seen persons in an ordinary stale 
hear severe operations without manifesting the slightest pain. Now I do not be- 
lieve it. No doubt Mr. Alcock thinks he witnessed such self-comiinand ; but I 
do not believe he observed with sufficient minuteness. I, during a period equal 
to three years, while a student at the two hospitals of St. Thomas and Guy, saw 
a very large number of operations, as these were both great establishments and^ 
close to the river and in a very crowded district, as operations were then far more ' 
frequently resorted to than at present, and as Sir Astley Cooper was surgeon to 
one of them and his glory was to operate, and I do not know that 1 v^/as absent 
from a single operation. Yet I never witnessed such a prodigy as apparent lolal 
indifference to pain. I recollect a sailor astonishing .Sir Astley Cooper by not 
uttering the faintest sound while his leg was taken ofT: but the man folded his 
arms firmly together and his lips were jirmly compressed. No one will doubt the. 
high courage of the Marquess of Anglesey. While his log was amputated he 
uttered not a sound. A bystander, might have supposed that he felt no pain. 
But the brother officer, whose hand he held all the time, told a clergyman, a 
friend of mine, that he never had such a spueeze in his life. Some who have 
uttered no sound have held ttieir own tnigh during an amputation of the leg: 
but then they could give silent vent to their sulTerings hy squeezing the limb. 
Some, when under the surgeon's hand, keep their jaws or lips firmly closed, some 
sing, whistle, chatter, laugh, or smoke, all the time, and thus find relief. 1 knew 

10 

an old clerijyman wlio Ijad senile gangrene of a toe, to which Sir Astley Cooper 
frequently applied nitric acid, and he told me that, not liking to cry out and not 
being able to swear, he always relieved himself in his agony by spouting a sen- 
tence of the Philippics,— 1< atS^K 'Ae»M«/, &c. Savages, criminals, and martyrs 
in different causes, have in all ages borne torture bravely, defying pain. But 
then they have laughed, prayed, sung, talked, or performed some other muscular 

^ motion: or, although silent and still, would, I have no doubt, have betrayed to a 
good observer some sign of suffering or determination in their breathing, lips, 
closed jaws, or fixed look, — in acting strongly with some part of their body, li 
a man has held his hand in the fire,'he has'lield it firmly. Dr. Barnes, of Tavi- 
stock Place, who was acting surgeon at Macquarie Harbour during 1826 and 
1827, for nineteen months, infornis me that he saw in all 17,000 lashes given in 
that penal settlement. The whip had a wooden handle a foot in length, and nme 
lashes, each composed of two layers of whip-cord about a yard and a quarter long, 
with nine post-boy knots towards the end, and about two inches apart; the ex- 
treme point of each lash was made firm with waxed thread. The culprit was 
bound arms and legs to a post, and the number of each stroke called out by the 
chief constable before the lash fell, and about three per minute were given, so 
that a hundred lashes occupied a considerable time. Dr. Barnes assures me of 
what every rational man would anticipate, — that no good ever resulted from these 
disgusting, disgraceful barbarities. The spirit of the tortured person was broken, 
and he was rendered reckless tor ever. As it is a point of reputation with the 
convicts to appear to despise the torture, and numbers of them are the most 
daring, determined, and courageous of men, he continually witnessed the absence 
of all exclamation : but in every instance something was noticeable which dis- 
closed suffering or determination, — the shoulders were generally kept raised, 
showing the strong action of the surroundmg muscles, — or perhaps a bullet in 
the mouth was found afterwards flattened out to the thinness of a wafer by the 
action of the jaw. 

In an account which Dr. Barnes has kindly written for me of some of these 
cases, he remarks: "Although those men, tty a species of false pride, would 
endeavour to show what they termed a manly spirit, and bear unflinchingly that 
most dreadful torture, without calling out or making any demonstration of bodily 
suffering by the writhing of the trunk, limbs, or muscles of the countenance, — 
yet in every instance when punishment was inflicted, the culprit evidently pre- 
pared himself to bear up against it, by placing himself in a particular position; 
for instance, the hands grasped firmly the halberts, the back was curved and the 
shoulders were raised, the chest tvas emptied and the abdomen was drawn in- 
wards, the breathing icas short and the pulse quickened. 

"Thomas Hampden was Hogged in June, 1827; he received one hundred 
lashes, but did not evince any symptoms of pain ; yet the punishment was twice 

•• suspended during its infliction by my directions, in consequence of the appearance 

' of his countenance and the state of his pulse. Water was applied to his lips, 
t^ and, although he told the constable he did not require any, yet he drank greedily. 
^ . When the punishment was complete and the prisoner was released, he threw his 

I shirt carelessly over his shoulders and went to his barracks, and in a boasting 
manner said his back would not require the doctor; and in order to carry out his 
principles he went to his labour daily, without availing himself of the privilege 

' which the sick-list afforded of giving rest till his back was healed. . 

" This man, when in the hospital subsequently with fever, told me the torture 
produced by the lash was like boiling water poured constantly on the back; and 
that nothing but the fear of being derided by his fellow-convicts could prevent a 
man from showing his feelings." His sufferings were, however, shown by the 
signs of the determination necessary in all the instances to bear up under them. 
I do not believe that any person in an ordinary state could bear so severe an 
operation as amputation of the thigh without making some muscular effort visible 
to a good observer, or evidencing pain by a look, the condition of his lips or 

11 

breathing, or by something else inconsistent with the perfect motionless and 
universal relaxation, the perfect placidity of countenance, the perfect regularity 
of breathing, in short, the perfect absence of all expression, not to say of suffer- 
ing, but of delerminalion, — o( firmness, that was so remarkable in Wombell. 
His aspect, during the whole time, was that of a person in a sound and beauti- 
fully placid sleep, with the lips, I understand, slightly open : " the placid look of 
his countenance never changed for an instant; his whole frame rested uncon- 
trolled in perfect stillness and repose ; not a muscle or nerve was seen to twitch." 
The low moaning was, as I have already staled, not correspondent with the 
course of the operation, — did not occur with any relation to moments when this 
gave the greatest cause for pain, but seemed totally uninfluenced by the proceed- 
ings of the operator; and was not induced or increased even by the severe treat- 
ment of the end of the sciatic nerve. It gave all present the idea that the man 
was dreaming impleasantly. He made no boast afterwards that the pain had 
been nothing, — a very trifle to bear : but declared he had felt no pain at all, for 
he had not known that the operation was performing. His first exclamation, not 
made the moment he awoke, as if he had meant to say something striking, but 
after he had looked about in surprise, — a circumstance so in accordance with 
what mesmerists always observe when any change in external circumstances has 
occurred during the state of the patient, — was, " I bless the Lord to find it's all 
over," — an exclamation showing no disposition to make the bystanders believe 
he was a brave hand at bearing pain. Every thing, in short, proves the reality 
of the case to those who are not the prey of that cruel disease — prejudice. 

Suppose, however, that Mr. Alcock, or any of the opponents of the evening, 
had observed patients during operations with sufficient minuteness to know that 
they made no muscular effort whatever and showed no expression of pain or 
determination, but remained all the time in silence, as calmly breathing, as 
motionless and universally relaxed, with as equally unchanged a placidity of 
countenance, as this man, all that would amount to rrothing, unless, in addition 
to the operation, a pointed instrument had been roughly poked against the divided 
end of some large nerve and the same undisturbed state of the whole person had 
continued as in this man. The divided end of his sciatic nerve was not merely 
brushed roughly with a sponge, and pinched, but poked with the points of a for- 
ceps, and he gave no sign of suffering ! Not one opponent on the score of firm- 
ness all the evening alluded to this, any more than to the astonishing improve- 
ment in the man's sleep, and looks, and health, after being mesmerised ! 

Dr. James .Johnson, the reviewer, and another doctor whose name I hear was ' 
Truman, followed in the same strain with the preceding speakers. Dr. Johnson 
added that he would not have believed the facts mentioned in the paper had he 
witnessed them himself When a man has reached this point of intellect, the 
sooner he shuts his eyes and retires from this wondrous scene into utter darkness/ 
the better. Dr. Truman talked rapidly and confusedly against mesmerism with- 
out any argument and with a total ignorance of the subject, that led him into 
ridiculous "statements, whifh Mr. Symes corrected : he attempted to speak a 
second time in the course of the evening, and politely believed that the man was 
prepared for the occasion and designed as a great card by the mesmerists; but 
the meeting loudly refused to hear him. 

Dr. Marshall Hall, some years ago, when my Demonstrations went on at 
University College Hospital, called mesmerism " trumpery" that "polluted the 
temple of science ;"* and now, being, like all the other opponent speakers, totally 
ignorant of the suhject, and glorying in his ignorance, very consistently consi- 
dered the present case to be one of imposition, because the poor man's sound leg 
did not start or contract while the diseased leg was amputated! The case, he 
said, "proved ton much, or rather flatly contradicted itself" because the sound 
leg did not contract when the diseased one was cut. He asserted that, " in cases 

* Lectures in Webb-street, Borough— iance(, Oct. 28, 1837, p. 42. 

12 

of insensibility in brutes, from intercourse of any portion with the brain being 
stopped by division of the spinal cord, or from absolute decapitation, or from 
stunning: by a blow upon the head, such an injury of an insensible leg- as prick- 
ing it with any thing, laceratmg-, or cutting, — such an injury for instance as 
plunging a sharp instrument into the muscles," (f sat next to Dr. M. Hall and 
those were his very words), " invariably causes both legs to contract; and, unless 
man differs from all other animals, the same must take place in the human being; 
and, as this man did not move his other leg,— did not eriact the reflex motions, he 
was no physiologist." Had he been such a physiologist as Dr. Marshall Hall, 
and read about the refle.x motions, "he would have known better, and would 
have moved the other leg, — and enacted the reflex motions." The ignorant man ! 
Dr. Marshall's Hall's right leg would have moved most physiologically, if a sur- 
geon had plunged a knife into his left! It was very silly of the man not to allow 
his sound -leg to start, nor his diseased leg, nor any part of his frame. But a 
horse has been just as silly, just " as bad a physiologist," and has just as " flatly 
contradicted itself," by not " enacting the refle.v motions." " A horse was struck 
with the pole-axe over the anterior lobes of the brain. It fell instantly, as if 
struck with a thunder-bolt; it was convulsed, and then remained motionless. It 
shortly began to breathe, and continued to breathe freely by the diaphragm. 
When lacerated or pricked with a sharp pointed instrument, as a pin or nail, on 
any part of the face or surface of the body, it was totally motionles.--, manifesting 
no evidence of sensation or volition." In another account it is said, "deep lace- 
rations" of these parts produced no movement of any kind, nor any infliction on 
the skin by "a pin or other pointed instrument." Now this I quote against Dr. 
Marshall Hall on authority considered by Dr. Marshall Hall at least equal to any 
in the world, — equal to his own. But whose can this be 1 Can there be an 
authority equal to Dr. Marshall Hall'sl It is Dr. Marshall Hall himself!* Dr. 
Marshall Hall in print, against Dr. Mar.shall Hall in debate! Dr. Marshall Hall 
in print proving too much, or rather flatly contradicting Dr. Marshall Hall in 
debate ! But Dr. Marshall Hall in print is quite right. 

The other extremity may move, but it may not. I cut off the heads of some 
frogs, and, in the presence of Professor Wheatstone of King's College, Mr. At- 
kinson, Mr. Symes, and Mr. Wood, pinched the toes of one leg with the forceps; 
the leg contracted, but the other leg was slill. I repeated the experiment twenty 
times, and, in almost every instance, the same leg only contracted : once or twice 
the other leg contracted, but it was when general contractions of the whole mass 
of the frog took place. I repeatedly pinched the muscles of the thigh, a!id they 
alone contracted, the other extremity being invariably unaffected. Provoking 
frogs! Why did you not contract your other leg? Impostors! You little 
thought you " proved too much" — for Dr. Mar.shall Hall ; and yet you were but 
like some other unphysiological frogs. For Dr. Marshall Hall says that, if, when 
he divides the spinal cord in frogs just below the occiput, so that the creatures 
remain motionless, he then pricks or pinches the toes, " there is no movement at 
first, but soon distinct movements take place, and general retractions of the 
limi ! !" not limbs.f Mr. Ward states, in the Nottingham Journal for December 
30th of last year, in answer to a very silly letter by a young surgeon at Notting- 
ham, that he has made the same experimentwith the same result upon a rabbit. 
"Having knocked one rabbit down, it at first lay motionless, as if dead from 
the shock ; it then showed all signs of life by breathing tolerably freely. With 
a pin I deeply pricked first one limb and then the other — and invariably the one 
I pricked was retracted, the other lying motionless. Such results have followed 
other experiments." If, as many have asserted respecting the rogue whose leg 
was amputated by Mr. Ward, an inquiry were to be cautiously made, there can 

* On the Diseases and Derangements of the Nervous System, by Marshall Hall, M. D., F. R. S. 
p. S, 1841. Lectures on the Nervous Si/stem. By the same, p. 21. 
t On the Diseases, ^c. p. 6. 

13 

be no question that we should learn the rabbit's motives for not contractinsr its 
other leg. It no doubt had its reasons. It no doubt hoped for future favours from 
the surroundinjT nobility and gentry. It was no doubt well " trained," and its 
case *' designed as a great card by the mesmerists," It no c^oubt had been bribed. 
You little rogue, you little knew you were "proving too much" — for Dr. Mar- 
shall Hall, You were ignorantly quiet ; but were also spitefully quiet. Why 
did you not, like the wise young surgeon of Nottingham, stir for Dr. Marshall 
Hall 1 Malicious animal ! was it not enough that the mail's case proved too much 
— for Dr. Marshall Halll* And yet you were not so bad as one of Dr. Hall's 

* To expose the miserable shifts to which Dr. Mall condescends to have recourse rather 
than own himself wrong, 1 must state that Mr. Ward in his quotation from Dr. Hull's book, 
made by myself in the last page, omitted the words, "as a p'm or a nail," after the words, 
" when lacerated bij a sharp or pointed instrument," The question was not with whntsharp 
or pointed instrument the laceration was made, but whether the part was pricked or lacerated 
with a sharp or pointed in'stiujment. Of so little importance did Dr. Hall consider it that, 
in relating his experiments on the frogs, he employed neither a nad nor pin, but "pricked 
and pinched the toes with the^j-o6e or forceps." In the society he considered the experi- 
ment fairly made, when an amputating knife w as plunged into the thigh of the man operated 
upon." In another relation to the experiment upon the horse in another book, Dr. Hall, we 
have seen, is not particular about the instrument, but says "pin or other pointed instrument." 
Yet Dr. Hall published a letter in the Nottingham Journal for February 3, asserting that the 
apparent discrepancy between his written and oral statements of experiments arose entirely 
from Mr. Ward's omission of two words in quoting him. He most wilily does not say what 
the words are, so that one would suppose they were of great importance ; whereas tliey are 
not of the slightest, and in the sociery he spoke of any sort of wound of the insensible leg. 
In the next newspaper (February 10), Mr. Ward requests him to point out what words of 
importance were omitted. But Dr. Hall was again wily, and in a short letter to the editor 
did not pomt out the words, but merely repeated that there was the omission — a proceeding 
calculated to make an impression and screen himself He knows well that, if a laceration 
of the surface by a nail would not cause reflex motions, his as.^ertion in the society must fall 
to the ground ; and he does s.iy, in both the works already quoted, that deep lacerations, 
and therefore superficial ones also, for these cannot be avoided, with a nail in the struck 
horse, had no effect of any sort. He knew well that, in his printed nccounts, his purpose 
was to show that a laceration, a wound, a pinch, to produce the reflex motions, must be 
made on certain parts, for instance the toes, eyelids, and that a straw might suffice ; and that 
the other parts, for instance the body and portions of the extremities nearer the body, pos- 
sessed no such impressibility. Again ; in no part of his printed accounts does he recite any 
experiments with knives; all his experiments were made with pins, nails, probes, a forceps, 
or straws ; and thus, when it is pretended that, in saying the m.an's leg should have moved 
if man is not unlike every oilier animal, he meant because other animals moved when a 
palsied leg was cut with a knife, and that therefore Mr. Ward should have cut the rabbit's 
leg with a knife, I maintain that this is unfair — that Dr. Hall, referring to his own experi- 
ments, and never having used a knife, made the assertion in regard to simple wounding, — 
no matter with what sharp " instrument." 

Equally miserable is the attempt of the young Nottingham surgeon, in a second letter, 
equally silly, heartless and discreditable with the first. He declares that Mr. Ward's expe- 
riment does not bear upon the question, because this gentleman " deeply pricked" the mus- 
cles of a rabbit's leg, instead of making the experiment " upon the foot or upon some inci- 
dent nerve expanded on the foot," " muscular fibres having no incident nerves, and not re- 
flex or excito-motor, at all." Why. Dr. Marshall Hall considered iu the society that, when 
JMr. Ward plunged the knife into the muscles of the man's ^/; /:,'/(, just as Mr. Ward plunged 
the pin into the rabbit's thigh, the experiment was fairly made ; for he said that the man's 
other leg ought then to have moved. Besides, though the pin went deeply into the muscles, 
it pierced the surface first,- and not only was the skin, but the proper nerves of the reflex 
function, wounded by Mr. Ward, since rejkx motions actualh/ resulted from his pricking, 
though, unfortunately for Dr. Hall, in ordy the leg pricked ; — the "pin" used by Dr. Hall to 
lacerate the horse, without causing movements, and on which Dr. Hall and his young disci- 
ples would lay so much stress to explain the absence of movements, was used by Mr. Ward 
to prick the rabbit, and did cause movements, but unluckily in o)ib/ the pricked leg. The ex- 
periment was therefore perfect ; no matter what was the instrument, or what the part, — re- 
flex movements were produced, but only in one leg. I have however not only run a needle 
and a knife into the thighs and legs of headless frogs, and amputated them, without any ef- 
fect, but pinched the toes with a forceps, and yet the otherleg was almostalways motionless. 

Poor Mr. Wakley, not contented with the displays of medical science which he makes at 
inquests and which are the richest of my newspaper treats, yoes about telling persons not 
medical, with the most scientific air, that the case at Wellow was proved to be an imposi- 

14 

patients. You did move your pricked leg', though that only ; but a comatose 
patient into whose cheek, hand, and thigh, Dr. Hall ran a pin very deeply, he 
says, made not a single muscle move on either side.* 

I should have thought it more likely for the man's cut leg to have moved than 
the other. If Dr. Marshall Hall, after meditating upon his " retle.\" glories till 
he lost himself, and lay in his armchair in ecstasy, were to have his knuckles 
rapped, I engage to say that the hand rapped would be the one to move and be 
shaken in the air, and "enact the reflex motions," so that all the bystanders 
would see on which hand he was rapped. The poor man at Wellow made not 
the slightest movement oi either leg ! The operation was like an amputation on 
a powerless dead body. 

For the general reader, I will give a short account of the subject of movements 
produced by irritating animals whose heads have been cut off, or deprived of 
nervous communication with the portions irritated. 

In 1603, Boyle stated that the bodies of vipers, deprived of their head, would 
move on being irritated, j- Redi, an Italian physician, found, in 16S4, that, after 
cutting off the head of a tortoise, the legs moved whenever they were pricked. J 
Dr. Whytt, ihe justly celebrated physiologist and physician of Edinburgh, disco- 
vered, in 174.5, that, if the toes of the hind feet of a decapitated frog are irritated, 
after ten or fifteen minutes have elapsed subsequently to the decapitation, the 
feet are drawn up to the body; if one of the legs is pulled down from the body 
and kept e.xtended, no sooner are the toes of this foot wounded, than the leg is 
drawn up to the body as before:} "he also noticed that, though the muscles of 
the thigh were contracted when pricked or cut, neither they nor the neighbour- 
ing muscles were nearly so strongly convulsed as when the toes were wounded ;" 
and that, if the spinal chord of the decapitated frog is first destroyed with a red- 
hot wire, none of these effects result.|| He illustrates the subject by very nu- 
merous instances of movements so excited apparently without our will or con- 
sciousness, and he generalised the facts of the subject beautifully. Sir Gilbert 
Blanc, in 1788, cut off the heads or divided the spinal chords of kittens, and 
found their hind legs shrink from the touch of a hot wire applied to the hind 
paws; and the tail to move when irritated, even if the chord was divided below 
the last lumbar vertebra.^ In 1812, a French vivisector, Dr. Le Gallois, divided 
the trunk of a frog into transverse pieces, and found that each, as it possessed 
its portion of spinal chord, moved when irritated.** Nay, Dr. Macartney found 
that if the eye is taken out of an animal and light suddenly admitted upon its 
nerve of sensation — the retina, the iris contracts. jj- But, many years after 
Whytt, a German physician, named Prochaska, entered, in 1784, largely into 
the subject, and urged that there were nerves to receive and convey the impres- 
sion, and nerves to excite the consequent motion, and he termed this their ope- 
ration " the REFLEXION of sensory impressions into motor."}:[ Dr. Marshall Hall 
has taken up the subject with such eagerness, and written upon it so repeatedly 

tion by a scientific point : and yet. in the Lancel, for August 18, 1830, he published an inte- 
resting c.ise as genuine, on the authority of Dr. Imray, of fiis of catalepsy and insensibility, 
in one of which, during cupping, the spirits of wine ran about the young lady's necls and 
caught fire, without any movement occurring to indicate there was sensation or Tejlex 
function ! 

* Lancet, Feb. 10. 1833. p. G85. 

T Viipfnljiess of Aaturul Philonophi/. Part ii. Essay i. 1663. 

X Ot'ftervazioni inlurno af;li animalt viventl, p. 210. 1684. 

S^ Observations on Irritability. Sect. iv. Fart 4. 

II Same book, sec. ii. 

IT Select Dissertations, p. 262. 1822. 

** Sur le Principe de la Vie. 

Tt Report ff the third meeting of the British Association, 1834 p. 53. 

tt Conwienlatin lie Fiinctionibns Sijstematis Nervosi, cap. iv. printed 1784. Opera minora, 
pars. li. Vienna. 1800. He even points out the portion of the nervous system whicii he con- 
ceives to receive and then reflect the impression to the muscles ; viz., the oblong and all the 
spinal marrow, and the crura and thalamiof the brain, p. 153. 

15 

after his first publication in 1833,* that, in his ludicrously uncontrollable and ne- 
ver flaorrring appetite for notoriety, he would have the world believe him to be a 
discoverer in the subject, has passed over (as in the case of Prochaslta, till he 
was exposed) or been most unjust to his predecessors, has made incorrect state- 
ments, and, though he has the merit of forcinrr attention to the subject, he 1ms 
succeeded in forcing far more to himself, comparing himself at last to Harvey, 
who, in his disgust with the world, would not have given his manuscript on 
Generation to it, but for being entreated by Ent to forgive it and not to deprive 
it of what would be useful — when he benevolently relented. f The following 

* Philosophical 1 ransactions, 1833. 

t Those who are desirous will see a full exposure of Dr. Marshall Hall's false claims and 
injustice to other authors, in the London Medical Gazette for April 7, 14, 21, 28, and May 5, 
and Lancet for April 28, 1838. Mr. Mayo, who has devoted great attention to the nerves, 
thus expresses his opinion of Dr. Marshall Hall's claims on the subject: "Dr. Marshall Hall 
has given the good name of reflex function to this circle of impression and action, and has 
added one or two additional facts in illustration of the principle." The Nervous Sifsfem and 
its Functions, p. 50, 1842. As to the good name, we see that Prochaska had called the ope- 
ration "the reflexion of sensory impression into motor." p. 154-5-6-7. All these statements 
gratify me as confirming the opinion to which I painfully and dispassionately came whnn 
studying the subject for the part of my Human Physiologij whxch i puhlished in 1837, p. 495 
and following. " Now really the whole truth appears lo be what is well known, that an 
impression made upon any nerve of sensation, or, what is the same thing, upon any part 
endowed with sensibility, may induce action of any voluntary muscles calculated to remove 
it if disagreeable, or to be useful in some way to the individual, even though the brain be 
prevented from perceiving the impression, — from having a sensation from the impression. 
The impression need not be upon nerves running to the part of the encephalo-spinal organs, 
where the roots lie, of the motor nerves excited, for a sharp pinch of the toe will not merely 
make a man draw away his foot, but raise his arms, make a face and halloo into the bargain, 
whether he is asleep or awake. Tickling the sentient twigs of the fifth pair, the eyelid, and 
cornea, is not requisite to cause winking; if by the optic nerve, one not included in Dr. M. 
Hall's excito-motory class, we see a finger suddenly approach the eye, instinctive, involun- 
tary winking will as certainly occur. Winking will occur if a strong light is suddenly ad- 
mitted through the lids to the retina of a person asleep. The sun's glare upon the retina 
will excite sneezing. Not only are sneezing, vomiting, sobbing, mentioned as acts of this 
system, but even deglutition, which is declared always to be of this nature, and aJuays to 
require the ()resence of some stimulus to the sensible nerves of the pharynx, it being ' im- 
possible to perform the act of swallowing three or four times in rapid succession, without 
takmg something into (he mouth.' Now if deglutition is always ajj excited act, — to use this 
gentleman's peculiar language, — is always produced involuntarily by an impression on the 
pharynx, it must be as impossible once or twice, without taking something into the mouth, 
as three or four times, and slowly as rapidly. 1 however can swallow with nothing in my 
mouth in rapid succession, as readily as with something, and above fifty limes : that is to 
say, till the muscles are fatigued. If swallowing is instinctive when any thing reaches the 
pharynx, so is the act of opening the mouth when a sugar-plum is offered to the eyes of a 
baby: and indeed the various movements of the extremities, head, and trunk, which natu- 
rally are performed on various circumstances presenting themselves, are just as instinctive; 
and we have only to observe the movements of other animals, especially of those most like 
ourselves, and above all of monkeys, to see how instinctive our voluntary actions are when 
we are most apt to regard them as determined by our reflection. We contract all voluntary 
muscles either simply because we think proper, as when ive cough at the request of another, 
oi* because a strong motive is given, as when we withdraw the hand from anything hot; 
and the latter is only such an instance as swallowing, coughing, winking, <S;c., when food is 
in the pharynx, phlegm in the larynx, or strong light in the eyes. Certain sensations excite 
a certain desire and this may be too strong for us to overcome. But according to the 
strength of mind will be the resistance to the strength of the desire induced by the sensation. 
Some actions result from certain sensations only, and we can neither perform some without 
these sensations, nor when these sensations exist find it possible not to yield to the desire. 
With some deglutition is not an act of this kind. But sneezing is with all. I never knew a 
person able to sneeze at pleasure. To be induced to will sneezing we must have a certain 
sensation. If our attention is drawn to something else, though the irritating cause act, we 
do not feet the sensation and do not sneeze. If the sensation is felt forcibly, the impulse 
may be loo strong for us to resist, and sneezing will be involuntary: and we can bring our- 
selves to sneeze by attending closely to the sensation, and by increasing it. I have often 
amused myself by looking more or less at the sun. or thinking more or less of tickling felt at 
the moment in the nostrils, and so increasing and lessening the inclination to sneeze. Wiih- 
out the sensation and a certain amount of it, the sneezing no more than venereal convulsion 

16 

passage from Sir Gilbert Blane's Select Disserlations, p. 262, printed in 1822, 
should be seen by those unread persons who vaunt his pretensions. "There are 
facts which show that instinctive actions, even in animals endowed with brain 
and nerves, do not depend on sensation : I took a live kitten, a few days old, and 
divided the spinal marrow, by cutting it across the neck. The hind paws being 
then irritated by pricking them, and by touching them with a hot wire, the mus- 
cles belonging to the posierior extremities were thrown into irritation, so as to 
produce a"shrTnking from the injury; the same effects were observed in another 
kitten, after the head was entirely separated from the body. In repeating this 
e.xperiment, I found that when the spinal marrow was cut through between the 
lumbar vertebrse, and os sacrum, the posterior extremities lost their irritability, 
but the part below it— the tail, retained it." " In an acephalous monster, the 
like phenomena were observable. It moved up its knees when the toes of its 
feet were tickled; it performed the act of suction; passed urine and ffeces and 
sv.'allovvcd food." Let any one read Dr. Hall's paper in the Philosophical Trans- 
actions, above ten years afterwards, when all this is printed as original, without 
a single allusion to the names of Prochaska or Blane, and consider which was 
the greater, Dr. Hall's boldness in sending the paper, or the council's in print- 
ing it. 

But after all, Dr. Marshall Hal! entirely mistakes the nature of the man's case. 
The man's head had not been struck nor his spinal chord divided. The stunned 
horse, the divided frogs, were paralysed solely because the former's brain was 
overpowered, and the lotter's wounded and pinched extremity had lost its com- 
munication with the brain. But paralysis, insensibility, and loss of voluntary 
motion may arise not only from inability in the brain to receive impressions 
brought to it or to will movement, or from the communication between it and 
parts impressed or parts to be moved being interrupted, but may arise also from 
the ;jar/s </ie»!.seZiies being incapacitated, however capable and entire the brain 
and Its lines of communication may remain. If the ]>art itself is incapacitated, 
not only cannot the brain obtain a sensation from it or excite a movement in it, 
but impressions cannot be made upon it by pricking or lacerating or cutting, so 
that Dr. Marshall Hall would in vain prick, lacerate, cut, or stab it, — it would 
not " enact the reflex motions." This is the case when the nerves in a part are 
palsied by cold, or opium, or disease. The brain and spinal chord may be af- 
fected at the same time; but that is not necessary, for the incapacity of the part 
itself prevents both sensation and voluntary motion, and likewi.«e impression and 
reflex motion. Now this was the man's state : but Dr. Marshall Hall, glorying 
to remain ignorant of mesmerism, did not know it. Even the exposed muscular 
fibres of the patient quivered "less than usual;" nor was there the ordinary 
amount of retraction of the muscles when divided: and, as the man had no 
power to impose in these two points, Dr. Hall and the rest who speak of imposi- 
tion mu.~t with reference to them charge Mr. Ward the narrator with fabrication. 
The stupefaction of mesmerism may not be in the brain or chord only, but in the 
individual parts; just like the stupefaction from exposure to cold which may 
stupify the brain, but, besides this, stupifies each part. The mesmeriser may 

of the ejaculaiores. tal;e9 place. At the same lime ihe facts Jiscovered by Whyit and others 
show a connection between motion and impression independent of the brain. 13ut this is 
probably intended lo assist Ihe wiM in evening motions on the occurrence of impressions on 
individual parts; and the impression may be so strong that the will may be compelled to de- 
lermine the motion, and tins compulsion will be according to the strenetb of the impression 
and Ihe weakness of opposing motives and of the resolution to resist the inclination. Nay, 
these facts .show that motion will occur when the brain i.s removed and there can be no sen- 
sation. Yet when the brain exists and in heallhy force, that the will docs co-operate with 
this local excitement of nerves of voluntary motion by those of sensation, when we might 
not be dl>pnsed to believe it. appears from the curious facts mentioned at pages 486—491, 
showing that sensations may occur, and the will may be exercised, almost unconsciously! 
While the brain exists and the system is in healih, these motions do not occur without wilh 
or without sensation should the will be overpowered." 

17 

suspend or restore not only one or more of the individual five senses, but also the 
sense of touch in individual parts, — in an arm, a leg, or a finger. More than 
this; he retnoves or restores not only feeling, but the simple senseless impressi- 
bility by which, if even the head is cut off, an irritation of an extremity causes it 
to move, — causes the reflex function, or "reflexion of sensory impressions into 
motor," to use Prochaska's two words, to be performed. He can locally suspend 
them all, as cold, or poison, or disease can locally suspend them all. This was 
the stale of the man. He was in a sleep more or less sound, and more or less 
extensive through his brain; but his nerves of feeling and will, and his nerves 
also of common impression and automatic motion, or, in other words, his common 
reflex or excitomotory nerves and their expansions were also asleep or stupified; 
and therefore there could be no such movements as Dr. Marshall Hall expected, 
any more than if the chord or nerves had been disorganized. But because there 
were none, because things did not happen according to Dr. Hall's notions, nature 
was wrong, not Dr. Hall; the man was an impostor, not Dr. Hall's fancies un- 
founded. When the Strasburg doctors disputed on the stranger's nose, — 

'"Nature accommodates herself to emergencies,' cried the opponents, ' else 
what do you say to the case of but half a man, when both his legs have been un- 
fortunately shot offV 

'He dies of a plethora,' said they, 'or must spit blood ; and in a fortnight or 
three weeks goes off in a consumption.' 

'It happens otherwise,' replied the opponents. 

'It ought not,'' said they."* 

Dr. Marshall Hall's error, — the error of ignorance, but of wilful ignorance, — 
was in supposing that the alleged insensibility and motionlessness of the mes- 
meric state resulted from merely the coma. Nay, these may take place without 
any coma whatever, the person remaining wide awake. In many patients who 
have been fully mesmerised on former occasions, you may affect an arm or a leg, 
causing it to become insensible, motionless, perhaps rigid, unimpressionable to 
pinching, pricking, and cutting; and without mesmerising the brain. Dr. Mar- 
shall Hall, while the paper was read, had just heard that local effects without 
mesmerising the brain could be produced in this man. "I then showed them," 
says Mr. Topham, " my power of affecting any one of his limbs, even when 
he was quite awake. At my request, he extended his arms alternately. By 
making two or three passes over each, without any contact, they became as rigid 
and unyielding as bars of iron, not to be unbent except by mechanical force 
powerful enough to injure the limbs ; and yet, instantly relaxing throughout, and 
dropping to his side, from the effect of my breath alone. His right leg was af- 
fected in the same degree; and immediate relief from pain was frequently af- 
forded by making similar passes over the diseased one." 

I suppose that, had not the blind foes of mesmerism learnt this reflex operation 
from Whytt, and second-hand from others, they would have accused every poor 
decapitated frog of some kind of imposition upon its moving when pinched. Their 
ignorance would have been its crime. 

Mr. Travers, who was present but said nothing, could have related an instance 
in which he made Dr. Marshall Hall's experiment of pricking with a sharp in- 
strument upon a man whose hands had lost their feeling. At The request of Dr. 
Yelloly he pricked the sensible skin of the ball of the thumb with a lancet-shaped 
couching needle, down to the bone, with no result whatever: no feeling, no 
starting of the other hand, or of the same hand, took place. 

But 1 will give the particulars of the case published by this very Medical and 
Chirurgical Society, in 181'2,t when Sir Astley Cooper, Sir Walter Farquhar, 
Sir Henry Haltbrd, Sir Everard Home, Drs. Baillie, Bateman, Birkbeck, Marcet, 
Pcmberton, Roget, Saunders, and Yelloly, and Messrs. Abernethy and Cline, se- 
lected papers for publication. It is detailed by Dr. Yelloly, and occurred— 

* Sterne. ''' Yol. iii. page 90, and following. 

18 

" In a Jamaica planter, 58 years nld, whose mind and muscular frame were 
unimpaired, but whose hands up to the wrists, and the feet half way up the leg, 
were perfectly insensible to any species of injury, or culling, "pinching, scratch- 
ing, or burning. He accidentally put one of his feet into boiling water, but was 
no otherwise aware of the high temperature than by finding the whole surface a 
complete blister on removing it. No species of injury to a vesicated part, ot 
either hands or feet, was felt by liim. The extremities were insensible to elec- 
tric sparks taken in every variety of mode. The cubital nerve, where it passes 
the elbow communicated the sensation produced by pressure or a blow only half 
way down the fore-arm." " On putting his hand, at the desire of a friend, into a 
pail of hot grains, which hi.s friend assured him were not too hot, and, to con- 
vince him of this, previously thrust his hand and arm into it, there was a very 
extensive vesication produced. His hands were never free from blisteis, which 
he got by inadvertently putting them too near the fire; and he had met with 
several severe burns without being aware of it. No degree of pressure was felt 
by him." To ascertain whether the flesh as well as the surface was insensible, 
Mr. Travers passed a lancet-shaped couching needle into the ball of tlie thumb, 
down to the bone. " Not Ihe least degree of pain, or even of sensation was 
produced." (Neither did the other thumb start and contract, as Dr. Marshall 
Hall should think it ought, since he thinks VVombell's other leg ought to have 
moved.) 

A case follows of a lady, about 40 years old, who had " been deprived for more 
than two years of the power of sensation in her iiands and feet. She was insen- 
sible to the effects of cutting instruments or of burning coals applied to them. In 
one instance, when she was employed in shaping a piece of wood with a knife, 
she incautiously turned her eyes on some other object, and cut off the end of the 
thumb of her left hand without perceiving the smallest sense of pain." (Nor did 
the other thumb start and contract any more than the poor man's sound leg when 
Mr. Ward cut off the diseased. This gentleman and lady were as had as, or 
worse, than Mr. Tophain's poor man, because from their superior station they 
should have known better than to sham antiphysiological facts.) "Although 
eleclricity produced very considerable contractions in the muscles of her arms 
down to her wrists, the effects of it in her hands were scarcely perceptible. After 
two oi three days, however, she imagined that she was sensible of some kind of 
sensation from strong shocks," 

One of the Okeys, during her mesmeric state of ecstatic delirium, though pos- 
sessing full power in all her muscles, was insensible to mechanical injury, burn- 
ing, and electricity. The cylinders of the electro-magnetic machine Were held 
in her hand any length of time, while the wheel was turned as rapidly as pos- 
sible, without any evidence of the slightest sensation, though no one else could 
hold them for more than some seconds. She received the charge of a large Ley- 
den vial, and no effect was noticed. When asked what she felt, she answered 
in Ihe former instance, " I heard it go giggle, giggle, giggle ;" and in the latter' 
"I saw the light." At the Adelaide Gallery I put the'^iiands of a female in a 
state of sleep-waking, who had not been there before, upon the electrical eel near 
the head and tail, and she took no notice, though I felt a very slio-ht movement 
of her arms, which nobody else could remark. Now the shock of'^he eel made 
very many jump. When I was not present, I know for certain that she received 
at once the charge of six Leyden jars, each sixteen inches high and eio-ht wide 
wiihout evidencing sensation. But, because the condition of Elizabelii Okev' 
and of this young woman was induced by mesmerism, it was feianed ; as thouoh 
there was more evidence of reality, or could be more evidence of reality in the 
other cases than in these. 

A third case is annexed, taken from the Philosophie Zoolngique of Lamark 
■ "^.1"='" '![„^'^,.>"'i"'" "'' «Sf^', '^="' '0'" 'oiTteen years the right arm completeiv 
insensible. 1 he limb, nevertheless, preserved its activity, size, and power On 
the accident occurrmg of a boil uoon it, there were heat, swelling, and redness 

19 

produced in the parts, but no pain, even when it was pressed. Durinn- his work, 
he happened to break (lie bones of liis fbre-arni, at about a third their length 
from the wrist. As he only felt a crash (craquement)," {crunching of the im- 
postor !) "he thought he had only broken the shovel he had in his hand; but it 
was sound, and he could only discover his accident by being unable to continue 
his work. The following day, the arm, at the fractured part, was puffed up; the 
temperature of the fore-arm and hand was increased, but the patient experienced 
no degree of pain, even during the extension necessary to reduce the fracture." 

Now in these cases published by this very Medical and Chirurgical Society, 
when things calculated to make a strong impression were applied to one e.'ctre- 
mity, not a word is said about the other starting; and of course neither the one 
nor the other started, or it would have struck the patients and the bystanders, 
and have been mentioned and regarded as a proof that the patients felt. No 
" reflex movements" were " enacted." 

The society believes these cases; but refuses belief when the loss of impressi- 
bility occurs in the mesmeric state! insensibility and unimpressibility are then 
impossible, and proofs of imposture ! proofs that mesmerism is untrue ; and Sir 
Benjamin Brodie, as I shall presently tell, comes down to the society, sneers at 
the poor man and the gentlemen who witnessed the facts, and tlien walks out of 
the room in perfect satisfaction with his own sagacity and authority. 

IVIr. Wood, who had assisted at iVIr. Ward's amputation, vouched for the accu- 
racy of the whole account of it, and urged that all the proof possible in such a 
case was afforded, — the absence of all sign of pain and resistance to the expres- 
sion of pain, and the patient's declaration that he had felt no pain. What more 
proof was there in the cases just extracted from the Transactions of the Society 1 
None. And the society admitted the reality of those cases without hesitation. 

Mr. Listen, also, who, with his whole set to which he belongs, has hitherto 
scoffed at mesmerism as humbug and mesmerists as tom-fools, could, according 
to Mr. Wakely, have related an experiment which he made, like Mr. Travers, 
to test a case of similar insensibility, — and a case still more similar to mesmeric 
cases, in as far as the insensibility was not permanent but occasional, and united 
with catalepsy. The Lancet for May 22, 1830, gives a report of a clinical lec- 
ture, delivered in the University of Edinburgh, by Dr. Duncan, upon the case 
of a young woman who had for a short time been subject to seizures of perfect 
insensibility and catalepsy; " her limbs, on the application of force, yielded" no 
more readily, however, than lead would, " in whatever direction they were bent ; 
and, when the force was withdrawn, remaining motionless and without tremor, 
like bars of lead, in whatever position they were placed, no matter how painful 
under ordinary circumstances, or how contrary to the ordinary laws of gravita- 
tion." The poor creature's case was perfectly real ; but, because some were so 
ignorant of medical science as to be unacquainted with the features of such an 
affection, she was suspected of imposition. 

The following is Mr. Wakley's report of Dr. Duncan's account of the expe- 
riment: " We cannot avoid noticing, and we do so with feelings of the most 
unmixed disgust, an unmanly, wanton, and barbarous experiment, practised on 
this unfortunate patient by an individual, unconnected, we are happy to add, with 
the department of clinical medicine" (as distinguished from clinical surgery). 
"It will scarcely be credited, but nevertheless it is strictly true, that during a 
paroxysm of insensibility, the person to whom we allude, tore with his nails two 
separate pieces of skin from the hand of the patient. She was not aware of the 
cruel and unwarrantable experiment at the time, but she felt the effects in the 
intervals very acutely. It is satisfactory, however, to know that but one feeling 
of the most unequivocal reprobation pervaded teachers and pupils at this inhuman 
and unprofessional act." Dr. Duncan hints only that it was a surgeon. Mr. 
Wakley declares the surgeon was Mr. Liston; for, in the index is this reference 
to the two pages in which the experiment is related : — 

" Liston, Mr., inhuman experiment by, pp. 278. 281." 

20 

Vet it is impossible not to think the statement erroneous, because Mr. Wakley 
and Mr. Lislon are now inseparable friends, and Mr. Wakley has placed his son 
under Mr. Listen. There, however, stands the accusation in the mdex to Lancet 
May 2d, 1830, p. 278, vol. 18. 

In this variation of Mr. Travers's experiment, the injury being committed by 
laceration with the nail, instead of pricking to the bone with a strong needle, 
there was no starting of the other hand, nor of the same hand ; had such a thing 
happened, it would have been gladly proclaimed by the tender experimenter, if 
Mr. Listen was the perpetrator, (and for that we have only Mr. Wakley's asser- 
tion,) for 1 read the case, with Dr. Duncan's remarks, aloud, from my Human 
Physiology, p. 47, and he was silting on an adjoining bench, but opened not his 
mouth. Nay, Mr. Listen himself describes a case in the Edinburgh Medical 
and Surgical Journal for April 1829, of a gentleman, a patient of his own, who 
lost his sense of touch over nearly the whole surface of the body, so that he could 
feel with nothing but his mouth, though he walked and talked, and heard, and 
saw, and enjoyed life; and also through the deep-seated muscles, tendons, and 
ligaments, so that, when Mr. Liston cut away one of the bones of his foot, he 
"felt no pain whatever,^' and he added, " nor would I now, I am convinced, were 
you to dissect the whole foot." Not only did the limb operated upon not move, 
but the other evidently was unmoved likewise. Mr. Liston ought to have men- 
tioned this feet in the society, and now ought to tell it to Mr. Wakley. If such 
things take place without mesmerism, experience can only settle whether they 
may take place through mesmerism. They may. 

But in the insensibility of a perfect fit of epilepsy, when at its highest inten- 
sity, we have the same insusceptibility of pain, — the patient may be scratched, 
pricked, pinched, cut, even in the hands, something sharp be thrust under his 
nail, and yet no sign of feeling will appear, — the limb will not move; nor will 
the opposite limb, even to please Dr. Marshall Hall : and yet in perhaps five 
minutes, the state shall have passed, — the patient be susceptible of all impres- 
sions and perfectly himself again. 

Dr. Marshall Hall continued to display his want of information. " What," he 
argued, "said the patient ■! Why that he heard the sawing of the thigh bone 
which is unendowed with sensibility ; but he was insensible to the contusion of 
the sciatic nerve whose sensibility is extreme. What physiologist could believe 
such an absurdity's" Now I should think that an impostor would have said 
nothing about having heard any sound, — would have said nothing about havinc 
"once felt as if he heard a kind of crunching," which words were what he really 
did say, for he uttered nothing about either bone or sawing. He would have 
declared he had positively heard, — known, nothing. Neither would an impostor 
have shown he had any hearing by always waking on any attempt to converse 
with him ; but would have always pretended to be as deaf as a post. Yet he 
always awoke by attempts to t;onverse with him, whereas he did not awake when 
pricked or violently pinched, even in his diseased leg, which in his wakin^ state 
" could not bear the lightest covering to rest upon it." An impostor would not 
have always shammed so very stupidly. Yet thefe points struck none of the 
objectors: or at least were not alluded to. The objectors were too dull, or too 
wily, or too much hurried by their passions, to reflect soberly. As a lecturing 
physician. Dr. Marshall Hall should have known that, in those extraordinary 
cases of somnambulism which nobody disputes, and which have been seen in all 
ages and countries, and are not very uncommon, and are independent of mes- 
merism, though the person be asleep, his eyes perhaps shut, his breathing heavy, 
and his head occasionally nodding, he will go about and do many thino-s and do 
them well,— work, write, compose, may feel, may be awakened by cold air or 
water, and yet hear nothing, not even the firing of a pistol ; and that on the 
other hand, he may bear pinching and pricking without sensation, and yet hear 
and converse with you, perhaps hear far more acutely than when awake- in 
short, that, the sleep being partial,— aflfecting some nerves and Bome cerebral 

21 

orjjan or organs, and not others, and affecting in various degrees those it does 
affect, there is an endless variety of phenomena. 

In common coma, of the deeper kind and fatal, the patient may feel acutely, 
though otherwise completely insensible. I was sent for a short time ago to a 
patient who was a medical man and in this very condition. Unfortimately it 
was the afternoon and I was out, so that I did not see him ; but Dr. Barnes, who 
kindly supplied me with the facts of the convicts, has furnished me with the par- 
ticulars. The patient was thirty-two years of age, was accidently knocked down 
on the head with a bar of iron in Regent Street while returning from a surgeon 
who had passed an instrument up the urethra, which operation was followed as he 
went home by a flow of blood. Ischuria ensued, and coma, which after twenty- 
four hours terminated his existence. "The pulse ceased to be felt at the wrist 
twenty hours before death; at that time and continuously till he died, a very 
copious perspiration bedewed the whole body — the hands and feet were icy cold. 
About two hours before dissolution the temperature of these parts rose conside- 
rably ; the pupil was now slightly dilated and the tunica conjunctiva became 
infiltrated with a dark fluid, giving a peculiar carbonaceous appearance to the 
white part of the eyes: there was no urine in the bladder. The most remarka- 
ble feature in this case was the extraordinary sensibility of the entire surface of 
the body to very slight external impressions; the parts most so were the lower 
extremities. Now, although the patient xoas perfectly unconscious of passing 
events, he could not be roused in the slightest degree by speaking loud or by 
bawling in the ears, he was unable to swallow the smallest particle of food, he 
had stertorous breathing ; yet, if the hand was placed over his thigh, (even on 
the outside of the bed-clothes,) and the part gently squeezed, the muscles of the 
countenance would immediately contract and betray intense agony, and a most 
piteous groan would escape his lips at the same time. This condition continued 
to increase until he died. The sensibility was seemingly as great a few minutes 
before he died as it was some hours before: so extraordinary was this morbid 
sensibility, that to attempt to turn the individual in bed, — to elevate his head on 
the pillow, or to touch the surface of the body on any part, appeared to excite the 
greatest possible torture. I remained with this individual twelve hours before 
his demise, and continued to witness this phenomenon at least fifty times." 

Mr. Carstairs of Sheffield informs me that, in several instances of deep mes- 
meric coma induced by him, the person has heard the slightest whisper, inau- 
dible to the bystanders, and some of the other senses, particularly that of smell, 
have also been rendered more acute than in the natural stale. 

Dr. Hall should have known that mesmerism produces no phenomenon that 
does not occur in nervous affections without mesmerism, as I often stated in the 
theatre of University College Hospital, but that it does produce all the most 
wonderful phenomena of all affections of every portion of the nervous system; 
and that the torpor or somnambulism or sleep-waking, which it produces, is that 
which occurs in trances, as the deepest form of singular sleep, with very mode- 
rate cerebral activity, at one extreme, and that of persons in e,\latic delirium at 
the other, in which most of the faculties are very active, many perhaps far more 
active than when in the natural state, and only some faculties torpid, and these 
perhaps but partially torpid, so that, while the patient may be very talkative, 
clever, and facetious, he may be divested of his usual proper reserve and even of 
all sense of propriety and really be in a new waking state. I shall in the next 
chapter detail cases of surgical operations in which the patients, in this peculiar 
sleep felt nothing, and conversed all the time with the operator. I purpose to 
enter more fully upon the curious subject of sleep-waking when controverting 
Sir Benjamin Brodie. 

Dr. George Burrows expressed his doubts of the reality of the case because 
of the man saying he fancied he heard something in his sleep. He would not 
have found any difficulty had he made himself acquainted with the subject of 
sleep-waking, whether spontaneous or mesmeric, as he and every other teacher 
should have done long ago. 

22 

Another surgeon now rose, — Sir Benjamin Brodie, — whom I never saw in 
the society before except during his period of presidency, and who, soon after he 
had spoken wliat he came to say, seemed to consider that he had settled the 
matter, and left before the close of the meeting and before I could reply to him. 
Like all the opponents of the evening he entirely passed over the comfortable 
nights, the return of the appetite, and the improved appearance of the poor man 
by mesmerism. He used the argument of the other surgeons, Messrs. Coulson, 
Blake, and Alcock. My answer to it I need not repeat. But he did more : he 
supplied a defect of which I have complained,— the want of reference to a case 
in which, as in this, a nerve was probed ; for he described a case brought up in 
that respect to an equality with the present, and he at the same time most sin- 
gularly supplied a strong argument against himself and his coadjutors. He 
related an instance of operation for hernia, — an operation not to be compared for 
pain to the amputation of a thigh, — in which his patient evinced no sign of feel- 
ing, though I have no doubt a minute observer, not engaged*in operating, would 
have discovered some;* the surgeon was therefore tempted to test him, and 
touched the divided end of a small nerve which happened to be exposed, — a nerve 
probably at the most but one-eighth of the size of the great sciatic nerve touched 
so freely in the man whose leg was amputated. Of course I expected to hear 
that, like the man at Wellovv. this patient still gave no signs of feeling. But he 
did, — he instantly gave signs of acute pain ! This was not the hit of a sagacious 
opponent. Sir Benjamin Brodie deserves and has my best thanks for making this 
case known, and arguing so well for the insensibility of the poor man at Wellovv. 
His next argument was, that some people really do not seem susceptible of 
pain ;— cannot in fact be made, or scarcely be made, to understand what pain is. 
Sir Thomas Hardy, he added, was one of these. I hear it doubted whether Sir 
B. Brodie has sufficient ground for this assertion. But this is altogether unim- 
portant, for the poor man at Welloiv was susceptible of pain. He could bear his 
pain ill no other than a sitting posture ; had slept before he was mesmerised but 
two hours in seventy from his pain; would shed tears from his pain ; could not 
bear except in the mesmeric state the slightest covering on his knee for his pain ; 
and was awakened, even from mesmeric coma when this was not deepened by 
the fingers held on the eyes, by the slightest movement of the extremity. This 
argument was therefore good for nothing. But it told, as well as the preceding, 
for the insensibility of the man in his mesmeric state. 

He further urged that patients worn down with suflTering (so that he now re- 
membered that the poor inan knew what pain was) sometimes became hysterical 
and more or less insensible. But this patient was not hysterical; and sufTered 
acutely to the last, even while being moved for the operation. This argument 
therefore falls with the rest. 

He allowed after all that the man was in a peculiar state. Of what he meant 

I have no idea, except that the man was in an hysterical insensible state, which 

was not the fact. That he was in a peculiar and insensible state when under 

the agency of mesmerism is very true and for what we contend. 

! When he had seen Mr. Chenevix, fourteen years ago, mesmerise a little girl 

I into coma, and was asked by that gentleman, " Do you think this girl really and 

I truly .slept"!" he replied, "I do, and very soundly too:" and when asked, "Do 

you think she went to sleep of herself out of pleasure or desire, or by means of 

what you saw rne do 1" he replied, " Certainly by means of what you did." These 

means he compared to rocking.f Now, if he allowed this, he might, thouirh 

stationary in his knowledge (or fourteen years, allow that the poor nian at Wel- 

\ low was asleep by Mr. Topham's means. His explanation of the mesmeric sleep 

^ reminds me of the explanation given by some people of the shocks of the elec- 

* It is said on very good authority tliat this patipnt was Dr. Holland, and that he de-lares 
he did feel pretty acutely, but cotjcealed it as much as possible by not cryinff out Whether 
ornot this IS true is unimportant. 

t London Medical and Physical Journal. Sept. 1829. p. 214. 

23 

trical fish, tlie torpedo. The facts were at first denied, and, when they could be 
denied no longer, some would not allow there was any electricity in the matter, 
but explained them by the animal giving a sudden blow with its broad back, first 
drawn flat and then suddenly restored to its usual convexity. Tliis explanation 
was so clear — "hinc clarum est,'" that Marrher says* that Reaumur, the explainer, 
"arcanum deprekendit." And now we obtain electric sparks from electric fi.sh, 
and the sceptics exist no longer. 

He said that the case before the society was the companion of one, equally an 
imposture, which occurred -149 years ago, and was published by the Royal So- 
ciety in the ■24th vol. of their Philosophical Transactions, in 1706. He informed 
the meeting that a man at Tinsbury, near Bath, pretended to sleep for weeks and 
even months; and once on waking could not be persuaded he had slept so long, 
"till going into the Fields he found every body busy in getting in their Harvest, 
and he remembered very well when he went to sleep they were sowing of Barley 
and Oats, which he then saw ripe and fit to be cut down." This, lold with a 
smirk, as an impudent trick, raised a roar of laughter in the room, and was with- 
out hesitation received by the meeting on Sir Benjamin's authority as a case of 
imposture; the members not appearing sufficiently learned in the Philosophical 
Transactions to know the case which, however, 1 related in my Physiology, and 
not as an imposture, many years a^o. He proceeded to state that in this pre- 
tended sleep the man was bled, blistered, cupped and scarified, but all in vain: 
— the impostor still slept, bore it all unmoved, and gave no sin-n of pain. Nay, 
the man was so barefaced that, though bread and cheese and beer placed by his 
bedside regularly disappeared, and evacuations regularly appeared in the utensil, 
nobody ever saw him eat or evacuate. He was therefore decidedly an impostor; 
and, as he was an impostor, the patient at Wellow was an impostor, and all mes- 
merism is false. A rogue shams an epileptic fit in the streets, therefore all epi- 
leptic people are impostors, and there is no such disease as epilepsy. Soldiers 
and sailors sham rheumatic pains and palsied limbs, therefore there are no such 
diseases as palsy or rheumatism. 

But Sir Benjamin Brodie gave an entirely false colouring to the case. The 
man was indeed, for periods, not seen eating, probably because he ate all his food 
at once, possibly when he employed tlie utensil, and because he might, being no 
doubt aware of the presence of others, like most sleep-wakers, though ignorant 
on awaking of every thing that had passed, have an antipathy to eat as well as 
to evicuate when others were present or stirring about the hou>e; just as often 
occurs in insanity, for in the sleep-waking state the activity of brain that does 
occur is generally attended with some peculiarity of the feelings: and, indeed, 
if the acts of eating and employing the utensil were continuous with him, there 
would be a sufficient reason for his selecting periods fijr eating when he was un- 
disturbed. But, nevertheless, he tvas sometimes found taking his victuals and 
relieving himself in his sleep. The narration runs thus: — '^ Sometimes Uiey 
have found him fast asleep with the Pot in his Hand in Bed, and sometimes with 
his Mouth flill of Meat." Again, — "In this manner he lay till the 19th of Nov., 
when his Mother hearing him make a noise ran immediately up to him, and found 
him Eating." Again, he did not always eat and evacuate with regularity, as Sir 
Benjamin "Brodie represented: — "In this manner he lay fiar about ten weeks, 
and then could eat nothing at all, for his Jaws seemed to be set, and his teeth 
clenched so close, that with all the art they had with their Instruments they 
could not open his Mouth, to put anything into it to support him. At last, 
observing a hole made in his Teeth, by holding a Pipe in his Mouth, as most 
great Smokers usually have, they through a Quill, poured some Tent into hi.s 
Throat now and then, and this loas all he took for six weeks and four days, and 
of that not above three pints or two quarts, some of which was spilt too ; he 
made water but once and never had a stool all that time.'' \ 

* Pr(rlectioncs in Hcrvianni Boerhaavii InstiUUioncs, turn. iii. p. 76. 

24 

The narrator, Dr. Oliver, F.R.S., a physician of high etandingf, an F.R.S. 
in days when the fellowship was not so common as at present, did not pronounce 
the man an impostor as Sir Benjamin Brodip so fearlessly does. " I have no 
room," he says, " to suspect this to be any Cheat, because I never heard of any 
gain to the liimily by it, though so near the Bath, and so many people went 
thither out of curiosity to see the Sleeper, who, when awake, was a support to big 
old mother by his labour, but now a certain charge to her. Besides, there was 
seldom any tody in the house to attend any profit that might be made by it, he 
being left alone in the house and every body at liberty to go up to his bedside." 
Indeed, the old mother was so far from deserving the charge of collusion with her 
son that, being as ignorant of his disease as Sir B. Brodie, she at first believed 
his sleep was only sulkiness or " sullen humour," and placed food at his bedside 
lest he should be starved. How, indeed, could Dr. Oliver for a moment have 
thought the man an impostor! For to pass over the scarifyings and various ex- 
ternal irritations, hollowing his name in his ears repeatedly and as loudly as pos- 
sible; pulling him by his shoulders; pinching his nose; and stopping his nose 
and mouth till Dr. Oliver feared he might choke the man ; running " a large 
pin into his arm to the very bone, but all to no purpose, for in all this time he 
gave (me) not the least signal of his being sensible," Dr. Oliver held a. phial of 
solution of ammonia under one of the man's nostrils A considerable time, so 
strong that he himself" could not bear it under his own nose a moment without 
making his eyes water ; but he felt it not at all. Then," continues Dr. Oliver, 
" I threio it, at several times, up that some nostril, it made his nose run and 
gleet, and his Eyelids shiver and tremble a very little, and this was all the effect 
J found, though I poured up into one nostril about half an ounce bottle of this 
fiery spirit, which vvas as strong almost as fire itself Fmding no success with 
this neither, 1 crammed that nostril with poioder of white hellebore," " but he 
never gave any token that he felt what I had done, nor discovered any manner 
of uneasiness by moving or stirring any one part of his body." " Yet, the next 
day his nose was inflamed and swelled very much, and his lips and the inside of 
his right nostril blistered and scabby with my spirit and hellebore." Nay, wish- 
ing to renjove him to another house, they carried him "down stairs, which were 
somewhat narrow, and struck his head against a stone, and gave him a severe 
knock, which broke his head, but he never moved any more at it than a dead 
man would." This accident was an equally strong test with the applications of 
ammonia and hellebore, for it was violent and unexpected; and they, altogether, 
were tests which Sir B. Brodie never saw an impostor bear, and \\h\c\\ he passed 
over in silence. Educated as he was for surgery, and occupied as he all his lifo 
has been with the mechanical matters of the profession, Sir Benjamin Brodie 
must be pardoned for not appreciating and understanding this case; but, I do 
not pardon him for omitting some of its most decisive proofs of insensibility, nor 
for declaring that the man was never seen to eat and was therefore a cheat, nor 
for presuming to understand a form of disease of which he knows nothing. What 
deception did the man attempt when his food "very regularly" disappeared, once 
daily or every two days, and evacuations appeared "very regularly" in the 
utensil? Did the man intend his mother to believe that the latter were supplied 
by any one but himself? If he had meditated something wonderful in this way, 
he would have prevented all signs of such matters; and that he could easily have 
done, as he vvas generally left alone in the house, while his mother worked out 
of doors. Bui, as these circumstances were not calculated to impose, so impos- 
ture was not suspected from them. The food at his bedside, in his first paro.xysm 
of sleep, " was spent every day, and, supposed, by him ;" in the second paro.\ysm, 
victiiaUi stood by him as before, which lie ate of now and then, " but nobody ever 
sav/ him eat or ev.icuate, though he did both very regularly as he had occasion." 
In fact, all suspicion of imposition is preposterous. We have a simple, aitless, 
natural narration of a case of sleep-waking, bearing upon itself the very stamp of 
truth to the eyes of every well informed physician. 

25 ' 

The changes which occurred at different limes were highly characteristic of 
these more rare affections. After his first paroxysm of sleep he was dumb for a 
whole month. During the first fortnight of his second paroxysm of sleep he 
would open his eyes, but afterwards he did not; — a likely thing tliat a man 
feigning sleep would ever lie with his eyes open, or open them from lime to 
lime ! At one period he ceased to ent and evacuate: his jaws closed, and neither 
food put at his bedside disappeared, nor did an alvine evacuation appear in liis 
utensil for six weeks and four days, though once he made water. At another 
period, when he was called on by his name " he seemed to hear Ihem and be 
somewhat sensible, though he could not make them any answer;" — was this 
likely in a man feigning absolute slecpl His eyes were not now shut so close, 
and he had frequent great tremblings of his eyelids: — a probable thing this, that 
he would have kept his eyes constantly in this irksome state of movement when 
sleep would have been better shammed by keeping them closed ! The country- 
man could never have devised all these little circumstances which praciitioners, 
who have seen as many cases of this description as I now have, recognise at once 
as striking peculiarities of such affections. It is worthy of notice that the man 
was so inveterate a smoker as to have "a hole made in his teeth, by holding his 
pipe in his mouth," yet, by sleeping thus, first in 1694 for a month, then in 1696 
for seventeen weeks, and then in 1697 for six months with the exception of a 
few minutes once, he deprived himself of what must have been an indispensable 
pleasure. 

On waking from his sleep of seventeen weeks, so far from wishing it to be be- 
lieved, he could not easily be brought to believe it himself till he saw the oats 
and barley ripe which were sowing when he saw the fields last. 

1 should say that a more beautifully genuine case of sleep-waking in which 
coma predominated never occurred. When Sir Benjamin Brodie sat down, Mr. 
Symes pointed out to him and the meeting the true nature of the case — that it 
was an instance of sleep-waking, with double consciousness, the man being in a 
sleep, generally profound, but sometimes with sufficient activity of the sleeping 
brain to enable him to do certain things — eat, drink, and evacuate, in all these 
actions voluntarily administering to himself, but not remembering one of them 
on awaking. In some instances of this peculiar sleep, there is from time to time 
more activity than he showed, so that persons walk, talk, write and work, nay, 
they may do some things better than when awake, though the sleep continues 
and they be insensible to mechanical injury, and snore; and in most instances, 
as in the present case, nothing is afterwards remembered, and the period passed 
in this sleep-waking state is as a separate e,xislence. Sometimes the coma ig 
profound and little or no activity of biajn is discernible; sometimes there is no 
coma but great activity of the mind, as a separate period of existence, the cha- 
racter or ways of the person being more or less different from those habitual, and 
entirely forgotten when the brain passes again into its natural state : and between 
these two extremes are endless gradations of activity in the various cerebral 
faculties. Sleep-waking is the most appropriate title, as it comprehends all ac- 
tions that may be performed ; though the word somnambulism is often loosely 
employed, which strictly applies to those cases in which the patient walks. 
When the coma is profound the second term waking is hardly appropriate; and 
when there is no coma the first term sleep is hardly appropriate, and extatic de- 
lirium should rather be the designation. But, as a generic denomination, the 
expression sleep-waking is very convenient and characteristic. Extatic deli- 
rium was the wild, and, to a philosophic observer, deeply interesting, state in 
which the Okeys were usually seen when not in a profound coma or in their na- 
tural condition. 

This class of affections are most wonderful and absolutely rivet the attention 
of a thoughtful man ; and their varieties are great and beautiful, though beauti- 
fully similar to each other. But too often medical men are lamentably ignorant 
of them, and, when they have an interesting case of this kind, regard it only as 

26 

a strange piece of business, and are at a loss what to do, and so torment and 
physic the patient without mercy, and think no more about it ; or perhaps, to save 
meditation, declare it was all imposition. The records of medicine supply a suf- 
ficient number: and, now that by mesmerism we know how to produce them 
artificially, no medical man is pardonable who does not make himself well ac- 
quainted with them. Ignorance of these wonderful spontaneous cases has caused 
much false and cruel accusation. I have known young children treated as liars, 
as naughty, as odd children, and youth and grown up per.-ons vilified as impos- 
tors, by their families and instructors, and chiefly by medical attendants, because 
they fell occasionally into a state of sleep-waking, of the modification Icimed ex- 
tatic delirium, during which, though not strong enough to strike every one as 
delirium, their conduct differed from what was habitual and proper; or because 
after an unsuspected paro.vysm, one in which no extravagance had been commit- 
ted, tliey denied all knowledge of what they were told they had said or done. 
An instance occurred of a gentleman so seized while in a box at the theatre, 
and losing all knowledge of his situation and preparing to perform a private act, 
nothing of which he remembered when taken before a magistrate. A striking 
case of this kind has lately been seen by me in the Middlesex Hospital. Dr. 
Wilson, under whose care the patient was and who to his honour linows and 
boldly declares the truth of mesmerism, was from this knowledge able to recog- 
nise the case: but some uninformed and spiteful person about the Hospital wrote 
to the lady who kindly interests herself in the poor boy that his only complaint 
was temper, and a medical whisper has reached me that the case is an imposition. 
The boy, who, in his natural state, is very respectful and particular in his be- 
haviour, is very regardless of both persons and places in his delirium, sings with 
great feeling, and recites with capital power of i.niitation, and eats most vora- 
ciously, and his writing is a great curiosity, — quite different from his habitual 
writing, and blotted all over. I unhesitatingly declare the case to be as real as 
the boy's existence, and should never have been tired of studying it. The cnse 
was drawn up and sent to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society hy Dr. 
Wilson, in IVovember, under the title of a case of double consciousness, and a 
notice affixed in the library that it would be read. But, when the members, 
having declared that the history of the amputation, being mesmeric, had disgraced 
them, learned that this case was analosrous to mesmeric cases, they actually took 
down the notice, gave half a hint to Dr. Wilson that he might withdraw the 
paper, a report went about that the boy shammed, and the paper was not read till 
three hours before March. I am told that Mr. Bransby Cooper would not believe 
the occurrence of such cases, and therefore said that the boy should have had a 
good thrashing, which would soon have cured him. Such a state of things is 
really lamentable. Let Mr. Bransby Cooper study the diseases of the nervous 
system before he condemns his fellow-creatures thus. Let him read a similar 
case of a girl sixteen years old, in the Edinlmrgh Philosophical Transactions, 
for 1822, and detailed in my Physiology, p. 365, who, because she recollected in 
her natural state nothing that occurred in the diseased, was treated in the most 
depraved manner; and one still more remarkable that occurred in a little oirl in 
America, and is printed by Dr. Belden, under the title of An Account of^ Jane 
Rider, the Springfield Somnambidist, a copv of which I deposited in theLibrary 
of the Society. His flogging of the poor afflicted boy would be the counterpart 
of the tearing the hand of the poor girl in the Edinburgh Infirmary with the other 
surgeon's nails. Thrash the poor boy ! The conduct and manners of the two 
Okeys m their preternatural state were perfectly diflferent from all that was ob- 
served m them when not in this state. They were totally ismorant of all perjons, 
thmgs, nnmes, and circumstances, with which they had become acquainted pre- 
viously: they knew neither their father nor mother, nor the meanino- of the 
words father and mother: forgetting the meaning of almost every temi, they 
learnt all the improper language so constantly used in the wards of hospitals, and 
irreverently swore and called bad names, and misapplied words, and were readily 

27 

taught to misapply them, without being aware of impropriety,— and the ignorant 
portion of tlie medical periodical press crnelly made fnn of this : they had to learn 
every thing atroth : they would have enormous muscular power: they mimicked 
exquisitely, and had a strong propensity to mimickry and humour, so that they 
were absurdly thought by those ignorant of particular cerebral faculties being 
often highly augmented in such cases, whether spontaneously or mesuierically 
induced, by Mr. Wakley for example, to have been trained and practised impos- 
tors, whereas not a single mesmeric phenomenon ever witnessed by any person 
in them was unreal. The cases of both sisters were genuine throughout, smiilar 
but very differently modified, and it was ignorance only which led any one to 
doubt them, and it was heartless cruelty to slander two perfectly virtuous and 
afflicted female cliildren, who had been carefully brought up and had lived only 
with their parents and afterwards in a respectable family till they were seized 
with epilepsy. Not merely the Editor of the Lancet knew no better, but the 
Editors of other Medical Journals; and the display of disreputable unacquaintance 
with this kind of case, and the composition of vulgar tirades by so many profes- 
sional men pretending to medical knowledge, was precisely the conduct which 
we witness in the streets when a deranged or imbecile person is pursued and 
hooted by boys and rabble, as though he were master of his own condition and 
conduct, and not the subject of an affliction profoundly interesting to the philoso- 
pher and to the man who can feel for others. Every thing stated or ever printed 
to their disadvantage was an absolute falsehood ; 1 repeat these words emphati- 
cally, an absolute falsehood. They are both cured of the violent fits for which 
they had been long in the hospital, and the reality of which no one had doubted, 
and for which I at length mesmerised them. One is already respectably married 
to a young man in her own station of life, and a mother; the other lives with 
her parents and supports herself by doing needlework for a neighbouring estab- 
lishment. 

Like the boy in the Middlesex Hospital, the sleep-waker at Tinsbury, from 
whose case I have digressed, was at first supposed, and that by his mother, to be 
only in a "sullen humour:" though at last she saw the truth and for some time 
would suffer no one to come near to him for fear of more experiments upon her 
son, — a likely thing if the case had been shammed for profit! But the sagacious 
physician saw it was no imposture. The Royal Society were equally rational, 
and the president. Sir Isaac Newton, October 27, 1721, put his imprimatur to 
the volume of the Abridgement of the Philosophical Transactions, containing 
the narrative at full length, by Sir Hans Sloane, which would not have been the 
case had there been any suspicion of imposition. Indeed, I never heard before of 
the case being suspected by any one. I have given a pretty full account of the 
wonders of sleep-waking in my Humayi Physiology. Beginning with natural 
sleep, I pass to dreams, and then to that higher activity of the sleeping brain, 
termed Somnambulism or Sleep-walking, or more correctly sleep-waking ; from 
p. 598 to 660 inclusively ; and I likewise devote 66 pages to Mesmerism, and 
print the leading features of the cases of the Okcys. 

I will now extract the whole narrative of the case near Bath: — 

" A Relation of an extraordinary Sleepy Person, at Tinsbury near Bath. By 
Dr. William Oliver, F.R.S., May the 13lh, anno 1694. 

One Samuel Chilton, of Tinsbury near Bath, a Labourer, about 25 years of 
age, of a robust habit of body, not fat, but fleshy, and a dark brown hair, happened, 
without any visible cause or evident sign, to fall into a very profound sleep, out 
of which no art used by those that were near him could rouse him, till after a 
month's time; then rose of himself, put on his clothes, and went about his busi- 
ness of Husbandry as usual; slept, could eat and drink as before, but spake not 
one word till about a month after. All the time he slept Victuals stood by hini; 
his Mother fearing he would be starved in that sullen humour, as she thought it, 
put bread and cheese and small beer before him, which was spent every day, and 
supposed by hini, though no one ever saw him eat or drink all that time. 

28 

From this time he remained free of any drowsiness or sleepiness till about 
the 9th of April, 1696, and then fell into his Sleeping Fit again just as he 
did before. After some days, they were prevailed with to try what effect 
medicines might have on him, and accordingly one Mr. Gibs, a very able 
Apothecary of Bath went to him, bled, blistered, cupped and scarified him, and 
used all the external irritating medicines he could think on, but all to no purpose, 
— nothing of all these making any manner of impression on him ; and after 
the first fortnight he was never observed to open his eyes. Victuals stood by 
him as before, which he eat of now and then, but nobody ever saw him eat or 
evacuate, though he did both very regularly as he had occasion; and sometimes 
they have found him fast asleep with the pot in his hand in bed, and sometimes 
with his mouth full of meat. In this manner lie lay for about ten weeks, and 
then could eat nothing at all, for his jaws seemed to be set, and his teeth clenched 
so close, that with all the art they had with their instruments they could not open 
his mouth to put any thing into it to support him. At last, observing a hole 
made in his teeth, by holding his pipe in his Mouth, as most great Smoakers usu- 
ally have, they through a quill poured some Tent into his Throat now and then. 
And this was all he took for six weeks and four days, and of that not above three 
pints or two quarts, some of which was spilt too; he had made water but once, 
and never had a stool all that time. 

August the 7th, which is seventeen weeks from the 9th of April (when he 
began to sleep), he awaked, put on his Clothes, and walked about the Room, not 
knowing he had slept above a night; nor could he be persuaded he had lain so 
long, till going out into the fields he found everybody busy in getting in their 
Harvest, and he remembered very well when he fell asleep they were sowing of 
Barley and Oats, which he then saw ripe and fit to be cut down. 

There was one thing observable, that though his Flesh was somewhat wasted 
with so long lying in Bed, and fasting for above six weeks, yet a worthy Gentle- 
man his Neighbour assured me, when he saw him, which was the first day of his 
coming abroad, he looked brisker than he ever saw him in his life before; and 
asking him whether the Bed had not made him sore, he assured him and every 
body, that he neither found that, nor any other inconveniency at all; and that he 
had not the least remembrance of any thing that passed or was done to him all 
that while. So he fell again to his husbandry as he used to do, and remained 
well from that time till August the 17th, Ajino 1697, when in the morning he 
complained of a shivering and coldness in his Back, vomited once or twice, and 
that same day fell into his Sleeping fit again. 

Being then at Bath, and hearing of it, I took horse on the 23d, to inform my- 
self of a matter-of-fact I thought so strange. When I came to the House, I was 
by the Neighbours (for there was nobody at home at that time besides the sick 
man) brought to his Bedside, when I found him asleep, as I had been told before, 
with a Cup of Beer and a piece of Bread and Cheese upon a Stool by his Bed 
within his reach. I took him by the Hand, felt his Pulse, which was at that time 
very regular; I put my Hand on his Breast, and found his Heart beat very re- 
gular too, and his breatliing was easie and free; and all the fault I found was, 
that I thought his Pulse beat a little too strong. He was in a breathing Sweat, 
and had an agreeable warmth all over his Body. I then put my Mouth to his 
Ear, and as loud as I could called him by his name several times, pulled him by 
the Shoulders, pinched his Nose, stopped his Mouth and Nose too-ether, as lonu 
as I durst for fear of Choaking him, but all to no purpose, for in all this time he 
gave me not the least signal of being sensible. I lifted up his Eye-lids, and 
found his Eye-balls drawn up under his Eye-brows, and fixt without any motion 
at all. Being bafiled with all these tryals, I was resolved to see what effects 
Spirit of Sal Armoniac would have, which I had brought with me, to discover 
the Cheat, if it had been one; so I held my vial under one Nostril a considerable 
time, which being drawn from Quick-lime, was a very piercing Spirit, and so 
strong, I could not bear it under my own Nose a moment without makin<T mv 
Eyes water; but he felt it not at all. Then, I threw it at several times up that 

29 

same Nostril, it made his Nose run and gleet, and his Eye-lids shiver and tremble 
a very little, and this was all the effect I found, though I poured up into one 
Noslril about a half-ounce Bottle of this fiery Spirit, which was as strong almost 
as Fire itself Finding no success with this neither, I crammed that Nostril with 
Powder of White Hellebore, which I had by me, in order to make my farther 
tryals; and I can hardly think any Impostor could ever be insensible ot what I 
did. I tarried some time afterwards in the Room to see what effects all together 
might have upon him ; but he never gave any token that he felt what I had done, 
nor discovered any manner of uneasiness, by moving or stirring any one part of 
his Body that I could observe. Having made these my Experiments I left him, 
being pretty well satisfied he was really asleep, and no sullen counterfeit, as 
some people thought him. 

Upon my return to Bath, and relating what I had observed, and what proofs 
this Fellow had given me of his Sleeping, a great many Gentlemen went out to 
see him, as I had done, to satisfy their Curiosity, in a Rarity of that Nature, who 
found him in the same condition I had letl him in the day before, only his Nose 
was inflamed and swelled very much, and his Lips and the inside of his Right 
Noslril blistered and scabby with my Spirit and Hellebore, which I had plentifully 
dosed him with the day before. His Mother upon this for some time after would 
Eufier nobody to come near him, for fear of more E.\periments upon her Son. 
About ten days afler I had been with him, Mr. Woolmer, an experienced Apo- 
thecary at Balh, called at the House, being near Tinsbury, went up into the 
Room, finding his Pulse pretty high, as I had done, takes out his Laiincet, lets 
him Blood about fourteen ounces in the Arm, tyes his Arm up again, nobody 
being in the House, and leaves him as he found him; and he assured me he never 
made the least motion in the world when he prickt him, nor all the while his 
Arm was bleeding. 

Several other Experiments were made by those that went to see him every 
day from the Bath, but all to no purpose, as they told me on their return; I saV7 
him myself again the latter end of September, and found him just in the same 
posture, lying in his Bed, but removed from the House where he was before about 
a furlong or more: and they told me, when they removed him, by accident, car- 
rying him down Stairs which were somewhat narrow they struck his Head against 
a Stone, and gave him a severe Knock, which broke his Head, but he never 
moved any more at it than a dead man would. I found now his Pulse was not 
quite so strong, nor had he any Sweats as when I saw him before. I tryed him 
again the second time, by stopping his Nose and Mouth, but to no purpose ; and 
a Gentleman then with me ran a large Pin into his Arm to the very Bone, but 
he gave us no manner of tokens of his being sensible of any thing we did to him. 
In all this time they assured me nobody had seen him either eat or drink, though 
they endeavoured it all they could, but it always stood by him, and they observed 
sometimes once a day, sometimes once in two days, all was gone. 'Tis farther 
observable, he never fouled his Bed, but did his necessary occasions always in 
the Pot. 

In this manner he lay till the 19th of November, when his mother hearing him 
make a noise, ran immediately up to him, and found him Eating; she ask'd him 
how he did! He said, Very well, thank God. She ask'd him again. Which he 
liked best, Bread and Butter, or Bread and Cheese'! He answered, Broad and 
Cheese. Upon this the poor Woman overjoyed left him to acquaint his Brother 
with it, and they came straight up into the Chamber to discourse him, but found 
him as fast asleep again as ever, and all the Art they had could not wake him. 
From this time to the end of January or the beginning of February (for I could 
not learn from any body the very day) he slept not so profoundly as before, for 
when they called him by his name, he seemed to hear them and be somewhat 
sensible, though he could not make them any answer. His Eyes were not now 
shut so close, and he had frequently great tremblings of his Eye-lids, upon which 
they expected every day when he would wake, which happened not till about the 

30 

timo just now mention'd, and then he wak'd perfectly well, not remembering 
anythin<T thai happened all this while. 'Twas observed he was very little altered 
in his Flesh: only complained the Cold pincht him more than usually, and so 
presently fell to Husbandry as at other times. 

I have no reason to suspect this to be any Cheat, because I never heard ot any 
gain In the Family by it, though so near the Ba{h, and so many People went 
thither out of Curiosity to see the Sleeper, who when awake was a support to his 
old Mother by his Labour, but now a certain charge to her. Besides, there was 
seldom any body in the House to attend any profit might be made by it; he 
beiniT left alone in the House, and every body at liberty to go up to his Bedside. 

The case at Wellow was, I allow with Sir Benjamin Brodie, a companion to 
this case; not however a companion in imposture, but in the condition of the 
nervous system. I will now present another companion, seen by myself: since 
the occurrence of any similar morbid phenomena — just as of the phenomena of 
mesmerism — at different periods, in diflt;rent places, in persons of different ranks, 
and in persons who could never have heard of each other, is alone a very strong 
confirmation of the reality of those morbid phenomena — a reality, however, which 
ordinary sagacity, unclouded by prejudice and temper, cannot fail of discovering. 

On the 9th of August, 1840, I was requested by Dr. Arnott, who, unlike men 
of far inferior intellect and attainment, has witnessed my mesmeric phenomena 
fiftv times and is as satisfied as myself of the truth of mesmerism, to visit, with 
him, a Spanish lady of consideration, about 40 years of age, who had married at 
14, miscarried every three months for two years, and then had a child, and after- 
wards a second. Soon after the birth of the second and up to the time I saw her 

a period of above twenty years, she was subject to fits of sleep, which often 

lasted three weeks, during the whole of which she would swallow nothing but a 
little water. The fits of sleep would come on suddenly, and she was once seized 
at the opera. They would cease as suddenly, so that she often on waking went 
to the opera. In them she was insensible to light and all noise but the voice of 
her infant. Dr. Gregory the second, of Edinburgh, habitually mentioned in his 
lectures, when 1 was his pupil, the case of a cataleptic lady whom he attended, 
and whose disease had been induced by misfortunes very similar to the history 
of Isabella in the Fatal Marriage; and in her paroxysms of insensibility she ap- 
peared perfectly blind, except when her baby was brought near her, and then 
she gave slight signs of recognising it. Had the peculiar conditions of these 
ladies been induced artificially by mesmerism, the doctors would have pronounced 
them at once most shameless impostors, feigning insensibility, but not able to 
carry it on where maternal feelings were too strong for them. The same phe- 
nomenon is often witne.=sed in mesmerism. I have had several cases, in persons 
of both sexes, and of high and humble rank, of perfect deafness in the mesmeric 
state, except to the voice of the mesmeriser or a noise made by him. 

Like the boy stigmatised by Sir Benjamin Brodie as an impostor, the Spanish 
lady, in her fits of sleep, would relieve her bowels, and she rose out of bed for 
this purpose, and even performed the usual subsequent act: though in one pa- 
roxysm the call of nature was unheeded by her, and an immense collection of 
hardened matters took place. 

She was insensible to mechanical injury — pinching, pricking, &e., but not to 
cold; and this again is a common fact in mesmerism. I have patients at this 
moment who give no sign of feeling, however you pinch them, but withdraw the 
hand instantly that a cold body touches or even is brought near to it. The lady 
was, on the other hand, fond of cold, for, if ice were given her, she would sit up 
in bed, smell at it, and appear to like it. 

When I visited her, she was in an attack. I found her eyes firmly closed and 
her upper extremities rigid, not yielding to an attempt to move them, and her 
hands placed up against her face. I blew in her face, and her eyelids corru- 
gated the first time, but did not upon repetition. I understand that at 11 P. M. 
the rigidity regularly ceased and she sunk completely relaxed into a deep sleep. 

31 

How analogous, how identical, will not every one, familiar with the state arti- 
ficially induced by mesmerism, recognise these phenomena to he with those of 
mesmeric patients! 

The attacks had become less frequent of late and shorter, continnino- a week 
only: but the present had lasted ten days, and Dr. Arnott informed me tiiat when 
he called the next day she was still asleep. Headache preceded the first attack, 
and often continued and tormented her. The present attack was ascribed to 
improper food. The atHicted lady was tired of her disease, and wished for death. 
I recommended mesmerism as an almost certain cure, if properly and persever- 
ingly employed ; but did not visit her again as she was about to leave England 
immediately. It was lucky for her character that she was not a patient in the 
University College, or, as it was formerly called, North London, Hospital; that 
neither iVIr. Wakley, nor the Edinburgh surgical experimenter of whom he 
writes, was allowed to see her ; and that her case was not described to the Royal 
Medical and Chirurgical Society of London. 

Sir Benjamin Brodie, after agreeing with Dr. Marshall Hall that according to 
the laws of physiology the man's sound leg ought to have moved during the 
operation on the other, concluded by declaring himself perfectly satisHed with 
the old report of the French Royal Commission in 1784, and the more recent de- 
termination of the French Academy against the truth of mesmerism. The self- 
ish, insincere, and ambitious Bishop Watson — the writer of The Apology for the 
Bible, used to profess himself, in his days of wealth and importance, perfectly 
satisfied with Chemistry as it was when he was nobody and published his Chemi- I ^ 
cal Essays: — "for his part he never troubled himself with the new-fangled dis- ' 
coveries and doctrines of Sir Humphry Davy."* I was once summoned to an i 
old man near his death with the influenza, who had been forty years check-taker I 
at Covent Garden or Drury Lane Theatre, and, though at his post every night, 
had been so occupied in the money department that he actually had never once 
in his life seen a play, but had been for forty years contented with sitting at the 
receipt of custom and never felt any desire to step three yards farther into the 
house and learn what a play was like. I have heard that Sir Benjamin Brodie, 
when I demonstrated mesmerism at University College Hospital, used to say 
that he disliked turning his horses' heads towards Russell Square to see a patient, 
lest people should think he was going to that scene of humbug, University Col- 
lege Hospital. From his total want of curiosity while I have demonstrated mes- 
merism at my own house for the last four years to any respectable person who 
requested me, and from this declaration at the Society, I can believe the anec- 
dote. Sir Benjamin Brodie is to be pitied ; but he is also to be condemned. He 
ought to know that the French investigation was most superficial and incom- 
plete, conducted in the most random way; that the commission allowed that the 
efi'ects were not imposture, and only ascribed them to imagination, imitation, and 
touch; that the results were varied, and the report says — "Nothing can be more 
astonishing than the convulsions;" "he who has not beheld them can have no 
idea of them ; and even, in beholding them, one is equally surprised at the ^ro- 
found repoie in which some of the patients are placed, and at the agitation 
which animates others. It is impossible not to recognise in these efl^ects, which 
are constant, a great power which agitates the patients, which ever masters 
them, and of which the person who magnetises them seems to be the depositary ;" 
— that one of the French Commissioners, truly virtuous, highly distinguished in 
Science, and well accustomed to investigate nature — the celebrated Jussieu, 
who had pursued the investigation with the greatest attention, firmly refused to 
sign the report of the rest, though threatened by the minister. Baron Breteuil, 
and made one separately, favourable to mesmerism, and sotting forth the solid 
reasons of his convictions, after having made separate experiments; that, in 
1825, on a suggestion that the Royal French Academy of Medicine should in- 

* Tail's 

; 1 

asi 

vestigate the subject anew, a powerful report in favour of the investigation was 
made" by tiie Commissioners, Drs. Adelon, Pariset, Marc, Burdin, senior, and 
Husson ; that nearly one-half of its members confessed that they had seen, and 
that they believed, mesmeric phenomena most marvellous and important: that, 
after the investigation, a powerful, and in every respect admirable, report in fa- 
vour of the truth of mesmerism was made in 1831, by the Commissioners, Drs. 
Bourdois De La Motte, Fouquier, Gueneau de Mussy, Guersent, Itard, J. J. Le 
Roux, Marc, Thillaye, and Husson, and received by the Academy with the live- 
liest interest ; that some of the adversaries of mesmerism in vain attempted to 
disturb the religious silence of the assembly by murmurs of disapprobation, but 
that the immense majority instantly repressed their attempt, and testified by loud 
applause to the honourable reporter, M. Husson, how highly they appreciated his 
zeal, talents, and courage;* that great discoveries, great progress, have been 
made in the subject since the old report — that the science has been enriched since 
that time as much as Chemistry since the days of the Alchymists; that many 
men, his equals in education, information, ability, strength of mind, disinterest- 
edness, and industry, have not contented themselves with an antiquated report, 
and a modern superficial and unfair report of careless and prejudiced men, but 
boldly asked nature to report whether mesmerism is true, and have received 
from her one plain, uniform, and often repeated answer — Yes- 
y Sir Astley Cooper, who, though really distinguished in mechanical surgery, 
/was otherwise but scantily informed, and was endowed with a moderate degree 
of the higher intellectual faculties, always refused to witness mesmerism, "be- 
cause he had a character to lose." A low estimate must he have formed of his 
J own character if it could have been lost thus ! How sad an absence of moral 
I courage and dignity ! And so poor Sir Astley died as Sir Benjamin Brodie at 
' present intends to die, without a sight of the mesmeric phenomena ! — just as 
many astronomers in Newton's time died in perfect ignorance of Newton's dis- 
coveries, and at his death, forty years after the publication of his Principia, he 
had not, as Voltaire remarks, twenty followers out of England : and just as the 
Professor of Philosophy at Padua refused to walk into Galileo's house and look 
through his telescope to see whether the satellites of Jupiter really existed, and 
the Professor at Pisa made speeches to show that the facts could not be facts. 
In Kepler's correspondence (Kepleri Epistolce) is a letter from Galileo, in which 
he writes : — " Oh my dear Kepler, how I wish that we could have one hearty 
laugh together. Here, at Padua, is the principal professor of philosophy, whom 
I have repeatedly and urgently requested to look at the moon and planets 
through my glass, which he pertinaciously refuses to do — why are you not herel 
What shouts of laughter we should have at this glorious folly ! and to hear the 
philosopher of Pisa labouring before the Grand Duke u;ith logical arguments, 
as if with magical incantations to draw the new planets out of the sky." 

When the assertion that the blood circulated first attracted public attention, 
not only were those who believed the fact vilified as visionary, credulous, and 
ignorant, by the medical profession, and therefore by the mass of the public who 
thought the doctors must be proper judges of the matter, giving them credit for 
more knowledge, sense, and honesty than they possessed ; and lampooned both 
here and on the Continent, and nicknamed circulators ; Harvey himself losing 
his practice, while his loquacious and shallow opponents, now forgotten, flourished; 
no doctor beyond the age of forty, at the time, ever believing the circulation to 
the day of his death : but books were written to prove by reasoning that the facts 

of the circulation could not be facts. Among the rest was one entitled : Ergo 

motus sanguinis non circi'laris. Candidate, Simon Boullot :— a thesis read 
in the University of Paris before the President, Hugo Chasles, 1482. Another, 
Ergo sanguinis motus circularis impossibilis, 1472. Candidate, Francis Bazin; 

n* ^?PP."V "^ O'^'^ussions de VAcadinie Royale de Midecin, sar le Magnitisme Animal 
Par M. f Foissac, M. D., Paris, 1833, p. 208— an historical work which alf interested in the 
subject shouid possess. 

33 

President, Philip Hardouin de St. Jaques.* But if Galileo and Harvey, the phi- 
losophers of facts, were pronounced visionary and credulous, so was Bacon, who 
urged men to avoid fancy ing and to busy themselves wilh observation, experiment, 
and induction. When Elizabeth thought of making him her attorney-general, 
Cecil represented him to her " as a man of mere speculation, ad one wholly given 
up to philosophical enquiries, new indeed and amusing, hul fanciful and absurd 
and therefore more likely to distract her affairs than to serve her with proper 
judgement," in short, as an inferior practitioner, though at length Lord Chan- 
cellor.! 

Sir Benjamin Brodie need not fear his company if he cease to scorn mesmerism, 
for he will find himself with Ciivier and La Place. 

Cuvier thus writes:]; — " The effects produced upon persons who, 6e/bre the 
operation (of mesmerising) was begun, were in' a state of insensibility ; those 
which have taken place upon other persons, after the operation itself had reduced 
them to that state; and, also, the efi'ects produced upon brutes; no longer permit 
it to be doubled that the pro.Kimily of two animated bodies, in a ceitain position, 
and with the help of certain motions, do produce a real effect, wholly indepen- 
dent of the imagination of either. It is also evident that these effects are owing 
to a communication which takes place between the nervous systems of the two 
parties." 

La Place thus writes :{ — "The extraordinary phenomena which result from 
the extreme sensibility of the nervous system in some persons have given birth 
to a variety of opinions, on the existence of a new agent, denominated animal 
magnetism. It is natural to suppose that the influence of those causes is very 
weak, and that it can easily be disturbed by accidental circumstances, but it would 
be unfiiir to conclude that it never exists, merely because, in many cases, it does 
not manifest itself. We are so far from being acquainted wilh all the agencies 
of nature, and with their different modes of action, that it would be unphilosophical 
to deny their existence, because in the present state of our knowledge they are 
unexplainable to us." 

M. Chenevix states that he had more than one conversation with La Place 
upon the subject, about 1816 and 1817, and that the expression of that great phi- 
losopher constantly was : " that the testimony in favour of the truth of mesmerism, 
coming with such uniformity from enlightened men of many nations, who had no 
interest to deceive and possessed no possible means of collusion, was such that, 
applying to it his own principles and formulas respecting human evidence, he 
could not withhold his assent to what loas so strongly supported."\\ 

Sir Benjamin Brodie joins the ranks of Mr. Wakley, and id genus omne of in- 
tellect, and information, and character, rather than of La Place ! ', 

Although it would disgrace Sir Benjamin Brodie to listen to mesmerists for a ' 
moment or to withhold his sneers, " it would not," I quote Mr. Chenevix, "dis- 
grace the greatest man whom England ever has produced to attempt an expert- / 
ment or two upon a doctrine which Hiifeland, Jussieu, Cuvier, Ampere, and Lay 
Place believed. Nay, would it not disgrace him more to condemn, without, 
knowing any thing about it, what they knew and credited 1 Is supercilious 
ignorance the weapon with which Bacon would have repelled a new branch of 
knowledge, however extraordinary it might have appeared to him." "Surely 
what great men believe, ordinary men may try." 

Mr. Bbansby Cooper, now began, by asking the advocates of mesmerism to 
give him " the rationale of the tiicts." The point first to be ascertained was 

* In 1723, a thesis was printed against inoculation r—EKCo variolas innculare nefas; and 
in 1691. a tlicsis dcclarin;; tlie enormous wigs ollliat day to be liealtllier ttian our own hair ; 
Ergo coma adsciiuia naliva silubkior. 1C91, Candidate, H. Petr. Mattot; President, I'd- 
Paul Guyard. Authors, and [jresidenis, and doctrines, have all vanished into thin air. 

+ See the Life, prefixed to his worlis. 

X Anatomie Comparee. Tom. ii. p. 117, 

§ Traili Annlaliijue dii Calcul des ProbabUilies. p. 158, 

II London Medical and Physical Journal. June 1829, p. 500 

3 

34 

evidently whether the statements of mesmerism were facts: and the author had 
opened I'lis paper with these words. "I shall abstain entirely from any prelimi- 
nary remarks upon the supposed cause of the efFects I have produced ; I shall still 
call the stale 'mesmerism,' because the name involves no principle; it regards 
the phenomena only ; and not the specific cause of them." " The generality of 
men, when they hear of some novel phenomenon, instead of testing the truth by 
experiment alone, endeavour to ascertain the cause by their own powers ot rea- 
soning; and belief or disbelief is made to follow the result. The startling phe- 
nomena of mesmerism have but too frequently illustrated this remark. To facts 
I shall therefore confine myself; and to such only as I can personally vouch for!" 
He then found a difficulty in admitting the facts, because the man seemed to 
hear the sawing of the bone; and contended that if the man could not feel he 
could not hear, — that "hearing and feeling were the same." Therefore no deaf 
man can feel a pinch ; nor men with palsied legs hear ! 

I presume he meant that in coma all the senses must be equally dull. His 
companion, Mr. Listen, who saw the case of coma with e.\quisite sensibility of 
the surface which I have described, could enlighten him on this point, were it 
DOl too philosophical a point for Mr. Liston's notice. If Mr. Cooper were not a 
surgeon only, but well acquainted with the more remarkable nervous diseases and 
with the phenomena of mesmerism, he would know that a person may be asleep 
and snore, and yet hear and talk ; and that touch, taste, smell, sight, hearing, may 
each be suspended or active, while the others are, one, or more, or all, active or 
suspended. However, this ignorance was very excusable in him, after the speeches 
which others had made. 

He sat down calling upon the gentlemen present acquainted with mesmerism 
not 10 let their opponents have it all their own way, and to come forward with 
Xhe'u facts in a manly manner. Now nothing could be a greater treat than to 
see their opponents have their way, and rush headlong violently down the steep, 
like another set of obstinate beings in olden time who had more legs to stand 
upon. As to coming forward with facts, there were strong facts, and facts only, 
given ; and given in as manly a manner as any thing could be given to the Society; 
and more facts than the Society knew what to do with : and yet he asked the 
supporters of mesmerism to come forward with more facts than were related in 
the paper ; and he had begun by asking for the rationale of the facts, as if he ad- 
mitted the facts and there were not facts enough. 
This gentleman is a teacher at Guy's Hospital. 
/ Mr. LisTON now rose, and, leaning forward, wished to "know if the interest- 
ing patient had sufficiently advanced in his education since the operation to be 
able to read with the back of his neck or with his belly." He said no more, and, 
if he had a friend in the room, that friend must have wished he had not said so 
much. His little speech fell flat and did not excite even a smile, except one of 
pity from myself. 

However, Mr. Symes assured him, as I could have done on my own part, that 
he had witnessed vision when the eyes were indisputably bandaged, so that the 
patients in their ordinary state could not have discerned the faintest glimmer of 
light. 

Mr. Listen made no allusion to the case of the poor cataleptic girl in the Edin- 
burgh Infirmary, from whose hand, according to Mr. Wakley, he tore a piece 
with his nails; nor of the gentleman from whose insensible loot he cut away a 
bone, and whose whole foot he thight have dissected without causing the least 
sensation. 

Mr. Arnott found some difficulties in the case ; but observed that the state- 
ment was highly interesting, and the subject deserving of attention, for he had 
seen operations performed without the knowledge of the patient when insensible 
through opium or great loss of blood. There is therefore some reason to hope 
that Mr. Arnott will feel it his duty to ascertain by experience whether patients 
can be rendered comatose through meemerism and unconscious of surgical ope- 
lations. ' 

Dr. Mayo considered that the subject was of great importance, and slioiild not 
be treated with ridicule, or at once rejected because it was startling-. He de- 
clared Sir Benjamin Brodie's suggestion that the man was hysterical to be totally 
unsupported; and stated that he suddenly ran a pin deeply into the elder Okey 
when her back was turned, and that she manifested not the slightest sensibility. 

Many who had witnessed the wonderful phenomena in the Okeys, and not 
ventured to believe there was not some undiscoverable collusion, became firm 
converts to the truth by making a pass behind the bick of one of the sisters after 
the demonstration was over, on meeting with her accidentally in the passages or 
on the stairs when her back was turned and it was absolutely impossible for her 
to see or suspect any thing. 

Dr. Mayo pointed out the difficulty of supposing that all the persons of different 
countries and ages who exhibited mesmeric phenomena were impostors. 

Capt. Valiant related the case of his own nurse who had a very severe opera- 
tion successfully performed upon her in the mesmeric stale without any sensation. 
Dr. James John.son sneered at the poor woman's truth, and wished to know if 
she did not beg her mistress to be present at the time. To this Captain Valiant 
immediately replied in the affirmative. Dr. Johnson then sneeringly wished to 
know what that was for. To which the Captain replied that it was surely natural 
for her to desire a female to be present, and that no one could be more proper 
than her own mistress under whose protection she was living. Dr. Johnson, as 
a father, should have been contented with viewing the poor man whose leg was 
amputated as an impostor, without attempting to insinuate that this poor female 
also had acted disreputably. 

The authors of the paper, Mr. Topham and Mr. Ward, heard all the speeches 
without a single observation ; and it was my intention, before I left home, to 
follow the same course of absolute silence, and amuse myself by seeing to what 
length the meeting would go. Indeed 1 should not have attended the meeting 
at all, but that several friends wished to be admitted as visiters. However, I did 
rise, after being repeatedly called for, and pointed out the striking ficts of the 
narration which had been entirely unnoticed by any of the speakers: I read from 
the Lancet the case of the Edinburgh surgeon, tearing the hand of the poor girl 
in the infirmary with his nails, Mr. Liston sitting on the bench next io me and 
saying nothing: and I advised them not to reason or rely upon others, but to act 
as I had done, — to go to nature and ascertain for themselves from her whether 
mesmerism was true. 

As soon as I sat down thanks were voted, wilhout-a dissentient voice, for the 
paper, and the society adjourned, disbelieving and ignorant of the most common 
and elementary eflfects of mesmerism, and having afforded a fine illustration of 
the remark of Mr. Chenevix, made fourteen years ago, — " The ignorance of the 
medical world in this country is as great as the precipitancy with which the case 
is prejudged." 

As soon as the society had adjourned, Mr. Topham went up to the president, 
and in my hearing formally withdrew the paper from the society, saying that he 
wished to withdraw it on the spot; and he took his leave with the words, — "it 
must accordingly be considered as withdrawn." 

The authors advertised it as a pamphlet on the following day, and published it 
on the next. 

SECTION iir. 

RESOLUTION OP THE ROYAL MEDICAL AND CHIRURGICAL SOCIETY NOT TO LEAVE A 
TRACE IN THEIR RECORDS TH.AT THIS FACT HAD BEEN PRESENTED TO THEM. 

" Galileo, Newton, Salomon de Caus, Volta, Fulton, Winser, .'^rkwright. Gall, and all who 
have presented themselves with a truth in their hand at the door of this great bedlam, called 
the world, have been received with stones or hisses." — Jobard. 

On the evening of the next meeting of the Society, December 13th, before the 

36 

chnir was taken, Dr. Copland, the eminent compiler, goodnaturcdly told me that 
he was going- to oppose the confirmation of the minutes of the proceed mgs ot the 
kot meeting. 1 as goodnaturedly replied that I was very glad of it; and hoped 
he would not stop there, but propose a strong vote of censure upon the authors, 
the council, and all concerned m its presentation to the last meeting. He imme- 
diately looked grave and astonished. But I laughed on, and assured him I was 
in earnest, —and desired nothing more for the sake of mesmerism than that the 
society would distinguish itself to the very utmost in its dire hostility. He 
evidently considered the society an important body. But I hold no society or 
college higher than a common club, except so far as it acts rationally and with 
the simple love of truth and of the happiness of man and other animals. 

An M.D. standing by, named Evans, living at the western extremity of Hill 
Street, on the left, with two very large brass plates, immediately that Dr. Copland 
had announced his intention to me, volunteered to second the motion: but Dr. 
Copland looked as if he was not ambitious of such distinguished support, and 
scarcely noticed him. He now said that he believed the palient an impostor, for 
that lie had taken or seen taken off a leg from a man who gave no sign of pain; 
and lie had published the case. I asked, "and was a nerve handled roughly with 
an inslrument as in the case of the man at Wellow." He turned perfectly white, 
and said "Yes, it was." "Of course," 1 remarked, "you published this striking 
fact in your narration of the case"!" "No, I did not," he replied. 

When the chair was taken, a secretary read as minutes of the preceding 
meeling merely that such a paper had been read ; no abstract being given accord- 
ing lo Ihe established custom of tlie society. The authorities thus disdained to 
possess the particulars on their books. The president then put the usual motion 
lor the confirmation of the minutes, when Dr. Gregory, known in connection 
with small pox and cow pox, rose to express his disapprobation of the authors 
having published the paper immediately that it was read. 

Dr. CopL/vND rose to oppose the motion on two grounds, — the character of the 
paper, and the publication of it by the authors without the permission of the 
society. He would allow no trace to remain that such a paper had been read. 
The president stopped his arguments on the first point, as the paper had been 
discussed at a previous meeting and thanks been voted for it. The deadly hos- 
tility of Dr. Copland to mesmerism is well known. But to-night he was particu- 
larly unwise. He protested that the paper ought not to have been read, because 
the author was not a medical man.' — As though knowledge was ever to be 
despised from any source. Why one of the authors was a surgeon, though neither 
was a fellow of the society. I have heard papers read at the meetings of the 
Colleae of Physicians (of which he rejoices to be afellov,) by persons not medical, 
once by the very reverend Dean of Westminster; and the society has of course 
no law as lo who may be authors of papers: and several members of the society 
are not medical men. On this point he was set right by more than one member. 
He then contended that, if the account of the irian e.xperiencing no agony during 
the operation were true, the fact was unworthy of their consideration, because 
pain is a wise provision of nature, and patients ought to suffer pain while their 
surgeon is operating ; they are all the better for it, and recover better! Will 
the world believe that such folly was gravely uttered! Tliis will be remembered 
as a doctor's speech in 1842, when the doctor himself shall be forgotten. In due 
consistency. Dr. Copland, when he is about to have a tooth extracted, of course 
goes to a clumsy dentist and begs the man to give him all the pain he can. In 
due consistency, he of course gives his patients that physic which he thinks most 
likely to pinch them well, because they must be all the better for being twisted 
with sharp pain while it is operating; the agony must do them good, and make 
them anxious lo take his physic again. He then confined his motion lo the 
erasure of the minutes, on the ground of the publication of the paper by the 
authors when they had no right. 

Dr. Evans fulfilled his promise of seconding Dr. Copland, but made no speech. 

uthors 
sident i ' 
in the / 

lects a/ 

37 

There was now a min;hty, virtuous indignation expressed by several at the 
publication of the paper by the authors. 

Dr. James Johnson said it had been printed before it was read in the society. 

Dr. Merriman, known as an accoucheur and e.xaininer at Apothecaries' Hall, 
said it had been published before it was read in the society ; which statement was 
incorrect, unless Dr. Merriman confounded printmg with publishing. "Common 
sense should have told the authors not to publish it, — the publication was a grosS 
insult to the society." 

Dr. Gregory was so shocked that he proposed the affair should be promulgated 
by advertisement in three newspapers. 

Dr. Copland declared the authors had broken faith with the society in publish- 
ing it, and had made a semblance of its being published under the society's sanc- 
tion. 

Dr. Moore protested that the authors had violated the laws of the society; and, 
at the same time that he was so indignant at its publication having been taken 
out of the hands of the society, declared, most consistently, that it was unworthy 
of a place in their minutes. " How would the character," he e.vclaimed, "of that 
medical society be affected, on whose records it should appear that it had received 
and discussed a subject like mesmerism, when no proof existed as to its truth!" 

Dr. Copland rose again, and asked if the society would pocket such an affront 
as the publication'! 

Mr. Symes heafged the president to inform the meeting, whether the authors 
had not formally withdrawn the paper as soon as it was read. The presic' 
made no reply: and at this I must express my regret. His conduct had 
whole affair been most sensible and impartial. He is in truth in all respects 
gentleman ; but he seemed distressed and confused at the hubbub of the meeting, 
and did not reply, though he evidently ought, and in the affirmative. 

Mr. Wood, who was present as a visiter, hearing such remarks made upon 
Mr. Topham behind his back, rose and was requesting permission, as the friend 
of the absent gentleman so accused, to say that Mr. Topham was not aware that 
he had been violatinn- any rulesof the society in publishing the paper after he had 
withdrawn it, when he was suddenly interrupted by one of a number who humbly 
live, and move, and have their being in Sir Benjamin Brodie, — 

Mr. Cesar Hawkins, who objected to his speaking, because he was not a 
member of the society: and Mr. Wood was not allowed to say another word. 
Here was a body of men censuring an absent gentleman in strong language, and, 
when his friend rose craving permission to explain for him, that ti'iend was in- 
stantly compelled to hold his peace. This was conduct unworthy of a society of 
men of the very humble.^t class. No law of the society forbad Mr. Wood to 
speak; and, had there been such a law, the laws of justice, and of that charily 
without which Mr. Hawkins is as "sounding bras.s" would have been superior 
to it under these circumstances. Ungenerous man ! I envy you not your heart. 
You little thought what you caused to pass in Mr. Wood's recollection when you 
acted thus. Vou caused him to remember that but five days before (December 
8th) he saw you standing near a table, while the leg of a poor young woman uas 
cut off in the midst of agonizing shrieks, she being evidently in the last stage nf 
consumption, and with which, as well as her scrofulous knee, she luid been under 
the same surgical care for four months. On this very day she had tlied (December 
the 13th); and, on being opened, it was seen that at the time of the operation she 
had been very far advanced in consumption. Not only was the upper part of 
the rioht lung extensively disorganised, but the whole left lung was studded with 
tubercles, which in the upper part had suppurated and formed several large ab- 
scesses' one abscess was very large, and had burst into the cavity of the chest. 
It is a surn-ical rule not to operate for even a fistula, unless the lungs are ex- 
amined and found healthy. Here the operation could only agonise the poor 
creature and shorten the wretched remnant of her d:iys ; and the reflection that 
she might probably have been spared the useless agony of the operation by mes- 

merism,— a blessing in the eyes of every one but Dr. Copland,— drew a sigh from 
Mr. Wood as Mr. Hawkins vented forth his hostility. Had indeed tlie stetho- 
.scope been employed the state of things would have been known, and she spared 
the operation altogether,— the stethoscope, without being conversant with which 
no man can treat diseases of the chest without daily blunders, but which has been 
despised in the building where the unfortunate woman died, is spoken of now by 
one there as a folly reminding him of a fishing line with a fool at one end and 
a fish at the other, and was spoken of formerly with equal contempt by one who 
now uses it hourly, but who, when I first defended its importance years ago, per- 
secuted me with ills tongue, and said it wag just the thing for Elliotson to rave 
about and he had never met with a single sensible man who advocated it. — So 
Mr. Wood .'■at down, amidst loud cries of "Chair .'" " Chair J" even from an old 
'practitioner, nut a member of the society, who lives near University College, and 
/ IS as violently, as he is ignorantly, antimesmeric : and, though I have been above 
,' thirty years a member of the society, — had been its president when it obtained 
' its charter, which has no other living name in it than my own, — had procured for 
it myself the epithet Royal, and for- its members the title of Fellnws, — had al- 
lowed the society to hold its general evening meetings and the afternoon meet- 
ings of the council at my house when it had no house of its own, and given the 
members numerous conversazioni during the two years of my presidency, and 
iiflbrded not merely my house but the proper trifling hospitalily on all these three 
kinds of occasions, — and had furnished many papers to the Society's Transactions; 
— I thought that 1 could not consent to continue a member of it. The substitu- 
1 Hon of perverse prejudice for scientific and candid spirit was discreditable enough, 
Uiut the want of common justice and feeling was too disgusting: and, after much 
Vnlui reflection upon my opinion, I sent my resignation. 

l\lr. Perry, a secretary, condemned the publication of the paper, and so did — 
Dr. Mayo, and Dr. Webster of Brook Street, and I think Dr. Addison of 
Spring Gardens, and Mr. Davie.s of Highgate. 

This virtuous indignation at its publication was truly laughable. The speakers 
all knew that the society would not have published this paper, and they would 
liave risen in arms at the bare suspicion that the council contemplated such a 
thing; and yet as much clamour was made as if the society had been deprived 
of a treasure. I resolved to take no share in the discussion, as I knew that 
neither the authors nor the public would care whether the minutes were con- 
firmed or not. 1 never enjoyed a farce of Foote's more than the acting of this 
evening; for, by a little eSorl, as I sat silently observing the speakers, 1 repre- 
sented to myself that they were enacting all their parts for my amusement. 

I am clearly of opinion that the society had no right to complain. This society 
by its laws (ch. xii. 5), cannot publish a paper without the consent of the author. 
Had the paper not been formally withdrawn, the publication would have been 
unjustifiable. 

As to the printing of the paper in readiness for the withdrawal, surely if the 
authors had a right to withdraw it and publish it immediately, they had a riuht 
to be ready with the printing. 

Indeed had they not done all this, they would have shown no spirit. For they 
had learnt, on the best authority, from various quarters, that a fierce attack would 
be made upon them in the society; that this member by name would demolish 
them and mesmerism and all concerned in mesmerism, and that member by name 
would teach people to send papers on mesmerism to the society ; that " a rod was 
in pickle for them, and for the impostor of a patient," &c. &c. Their resolution 
therefore was wise to hold their peace at the meeting, and to withdraw the paper 
and publish it themselves, instead of allowing it to be locked up for ever in a dark 
closet vvith the other valuables of the society. 

A little debate arose about the effect of confirmation of minutes. Dr. Roots, 
of Russel Square, thought that, if they were not confirmed, the vote of thanks 

39 

passed at the last meeting would drop; as though the business of a meeting was 
not valid till minutes of it were confirmed at another. 

Mr. QuAiN, of University College, and Mr. Drew, jun., of Govver Street, 
urged that the non-confirmation of the minutes could not affect the proceedings 
of the previous meeting ; that they were merely records, and their confirmation 
a mere assertion that they were correct. 

This I apprehend is perfectly true; and the society had a full right, as the 
president said, to preserve no record of the previous meeting. What is done at 
one meeting, if it is not a prospective resolution, is complete. When a person is 
elected a member or officer of a body, he is fully elected; tlie minutes record 
merely the fact. But minutes may affect a prospective measure. If a meeting 
resolves that a certain thing shall be done at another meeting or any time sub.se- 
quent to it, and the second meeting does not confirm the minutes, they are 
erased ; and, as then no such resolution can be shown, the measure previously 
resolved upon cannot be taken, unless by another resolution. For want of noticing 
this distinction of the two cases, the confusion about the confirmation of minutes 
affecting or not affecting measures, I presume, arises. The idea of the non-con- 
firmation of the minutes affecting the vote of thanks, when the persons thanked 
had received the thanks, and gratefully gone off with them, never probably to 
come near the society again, was very amusing. , 

So thn virtuous indignation of a large majority condemned the minuses to non- 
confirmation, — a most ridiculous proceeding, since, from reporters beinj admitted, 
the whole proceedings of the previous meeting were already published in the 
various journals, and recorded more publicly than they would have been in the 
minute-book of the society, which nobody sees but the secretary when he writes 
in it and the president when he signs his name. 

I forgot to mention that Mr. Bransby Cooper joined with the rest, and was 
not contented with virtuously disapproving of the publication, but informed us 
that the society ought to be grateful to us for coming forward to be so defeated, 
and that no men had ever had a more complete beating than had been given us. 
It was hardly noble in a victor not to be satisfied with seeing his foes at his feet, 
but thus to jeer and tell them, as they lay prostrate, they were beaten. And yet 
again it was very good of him, because we should otherwise not have known that 
we were beaten. 

CHAPTER II. 
NUMEROUS OTHER CASES. 

" Mesmerism is too gross a humbug to admit of any farther serious notice. We regard 
its abellors as quacks and impostors. They ought to be hooted oul of professional society. — 
Any practitioner who sends a patient afflicted with anj disease to consult a mesmeric quacli, 
ouffht to be without patients for the rest of his days." 

Mr. Thomas Wakley, Lancet, Oct. 29, 1842. 

1. It is a great happiness to me that, before Mr. Ward undertook to operate as 
he did in the case which has been described, I was originally consulted upon the 
possibility and safety of operating in the mesmeric state without pain and gave 
a decided opinion that to induce such a state and perform the most painful ope- 
ration in it, both without pain and with a successful result, was very practicable. 
I had myself witnessed five years previously the introduction of a seton into the 
back of the neck of Elizabeth Okey without sensation in the mesmeric state. 
"For a length of time she had perfect loss of the sense of touch, — anesthesia, i 
in her ecstatic delirium. She could hold nothing unless she saw it; nor, till she 
acquired the habit, could she walk without looking at her feet. She used to take 

40 

red-hot coals out of the fire and wonder, as she held them, why other people 
cried out and desired her to put them down; and why her hands became blis- 
tered." As she suffered excruciating neuralg-ic pain in her head, I prescribed a 
seton. She was not apprised at all of'it; and was standing: before me and several 
others chattering wittily and deliriously, when Mr. Wood, who was behind her, 
suddenly look up the fle.-hof the back of her neck, run a large seton needle with 
a skein of silk into it, and put on the plaster, without a moment's check to her 
chattering and fmi, or any sign of her noticing it, though I watched her most 
minutely. On dissipating the state, and bringing her to her natural condition, 
she soon found there was something wrong at the part, and put her hand to it, 
saying some one must have pinched the back of her neck. In her deep coma, 
and in that of her sister, there was always insensibility of touch, and cupping 
and the severest bli.-tering were perfectly unnoticed. 

2. Soon afterwards 1 met with a beautiful case of mesmeric susceptibility and 
the permanent cure of severe and obstinate epilepsy by mesmerism, in a little 
boy, Master Salmon, of Red Lion Street, Holborn, uhose case I shall send to the 
Zoist. I threw him into sleep-waking daily for the cure of his fits. In this state, 
though he saw, and heard, and whispered, he had no feeling. He had an eruption 
in the head, which was dressed every day, but with great pain. His mother 
dreaded this daily business; and I advised her to mcsmerL-e him always before 
she began. She did; and the removal of the old dressings, the washing, and 
the frenh dressing, were regularly from that time done by her in his mesmeric, 
slate, and he never svff'ered in the least, and she then always awoke him by a 
few transverse passes. His head got well. 

3. I have at this moment a beautiful case of mesmeric susceptibility and the 
cure of severe hereditary and long-standing epilepsy by mesmerism, in the per- 
son of a young female who^e phrenological phenomena are mentioned in my 
letter to Dr. Englcdue appended to his celebrated address. In her sleep she con- 
verses, after having been in a profound coma, with her jaws locked, for more or 
less time : but has insensibility nf touch except in the ski7i of the face, though 
exquisitely sensible, throughout her frame, to temperature, xvhether hot or cold, — 
a fact I have noticed in several other instances of sleep-waking. She had suffered 
severely from a decayed great molar tooth. I took her to Mr. Nicholles in Bruton 
Street, and threw her in a few minutes into the mesmeric state. I then relaxed 
her firmly locked jaw by laying my fingers upon it, and the tooth was extracted 
without her knowledge, though it had three fangs and was firmly fixed. Yet, 
what is as remarkable as the exquisite sensibility to heat or cold in ports that 
are not sensible to any mechanical injury, although the extraction of the tooth 
gave no .sensation, the presence of the blood in her mouth was felt unpleasantly. 
She continued for some time longer in the deep and silent stage of her coma, in 
which she has no muscular power to raise her hand, or her head, or to spit. She 
soon began working her lips uneasily; and her jaw had, as usual, soon closed 
again. I relaxed it again, and she worked both it and her lips with increasing 
uneasiness. She at length awoke, immediately spit out a dessert-spoonful of 
blood which had lain in the front of her mouth and annoyed her; and was 
delighted to find her troublesome tooth had been extracted without her know- 
ledge. She is one of a large fiimily at Islington, admirably brouglit up, and with 
a most beautiful cerebral confljrinalion, of the finest moral feelings and strength 
of mind, and as incapable of deception or afl'ectation as those, who in their un- 
feeling ignorance, accuse the most innocent mesmeric patients of deception, are 
destitute of common sense and common charity. I shall send her case to the 
Zoist next year. 

4. " March 10, 1841, at the hoii^e of M. Talbot-Descourty, in presence 'of M 
M. Rai-in, M. D., Dean of the Faculty,— Pcrrin, M. D.— Feuguer(dles, AAvn- 
catp,— Bertrand, member of tiie Academy,— Courty, Journalist,— Autrot, s'eii. and 
Augot jun, merchants, M. La Fontaine threw G. Louis Eugene Chanal into 
mesmeric coma with complete insensibility. Dr. Peirin, after having satisfied 

41 

liimself of tliis by pricking liim repeatedly, stated that the pulse was 100. M. 
Talbot, surgeon-dentist, then proceeded to extract the last lower left molar tooth. 
As it was broken, M. Talbot was obliged to cut away the gum from it, and the 
patient gave no sign of sensation. M. Talbot then introduced the instrument 
into the mouth — the instrument with lohich he had first attempted to extract the 
tooth; pushed back the head of the young man, who made a sort of grunt which 
was unufunl to him in the mesmeric sleep, fixed the instrument, extracted the 
tooth, which was barred, and therefore more calculated to give pain. Dr. Perrin 
found the pulse at this time 76. M. Talbot discerned no trembling of the hands, 
such as is common during an effort to disguise the signs of sensibility. The 
patient rinsed his mouth and was awakened. The moment he awoke, he en- 
treated M. La Fontaine not to allow his tooth to be taken out, because ho had no 
longer any pain; but, finding the blood in his mouth, he applied his hand to it, 
and discovered that the tooth had been extracted. Dr. Perrin found the pulse 
now to be 88. 

Every one present testified that he had not shown any sign of sensibility. 

This report being a faithful detail of the facts which passed before our eyes, 
we have signed it. March 10, 1841. 

La Fontaine, 

Talbot-Descourty, Chir. Dentiste." 

The pulse was only 76 while the tooth wa.s extracting in his placid sleep, 

AND 88 AT the moment WHEN HE LEARNT THE CIRCUMSTANCE. 

5. In the suminer of 1841, I exhibited such mesmeric facts to Dr. Engledue, 
Mr. Gardiner, and Mr. Prideaux, of Hampshire, as to convince them of the reality 
of mesmerism. They have all become powerful and practical supporters of the 
truth. Mr. Gardiner, by its means soon afterwards cured a young lady in the 
Isle of Wight of the most distressing nervous symptoms, which had long inca- 
pacitated her from either occupation or amusement and resisted all medical treat- 
ment. Besides being cured, she exhibited many of the most powejful mesmeric 
phenomena, which I went over to the Island to witness. In her state of sleep- 
waking she felt no mechanical injury, and therefore suffered nothing when a 
tooth was extracted. I will give the particulars of the extraction in the words 
of Mr. Gardiner: — 

" To the Editor of the Hampshire Telegraph. 

" Sir, — Some erroneous reports having been recently circulated on the subject 
of an important and interesting experiment, in which Mr. Martin the dentist, of 
Portsmouth, removed two teeth during the mesmeric trance, without the know- 
ledge or suffering on the part of the patient, I beg you will favour me by inserting 
the following simple statement of the case. Having been interrupted in the 
course of certain mesmeric experiments by a violent toothache in one of my 
patients (whom I had exhibited to Drs. Elliotson and Engledue), it occurred to me 
that the insensibility, which is an invariable concomitant of the true sleep-waking 
state, would afford me an admirable opportunity of benefiting the sufi^erer, and 
of extending the application of mesmerism. My friend. Dr. Engledue, obtained 
the assistance of Mr. Martin, a gentleman who knew little, and believed less, 
about mesmerism, and who decidedly questioned the practicability of the pro- 
posed opi'ration. He came. In two minutes the patient (a young lady) was in 
the perfect mesmeric trance, and therefore insensible. Mr. Martin seized the 
tooth (a molar or jaw tooth) with the forceps — purposely prolonged the wrench 
(as agreed upon by Dr. Engledue prior to his visit, in order to test thoroughly 
the insensibility of the patient), and drew forth the tooth. Not a pang or symptom 
of suffering! In a short time I restored the patient to her natural state in the 
usual manner. Upon being told that the tooth had been extracted, she exclaimed, 
^ Did 1 feel it?' — a singular greeting to a dentist's ears I Mr. Martin then pro- 
ceeded to examine her mouth, and suggessted the lemovalof a?!0(/(er tooth. The 

42 

patient laughingly consented, and sat again. In one minute and a half I again 
entranced her, and she became of course insensible as before. 1 he tooth being 
in an advanced stage of decay, was crushed under the instrument, and the rem- 
nants were with much trouble extracted. . 

"Durini' the whole of this trying operation not a groan or complaint escaped 
the patient. Shortly afterwards I again restored her, upon which she turned to 
the glass to asceriain whether or not she had really lost the second too'hj. ^ 
would be difficult to determine which party evinced the greater degree of delight 
and astonishment,— the one having witnessed a novel and most astounding phe- 
nomenon,— the other having been unconsciously, almost magically, freed from 
her tormentors. 

" I have confined myself to a simple narration of facts, and shall not trespass 
on your columns by detailing the general phenomena of mesmerism, which are 
nevertheless of the highest importance and interest. Whenever a new truth is 
advanced, short-sighted individuals immediately ask 'Cut bono?' — There is an 
answer. 

"I remain. Sir, 

" Your obedient Servant, 

" John B. W. S. Gardiner." 
" Portsmouth, Dec. 9th, 1841." 

6. Mr. Prideaux, who practises at Southampton, has had extraordinary expe- 
rience in this way, and obliged me with the following letter: — 

" My dear Sir, 

" In compliance with your wishes I have great pleasure in furnishing you with 
a few brief particulars of the cases in which I have. operated on the teeth of 
patients when in a state of magnetic sleep. My first information of the operation 
of tooth extraction having been performed during this state, and without pain to 
the patient, was derived from Teste's " Manuel pratique du Magnetisme A7ii- 
mal," published in Paris in 1840; a work not known in this country so much as 
it deserves to be. Upon becoming myself a magnetiser, I naturally became 
desirous of trying an experiment so applicable in my own profession, and an 
opportunity soon presented itself A patient I was then in the habit of frequently 
entrancing, and who when in this state had always shown insensibility to the 
ordinary tests of feeling, such as pricking, pinching, &c., had a great number of 
decayed teeth and stumps, from which she suffered so much, without being able 
to summon resolution to undergo their extraction, as gladly to embrace my pro- 
posal of being operated upon in the mesmeric state. During the next magnetic 
sitting, I took the opportunity of removing two of the most troublesome teeth, and 
with the most perfect success. The patient sat with the hands quietly folded in 
the lap, — the countenance was placid and serene, — and the whole attitude that of 
repose ; in short, not the slightest trace of mental emotion was perceptible, and 
upon being awakened, it was not till she had examined her mouth that she could 
credit the reality of her painless release from her tormentors. 

" I should have proceeded in the task of extraction on this occasion, but it 
appeared to me a pity that a phenomenon so interesting in its results to every 
friend of humanity, from the new era it promised to introduce inoperative surgery, 
and withal so calculated to carry conviction to the minds of sceptics, should be 
shrouded in comparative privacy, (only one friend was present,) and I accordintrly 
resolved to defer the extraction of the remainder, and invite a party of medical 
men to be eye-witnesses of the operation. I took an early opportunity of doing 
so, and on this occasion extracted two teeth and three stumps from the patient, 
who, to their great amazement, manifested the same insensibility and indifference 
to the operation as before. 

" I liave since extracted from the same patient seven teeth and eight stumps, 
at three different sittings, (making in the whole, eleven teeth and eleven stumps,) 

43 

with equally satisfactory results, anJ I may remark that the patient being com- 
paratively a young person, no absorption of the alveolar process and gum had 
taken place, but all the teeth were firmly rooted. 

"On the last occasion, five teeth and two stumps were extracted preparatory 
to her being supplied with a set of artificial teelh. Several were from the front 
of the mouth, and as tooth after tooth was extracted, the patient was excessively 
diverted at the alteration in her appearance; in fact she could with difficulty 
control her laughter; and as soon as the operation was over she called for a 
looking-glass, and holding it up before her closed eyes examined her mouth atten- 
tively, drawing back the lips ou either side with her fingers to get a better view, 
and finishing by a hearty fit of laughter at the droll figure she presented with her 
mouth almost toothless. This sitting was witnessed by a friend of mine, Mr. 
Henry Goode, B. A. of Pembroke College, Cambridge, who chanced to be spend- 
ing a few days with me at the time, and who will be happy on all occasions to 
corroborate the account I have just given, as well as to produce the teeth extracted 
if required. 

" I have extracted single teeth from three other patients during mesmeric 
sleep, with equally satisfactory results, the insensibility being evidently perfect. 
In fact in two of these cases, the patients were utterly unconscious during their 
mesmeric stale that any operation had been performed on them, being engaged 
in a conversation on another subject at the time, which suffered no interruption, 
beyond a slight indistinctness in articulation during the few seconds the instru- 
ment was in the mouth. 

"A filth patient on whom I have operated during the mesmeric state, is a 
young lady who required to have several of her molares separated with a file on 
account of the commencement of decay, and one stopped. 1 found her a most 
troublesome and restless patient, in her natural slate, shrinking when the cavity 
in her tooth was touched, and complaining greatly of the unpleasantness of the 
sensation of filing. I succeeded in entrancing her at the first trial in about five 
minutes, and in this state she allowed me to operate Jbr two hours with the most 
passive indifference, assuring me she felt nothing, except a slight sensation of 
heat, when the file was used rapidly and continuously for some time together. 

"This case is I think interesting and valuable, and affords some evidence in 
favour of an opinion I brought forward on analogical grounds, in my pamphlet on 
the Mental Functions, viz. : that there are distinct sets of nerves for feeling and 
temperature, an idea which you have since informed me suggested itself to Dar- 
win, from seeing a case of paralysis, in which the sense of temperature remained 
after feeling was lost. 

"The subject is certainly one of importance, and I have made several attempts 
since to isolate these two senses, and in one patient with perfect success. The 
moans [ employ are, the application to the skin of a glass stopper heated to a 
temperature just below what would suffice to raise a blister, to test the sensibility 
to temperature, and pricking with a common needle, lo test that of ordinary sen- 
sation, and I possess the power of rendering the patient sensible to the heated 
stopper and insensible lo the needle, or insensible to the heated stopper and sensi- 
ble to the pricking, or insensible or sensible to both, at pleasure. 

" Believe me, my dear Sir, 

" Yours, very sincerely, 

" J. S. Prideacx." 
•• Southampton, Nov. 20ih, 1842." 

I fear that those members of the Medical Society, who were puzzled by the 
man's low moaning, will be more puzzled by the lady who was fast asleep and 
felt not the severest mechanical violence, and yet walked, and talked, and saw. 
And puzzled they will be till they have studied, as they ought long ago, the 
history of somnambulism, catali'psy, and the whole of that family of nervous 
affection. When the ignorance of medical men ceases, the character of innocent 
patients will no longer be traduced. 

44 

7. The following is from the Jamaica Morning Journal, October, 1842:— 

'• To the Editor of the Morning Journal. 
"Sir, . 

" I have deemed fit to forward for your consideration, the following unvarnished 
fact. If after perusal you are disposed to publish it, my consent is freely given. 
First, however, I must apprise you, that the science oC mesmerism has ever been 
viewed by me with much prejudice, and I do not think I should have troubled 
myself to see the effect of its operation, had it not been for the occurrence which 
called my profession into action. As a person perfectly disinterested — who had 
never seen mesmerism practised, I was asked to remove a tooth for a lady while 
under its influence. I readily acceded, not only from the novelty of the situation, 
but to enable me to form my own opinion on Ihis {lalterbj) all-engrossing subject. 
Previously lo the arrival of Mr. Garrison of mesmeric celebrity, I e.vamined the 
tooth on which I was to operate, and found it to he the dens supienliee on the 
riijht upper jaw. The tooth was carious; and although the pitient hSd suffered 
much pain, yet at this moment, /Vo?n »!y appearance, she stated herself perfectly 
free from toothache. Satisfied in what manner, and what instrument I should 
use for the operation, I prepared myself accordingly. Mr. Garrison shortly after 
arrived, and I think F may say, without fear of contradiction, that this singular 
operation was performed before sixty or seventy gentlemen, most of whom are 
known to posse.-'S high intellectual powers, and the respectability of whom cannot 
be questioned. During the few moments which Mr. Garrison occupied in placing 
the lady under mesmeric influence, I kept myself aloof from the patient, and not 
until I was informed all was ready, would I approach her. In doing so, such part 
of the room was selected to enable all the bystanders to witness this very singular 
exhibit inn. Mr. Garrison then manipulated, to produce a relaxation of those 
muscles which kept the mouth shut, and gradually effected extension— the head 
was somewhat elevated — the eyes perfectly closed. I immediately applied the 
scarificator, and not. the slightest wince — not a movement of the most minute 
description could I detect ! In the act of introducing \.he forceps, the mouth 
partly closed, and (forgetting the situation of the patient) I requested her to 
extend the mouth, with which she immediately complied. The tooth was instan- 
taneously removed — the mouth remained extended — the eyes were closed, 7iot a 
shrink did I observe — not a muscle did I see move, and myself and all present 
were left to form our own opinion. Tlie tooth has three fangs connected together, 
forminc; one large root in a somewhat conical form — the length a little better 
than three quarters of an inch. As regards my opinion, when asked, at the con- 
clusion of this singular operation, I expressed myself by no means satisfied, 
becau-e at my biddmg the mouth, the second time, extended, but I was immedi- 
ately informed that on my desiring the extension, Mr. Garrison (who was at the 
back of the lady) had again acted on the muscles, and thereby had caused com- 
pliance. 

" What appeared to me, however, the most inexplicable, was the circumstance 
of the ynouth retaining its original position, still extended after the removal of 
the tooth, which is perfectly unnatural, and which has never been witnessed by 
ine during a practice of twenty-one years, and not until the mesmeric operator 
manipulated the jaws, to cause contraction, did the patient attempt to eject the 
blood friim her mouth. One of two points— the patient must have been totally 
■insensible to pain, or she exhibited an extreme firmness of purpose, and deter- 
mination unparalleled. 

"Mesmerism is a subject 1 do not comprehend, and consequently offer no 
opinioii. Did I understand its art, I might perhaps be foremost in the field to 
uphold Its doctrines. As it is, I can only reveal that to which I am a witness, 
regretting that I do not possess mesmeric influence tor the benefit of those who 
consult me professionally. " I am, your obedient Servant, 

„^ ^ „ "J- TnoM.vs DiAs, Surgeon Dentist. 

" 92, Orange Street." 

45 

P.S. I forsfot to add, that on tlie patient being restored to a Ftnte of sensibility, 
she assKred those present that, she was totally unconscious of the operation, and 
felt no pam. 

" J. T. D." 

8. I received tlie following letter from Mr. Carstairs, of Sheffield : — 

*^ Devonshire Street, Sheffield, 
Nov. nth, 184-i. 
" Sir. 

"I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your favour of the 16th, and 
proceed at once to comply with your request. Although my experiments have 
not been so numerous nor so important, per se, they are drops in the bucket of 
truth, uhich, united with others, tend to prove that operations may be performed 
without pain through mesmerism. 

" In two cases I have extracted teeth : one in one case and two in the other. 
The patients were females, and neither of them was aware on being roused from 
the state of mesmeric coma, that the teeth had been extracted. In another case of 
a lad about twelve years of age, I opened a large abscess behind the ear and dis- 
charged about a table-spoonful of pus, inserted a dossil of lint, and dressed the 
wound without the patient being sensible cf pain. He had not been previously 
mesmerised, and was not aware of my intention, when I began to make the 
passes, which were effectual in producing sleep in about five minutes. In an- 
other case I cut a large wart from the back of a female's hand, who had been 
mesmerised by me several times before. I had aroused her, and then produced 
catalepsy in the arm and hand, so that she saw what I was doing, but suffered 
no pain nor inconvenience from the operation, although an extremely nervous, 
irritable person. The only other case I have had was inserting a seton, which 
was accomplished without the slightest pain. 

"I remain, 

9. The following is from Dr. Engledue:- 

' Yours faithfully, 

" Thomas Carstairs.' 

' Southsea, December \st, 1842. 

" My dear Doctor, 

" I forward you the result of an operation performed during the mesmeric 
trance. 

"Miss K. ffit. 17, had suffered for two years from a variety of symptoms, the 
result of spinal irritation. The right knee was slightly contracted from the com- • 
mencement of her illness, but for twelve months preceding the operation, the 
contraction was so complete that it was quite impossible to separate the heel 
from the back part of the thigh. 

"For nearly three months she was regularly mesmerised by Mr. Gardiner; all 
the symptoms were very much relieved, and some altogether removed by this 
treatment. The knee-joint, however, continued firmly contracted. 1 shall not 
now enter into a description of the reasons which prompted mc to perform the 
operation of division of the tendons at the back of the knee-joint, my only ob- 
ject is to report that the operation was performed during the mesmeric trance 
and without any manifestation of feeling. Some hours after the operation, the 
patient was demesnierized ; there was no expression of astonishment and no re- 
mark made, till some spots of blood on the sheet of the bed attracted her attention. 
The proceedings were then explained to her, and the effect can be more easily 
imagined than described. " I remain, 

"My dear Doctor, 

" Sincerely yours, 
" W. C. Enoledue." 

46 

10. I will now furnish an account, from the Jamaica Dispatch, of August 
20th, 1842. 

" A mesmeric experiment was made at the private residence of a gentleman 
of this city on Thursday last, at which several physicians and gentlemen of high 
respectability were present, and which, we are informed by a gentleman who 
witnessed it, was in every respect successful. The patient, a lady, was put into 
the magnetic sleep by Professor Garrison; and, while in this state, the pamful 
surgical operation of removing a large e.xcresccnce from the upper eyelid, or 
brow, was performed by Dr. Arnold, assisted by two other physicians, loilhout 
the movement of a muscle on the part of the patient, or the least sign of pain. 
The patient had long desired the operation to be performed, but had not possessed 
the fortitude to submit to it, and she was in utter ignorance of the design of the 
physicians to remove the excrescence on this occasion, and knew nothing of it 
until the whole had been done and the loound dressed, and she had been awakened 
from her sleep; indeed we are told, that while the wound was being dressed, 
Professor Garrison willed her to sing a favourite air, which she immediately 
did." 

11. The following case I have in the handwriting of the surgeon and Captain 
Valiant. I have seen the woman and mesmerised her frequently ; and have the 
honour of knowing General Sir Thomas Willshire and Captain Valiant. 

" Mrs. Gregory, nursery-woman to Mrs. Valiant, the lady of Captain Valiant, 
40th Regiment, for a long time suffering from decayed teeth, which caused much 
constitutional irritation, applied to me early in May, complaining of headache and 
pain in the upper jaw, of the most excruciating kind. On examination, the gums 
were found ulcerated, the alveolar proces.ses carious on the right side, and pre- 
senting numerous spicula of bone projecting through the gums, which were ex- 
quisitively painful on the slightest pressure with the finger. Filing off the spi- 
cula of bone was advised and consented to. The performance of the operation, 
having been proposed while she was under the influence of mesmeric sleep, was 
undertaken on the 25th of May, in the presence of Sir Thomas Willshire and 
Captain Valiant of this garrison. Sleep was speedily induced by Sir Thomas 
and she was pronounced in a fit state to bear the operation in half an hour. 

" An incision was made on either side of the alveolar processes extending from 
the incisor to the molar teeth, dividing the gums, which were turned back so as 
to expose the diseased bone. The spicula being considered the principal source 
of annoyance were filed off smooth with the jaw, the gums approximated, and 
creosote applied to the carious points. The filing occupied fully five minutes. 
The patient, however, to my great astonishment, evinced not the slightest feeling 
from the operation, and continued undisturbed in the enjoyment of profound sleep 
" for one hour, at the expiration of which time she was awaked by Sir Thomas, 
appearing as if aroused from a dream. Some minutes elapsed before perfect con- 
sciousness became restored, when she expressed herself incredulous that any 
operation had been performed on her jaw, being quite free from all pain. 

" The phenomena evinced could only be elicited by Sir Thomas Willshire, 
who so kindly afforded his services to the poor woman : they appeared to be com- 
pletely under his control. By his request her mouth opened to admit my instru- 
ments, which she did not feel. His taking wine and cake produced in her cor- 
responding actions and sensations of mastication and deglutition. The pulse rose 
to 120, and some excitement and spasmodic action supervened on Sir Thomas 
withdrawing himself for a little. But his approach and contact quieted, and 
eventually restored, the patient to perfect composure during her slumber. 

" / had hitherto been in the habit of ridiculing, and, indeed, disbelieving, 
every statement connected with mesmerism ; but find it impossible to reject the 
facts of this case, brought home by the evidences of so many senses. 

" John Charlton, M.D. 

„ ^ , ■„ tr •, , ^, , " Assistant-Surgeon, Royal Marines." 

" Melville Hospital, Chatham, 
" June 9th, 1842." 

47 

The followingf statement was drawn up and e^iven to me by Captain Valiant : 

" Elizabeth Gregory, nursery-maid to Mrs. Valiant, usually called Anne, mes- 
merised by Sir Thomas Willshire, May 25lh, 1842, Brompton, Kent.— Sir Thomas 
commenced at six minutes past one o'clock to mesmerise the patient for a painful 
operation, to be performed by Dr. Charlton on her jaw and gum, during her sleep. 
Anne had previously suffered very much from the fracture of the jaw, in conse- 
quence of having had five teeth taken out, perhaps unskilfully, at one time. 
Matter and proud flesh had formed, and caustic had been employed in reducing 
them. She had also been mesmerised before, for experiment, three times, by Sir 
Thomas, and the same number of times by Captain Valiant. 

"In six minutes Anne was asleep. Soon afterwards Captain Valiant called 
loudly, without her hearing him ; but when Sir Thomas took her hand, and spoke 
in a low tone, she heard, and answered that she was asleep and comfortable. 

"At half-past one o'clock Dr. Charlton lanced Anne^s gum down to the jaw 
from one end to the other, and made it bleed considerably, which the patient did 
not appear to feel at all. Dr. C. then filed her jaw-bone for the space of Jive 
minutes and a half I'M what he desired was accomplished, which also she did not 
feel in the least — not a muscle nor nerve either twitched or moved. She opened 
her mouth for the operation to be performed at the command of her mesmeriser, 
who held her hand, and she constantly opened it wider at his direction. Dr. 
Charlton mentioned that a few days ago, when he merely touched the patient's 
jaw with a probe, she felt the pain so severely as very nearly to faint. While 
waiting for some creosote. Sir Thomas took some wine, when Anne went through 
the form of tasting and drinking, and on being questioned said, she tasted wine. 
The same experiment was tried with a piece of biscuit, and she said she tasted 
biscuit. Sir Thomas held a watch over her head, and asked her what it was. 
She replied — 'I don't see it, but I know what it is.' It was then held to her 
waistband ; and she said it was a watch. Captain Valiant pinched Sir Thomas's 
hand, which she immediately felt too, and said somebody was pinching her hand, 
and she did not like it. Dr. Charlton applied some creosote to the patient's jaw. 

"At twenty minutes to three o'clock Sir Thomas awoke her, when she was 
not conscious of having had any thing done to her, and was very thankful to 
find the operation was over, and wished very much that what had been done to 
her during her mesmeric sleep might be published, for the good of the world in 
general." 

12. I shall now detail a case which occurred many years ago in Paris; — the 
mesmeric operator in which — Dr. Chapelain, and the surgical operator — M. Jules 
Cloquet, are now both alive in that city. 

"Madame Plantin, aged 64, living at No. 151. Rue Saint Denis, consulted M. 
Cloquet, April 8th, 1829, respecting an open cancer which had existed for several 
years in her breast, and which was complicated with a considerable enlargement 
of the right axillary ganglions. M. Chapelain, her physician, who had mesmerised 
her for some months, with the view of dissipating the disease, could effect only a 
profound sleep, in which sensation appeared suspended, but intellect remained 
perfect. He suggested to M. Cloquet to operate upon her in the mesmeric sleep- 
waking. M. Cloquet, having judged the operation indispensable, consented, and 
it was fixed for the following Sunday, April 1st. The previous two days, she 
was mesmerised several times by Dr. Chapelain, who prevailed upon her when 
in the state of sleep-waking to bear the operation without fear, and brought her 
even to converse about it calmly ; although, when she was awake, she could not 
listen to the proposal for horror. 

" On the day fixed, M. Cloquet arrived at half-past ten in the morning, and 
found the lady dressed in an arm-chair, in the attitude of a person calmly asleep. 
She had returned about an hour from mass, which she habitually attended at that 
time of the day. Dr. Chapelain had thrown her into the mesmeric sleep on her 
return. She spoke with perfect calmness of the operation which she was about 
to undergo. All being ready she undressed herself, and sat upon a common chair. 

48 

"Dr. Chupelain supported her right arm. The left was allowed to hang at 
her side. M. Pailloux, internal student of the Hospital Saint Louis, had the 
charge of presenting ihe instruments and applying the ligatures. The first in- 
cision \vns begun at the arm-pit, and carried above the breast as far as the inner 
side of the nipple. The second was begun at the same point, and carried under 
the breast till it met the first. M. Cloquet dissected out the enlarged ganglions 
with care, on account of their pro.\imity to the axillary arteries, and removed the 
breast. The operation lasted ten or twelve minutes. 

" During all this lime, the patient conversed calmly with the operator, and 
gave not the least sign of sensibility ;* no movement occurred in the limbs or 
FEATURES, no change in the respiration or voice, no emotion even in the 
PULSE, was discernible;! this patient remained uninterruptedly in thes'inie state 
of automatic indifference and passiveness, (etat d'ahundon et d'impassibilite aulo- 
miques, or, as Mr. Topham says of his patient, ' uncontrolled, in perti^ct stillne.ss 
and repose,' ' like a statue !') in which she was some minutes before the operation. 
There was no necessity to restrain her, we had only to support her. A ligature 
was applied to the lateral thoracic artery, which was opened in removing the 
ganglions. The wound was closed with sticking plaster and dressed, and the 
patient was put to bed, still in the same state of sleep-waking; and was left in 
this state for eight and forty hours. An hour after the operation a slight haemor- 
rhage occurred, which proved of no importance. 

The first dre.ssing was removed on Tuesday the 14th ; the wound was washed 
and dressed afresh ; the patient showed no sign of pain ; the pulse was undisturbed. 
After this dressing. Dr. Chapclain awoke the patient whose sleep-waking had 
lasted from one hour before the operation, i. e. two days. The lady seemed to 
have no idea, no conception of what had passed ; but, on learning that she had 
been operated upon, and seeing her children around her, she experienced a very 
strong emotion, to which the mesmeriser put an end by immediately sending her 
to sleep again." 

Some of the surgeons of Paris scouted this case just as the London Medical 
Society, in imitation, scouted that of the amputation. Lisfranc explained it some- 
how or other, and Baron Larrey accused the poor lady of being an " accomplice 
of mesrnerisers." The latter should have remembered that there was once a 
soldier named Blanchard, who refused all his advice to part with his right leg on 
account of fistulous ulcers of the foot, tumefaction of the cellular membrane, a 
white swelling of the inner ankle, disease of the ligaments, and caries of the 
tarsal bones, and who was pronounced incurable by the certificates of six physi- 
cians and surgeons; that, when the Marquis de Puysegur mentioned to him that 
by means of mesmerism the poor man was greatly relieved, he burst into a laugh, 
said the patient would never be cured because the bones were diseased and the 
periosteum srone, and that amputation would be indispensable. By mesmerism 
the poor soldier was completely cured. \ 

1 have extracted the case of the lady from the highly-favourable report, in 1831, 
of the Committee appointed by the French Academy of Medicine to report upon 
mesmerism, and to be found in Dr. Foissac's excellent work.J The committee 
continues thus: — 

"The committee sees in this case the most evident proof of the suspension of 

* She was " not a physiologist," or she would have " enacted the reflex motions " 
T Tliis ought 10 convince Dr. Marshall Hall, who is represented by the Lancet to have 
said in ihe society, and I hear he did. though 1 do not rememljer u,— •■ Coidd llie man kerp 
his lunri ^,uet as he did ihe muscles of his face and leg ? Why was not th" action of ihe 
Jic.iri. ihc niinilicr ol ihe pulse, carefully noied ? We should Ihen have had pnsilwe proof 
01 the supposed loss of consciousness in the actual absence of all emotion " He may be re- 
lerrcd to the case of (he hoy mentioned at p. 41). 

Iti2!i''^''l5& "' ^'^'^"^"''"^ ''" I'-^cademie Royale de Midecin sur le Magnilisme Animal. 
^ Same book, p. 400. 

49 

sensibility during sleep-waking, and declares that, though it did not witness the 
case, they find it so stamped with the character of truth, it has been attested and 
reported to them by so good an observer who had communicated it to the surgical 
section, that they do not fear to present it to you as a most unquestionable proof 
of the state of torpor and stupefaction produced by mesmerism." 

I may mention that the case is related as perfectly genuine in the Penny 
Cyclopmdia, published by our Society tor the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, 
article Somnambulism, in which the truth of mesmerism is admitted to the ex- 
tent even of c/airDOyance; Lord Brougham being president of the society, and 
the Bishop of Durham, several peers, several Fellows of the Royal Society, men 
of the first distinction in science and literature, and several professors of Univer- 
sity College, where a general stand was made against mesmerism, being my col- 
leagues on this committee. 

In the Hermes* it is stated likewise, that M. Cloquet attests not only that 
there was complete absence of pain, but that, while he was washing the surface 
around the wound with a sponge, the patient felt tickled, and several times said 
merrily, " Come, leave otf, — don't tickle me." Her laughter, thus occasioned, 
was heard by M. Plantin — the patient's son, and by Madame Granier, who were 
outside the door. 

This remarkable circumstance must be viewed side by side with the uneasi- 
ness felt from the blood in the mouth of my patient who had no sensation from 
the extraction of her tooth, and whose case I have related at p. 40; and with the 
exquisite sensation she always had both of heat and cold in parts perfectly insen- 
sible to pinching, &c. — a fact noticed by me in several other cases, and by Mr. 
Prideaux in regard to heat in one of his patients, spoken of at p. 43 ; and in re- 
gard to cold in the Spanish Lady mentioned at p. 30, who was comatose without 
mesmerism. 

No man who has a heart can read the narration without being affected, and 
earnestly hoping it is true. But, though its truth is equally certain as that there 
is such a surgeon as M. Cloquet, it has lately been denied in England and the 
parties have been vilely traduced. 

In the London Medical Gazette for the 2d of last December, immediately af- 
ter an imperfect and incorrect account of the discussion in the Royal Medical 
and Chirurgical Society on the paper which detailed the case of amputation in 
the mesmeric state, is an anonymous letter of three paragraphs — signed " a 
member of the Medical and Chirurgical Society," who is ashamed to give his 
name, and therefore does the deed in darkness — the first styling the account 
"very silly" and unfit for the society, the second heartlessly accusing the poor 
patient of deception, and the third as lollows: 

" It is rather remarkable that it should have occurred to no one present to 
mention the case of a woman whose breast was amputated, some years ago in 
Paris, by M. Cloquet, while she was (as it is supposed) in a state of mesmeric 
stupor. This woman was believed to have been insensible to pain during the 
operation ; and was a better actor than the man mesmerised by Mr. Topham, as 
she did not even moan. Some considerable time afterwards, however, while 
dying of an internal complaint in another hospital, she confessed to the nurse 
that the whole had been a cheat ; that she had experienced pain like other per- 
sons, but had sufficient command over herself not to show it." 

The Nottingham surgeon, to whose letters I have already twice referred, 
writes, — •' some years ago in France the breast of a female was removed while 
she was professedly in a mesmeric sleep. She died afeio days afterwards ; an 
operation which in other cases rarely indeed proves fatal. Is it not too probable 
that the attempt to bury the anguish in her own bosom proved too much for na- 
ture to sustain 1 Another mesmeric operation case succeeded better, but the pa- 
tient subsequently confessed that her insensibility was all feigned." "Many 
similar cases have occurred, &c." 

* L' Hermh, Journal du Magniliame Animal. Paris, 1829, torn. iv. 
4 

50 

Now the statements of both writers are altogether untrue. 

Madame Plantin was never in an hospital, but the wife of a wealthy merchant 
of Paris; resided in a conntry house which she could hardly be prevailed upon 
to leave in the fine season of spring to take up her abode in Paris for the pur- 
pose of being mesmerised, for she disliked mesmerism because it had been tried 
upon her at different times unsuccessfully, and she was unwilling to submit to 
the restraint of mesmeric treatmmt; and she was terrified at the thought of a 
surgical operation under any circumstances, and declared she would rather die, 
and had indeed suffered severely from refusing even to be bled in one of her 
pregnancies. 

M. Cloquet testified to the Academy that she was pious, modest, and incapa- 
ble of any collusion; and Dr. Caldwell of America, hearing a rumour in London 
that this surgeon confessed he had operated upon other patients in an ordinary 
state who bore the pain as unmoved, called upon M. Cloquet, in Paris, to ask the 
question, and told me that he received for answer, "Jamais .' jamais ! jamais .'" 
However, Dr. Davison, a friend of mine, called upon M. Cloquet at my request 
in January, to make inquiries respecting the case ; and the following is an ex- 
tract from his reply: — 

" The letter to which you allude in the Medical Gazette \s false in every par- 
ticular, save the death of the patient. The lady was never the inmate of an 
hospital. She was the wife of a rich negociant, an excellent person, respected 
by all who knew her. She died above a fortnight after the operation, o(a pleu- 
risy ;* the wound having done well, and she having taken a drive some days 
previously. Cloquet saw her and is quite sure that she never made the confes- 
sion alluded to." 

As to the other case, spoken of by the Nottingham surgeon, Dr. Davison has 
made every inquiry in Paris, and cannot learn that it ever occurred. " Many 
similar cases have occurred !" I call upon him to make good all his assertions. 
■He knows that Mr. Wood flatly contradicted him in The Nottingham Journal 
in regard to the one, and pointed out that he gave no authority whatever for the 
others : yet, though two months have elapsed, this candid person has never re- 
plied or ventured to recur to the subject. 

It was most improper in the Medical Gazette to insert a serious anonymous 
charge against a person now no more — and that person a female, a foreigner, 
and whose family are now all resident in Paris and of great respectability ; and 
shameful in the Nottingham surgeon to make these wholesale accusations, not 
one of which he has been able to prove. 

The unscrupulousness of so many medical men to blacken the characters of 
their fellow-creatures, already one would think sufficiently afflicted, by accusing 
them, without any other reason than their own ignorance, of imposture, is a foul 
spot upon the profession. Wherever a person displays mesmeric phenomena, or 
is cured or even relieved by mesmerism, he is at once impudently called an im- 
postor, and any sort of thing fabricated to support the cruel charge. 

"L'homme est de glace aux verites; 
II est de feu pour le mensonge." 

La Fontaine. 
The Okeys not only were impostors, but confessed the imposition ! 
In a letter, paid for as an advertisement, in the Newry Telegraph for last 
February 9, signed— '^ 

J. MoRisoN, M.D. 
J. Woods, Surgeon, 
W. Staekey, M.D. 
.u J ,„ tt. H. KiDDs, L.RC.S. 

are these words,— "If we except Dr. Elliotson-whose mind always exhibited a 

nl^l *PP"'""^ o*" ""« '"fl*"'^'' pleura and lung afler death are fully detailed in the 

51 

tendency to wild and extravagjant theories, and who in consequence of his attach- 
ment to the marvellous lost his chair in the London University, as also his stand- 
ing as a practitioner — all the others, as Mesnier, Dupotet, La Fontaine, preached 
the mesmeric doctrines to some advantage, if not to the public, at least to them- 
selves." I never knew even the names of these four gentlemen before, but they 
ought to be aware that the character of my mind is the opposite of what they 
aver. I have never speculated, but have always devoted myself to the observa- 
tion of facts; so that, whatever I have advanced, I have seen ultimately esta- 
blished. I appeal to my writings on Quinine, Hydrocyanic Acid, Iron, Creosote, 
Glanders, the Use of the Ear in ascerlammg the State of the Heart, my Human 
Physiology^ and my Lectures on the Practice of Medicine and my Clinical 
Lectures. I came into practice solely from the devotion to facts evinced in my 
Clinical Lectures. Phrenology I have lived to see established, though it had not 
twenty advocates in this country when I first wrote in its favour ; and in it I 
have adhered so closely to facts that I have not yet admitted an amount of state- 
ment which is current among eminent phrenologists. However, let this pass. 
"The Okeys," these gentlemen further say, " were proved to be impostors,* 

* I make the following extract from the letter which I addressed lo my pupils on resigning 
my chair in University College, and which is to be had at M. Bailliere's : — 

" In an evil hour, I consented lo show some experiments to the Editor of the Lancet, after 
repeated entreaties conveyed by his assistant. Mr. Mills, who had witnessed the phenomena 
at the hospital, reported many in the Sjancei. been enraptured with them, and declared them 
over and over again lo be so satisiaclory that to doubt or to suspect the two Okeys ol' impo- 
sition would be the height o^ absurdity. I exhibited to the Editor the production of the 
singular delirium, and a variety of the most beautiful and satisfactory experiments which he 
has enliTely suppressed. But I presently feared what would be the result. He said he was 
pestered with letters upon the subject; but that nineteen out of twenty were unfavourable. 
Nineteen persons, of course, purchase more Lancets than one; and I fancied I already saw 
his rejection of the evidence. The mental phenomena were such as no person capable of 
sound and refined observation, and fitted for philosophical investigation, could for an instant 
have imagined to be feigned. The physical phenomena with the hand, the eye, metals, and 
water, were as striking and conclusive, with the exception of some with lead and nickel; 
and those I have since proved to large numbers of able judges to be equally conclusive. 
Mesmerised nickel produces upon the elder sister the most violent eifects, which none but 
a very ignorant person could consider pretended. Now, when this, or gold or silver, has 
been rubbed upon a part, and the friction has been desisted from before the effects come, or 
the effects have come and have ceased, they may be at once excited in the former case, or 
re-excited in the latter, by friction of the part with any thing — a piece of wood or a piece of 
lead ; and this excitement may be produced again and again. Friction was performed with 
lead upon parts to which nickel had been applied either with or without effect as it might 
be, and the effects took place violently. This explanation I gave to the Editor, but he was 
either too dull to understand, or had his reasons for not understanding. In another set of 
experiments lead produced effects, though nickel had not been applied to the parts; and yet 
I never had been able to mesmerise lead by holding it in my hand and to produce effects by 
then applying it. Those effects I candidly said I could not explain, since I had not com- 
menced experiments with lead or nickel for more than two or three days; but, as there was- 
no more deception in the cases, nor less certainty of the various facts which I had observed, 
than in chemistry or any other natural science, I added that these results showed only that 
they required farther investigation, and ihat I had no doubt I should, by perseverance, dis- 
cover their cause. The Editor knew that I was about to leave London that same dny for an 
absence of six weeks on the continent, and yet he could not wail for my return and give me 
an opportunity of farther research, but. with that gentlemanly delicacy for which he and his 
friends are so remarkable, published, almost immediately, what professed to be an account 
of what he had seen, — a most imperfect and worthless account, however; in his plenitude 
of scientific importance, he declared that not one more experiment on magnetism would 
ever be required; and answers which were sent he never published. He omitted to slate a 
circumstance in his experiments with lead, which had never been allowed to happen in 
mine, but which, when reflecting upon them on my tour, I thought might have influenced 
the results. In employing the lead, I had noticed th;it he applied it against a piece of nickel 
held in his other hand, before he applied it to the patient. On my return, I applied lead to 
her as before, and, indeed, copper also; yet never obtained an effect. I then applied the 
leader the copper, as it might be, against a piece of mesmerised nickel or gold, before 
applying it to her; and its application to her was then always productive of effects. I dis- 
covered that the surface of the lead or copper had become nickelized or aurified by the 

and afterwards acknowledged the tricks which they had practised on the credu- 
lity of Elliotfon." The only reply to be made is, that this is totally witrue. One 
of them was said by Mr. Wakley to have been reported to have figured at Ir- 
ving's chapel. The report was not only totally untrue, but I cannot find that it 
existed before it appeared in the Lancet. Mr. Wakley, like Dr. John.son, is a 
father, and he should have some feeling for innocent young females, who, though 
in tlie humbler walks of life, are not his inferiors in respectability. He even ad- 
vertised in the morning papers " An editorial article on the tricks and deceptions 
practised by perlbrmers and patients under the stale name of animal magnetism, 
showing the total failure of tiie patients to fulfil the promises of the magnelisers, 
when the signals which pass between them are effectually disallowed." 

However, his day of triumph has passed, and his chief business now must be 
to consider how lie can best e.xtricate himself from the sad position into which he 
has fallen from having so overcunningly, hastily, and violently committed him- 
self. Some say he is ready to hang himself. But I implore him for the sake of 
science and humanity not to think of such a folly, nor to imitate the dignified 
exit of the Tartar General, who, according to the dispatch of Sir H. Pottinger, 
" retired to his house when he saw that all was lost, made his servants set it on 
fire, and sat in his chair till he was burnt lo death." 

Not only the occurrence of mesmeric phenomena, but even improvement from 
mesmerism is sufficient to subject an innocent person to the charge of imposition. 

Above a year ago 1 was first requested to visit a patient whom I found labour- 
ing under a very severe form of St. Vitus's dance of nine years' duration. The 
disease is very common ; but I have seen only a few instances of so long a dura- 
tion of it, and never one of such violence as it generally exerted on the organs 
of respiration at night. We meet daily with persons who have constant twilchings 
of the features and workings of the head, arms, or trunk ; but this was general, 
as well as constant, and often most frightful. To suppose the case as one of 
imposition would have been as ridiculous as to suppose a case of confluent small 
pox to bean imposition. Such movements night and day for nine years, — nay, 
such movements for a day, 1 defy any human being to make voluntarily. The 
patient, though shut out from society, except that of intimate friends, and from 
all public amusement, bore this sad affliction so patiently as to increase one's 
pity. Dr. Marshall Hall had attended, and given the following opinion of the 
case : — " Chronic inflammation of the membranes in which the spinal marrow 
is inclosed, with the effusion of lymph or serum, and consequent irritation of the 
spinal marrow itself, with the spasmodic actions which such irritation is calcu- 
lated to induce. The essential character is its chronic form." So real and 
severe did he consider the case, that he prescribed mustard cataplasms to the 
spine, cupping on the back of the neck every fifth day, and mercury to such 
an extent that not one sound tooth is left in the patient's head: and declared he 

contacl ; and thus the difficulty was solved. These experiments I have repeated again and 
again before numbers of gentlemen, taking tho greatest care that the patient should not know 
when I applied lead or copper which had not been in contact .with nickel or gold, and when 
I applied lead or copper which had been in contact with either of them ; and the results 
have been uniform. I was obliged to leave the poor little girl in an intense coma with 
occasional violent tetanic spasms, at the Editor's house, little imagining that any farther 
experimenls would be attempted, especially in my absence, by a person ignorant of the sub- 
ject and altogether incapable of making experiments. 1 had seen sufficient of the extreme 
carelessness, and want of informalion and philosophic power, of the Kditor durinir the 
experiments conducled by myself, and which he frequently altogether deranned notlo be 
convinced that in my absence no experiment could be made in a manner to i'usti'fv conclu- 
sions. In his Ignorance, he acted as though mesmeric susccplibility is always ore^ent ind 
always the same- whereas the reverse is the fact; and experiments with water and meLls 
frequently repeated so derange the susceptibility that we are often obliged to desist 

"During the five months which have elapsed since my relurn, I h'ave reneated all mv 
experiments and continued my observations, not only on Ihe two Okeys, bii on othLr 
Sved "' ' "^ '"'"'"""■ ^"l"'"'"^' ''"^ >>"" conHrmed and all difficulties 

69 

would have treated his own child in the same manner. He treated the case for 
three months, and wished to continue his plan for a twelvemonth. But, though 
the poor patient submitted patiently to be thus disfigured, the family medical 
attendant and friends could not allow it, and Sir Benjamin Brodie was consulted, 
who condemned the treatment in the most unqualified manner, declined to pre- 
scribe medicines or to see the patient again, and stated that nothing more could 
be done than to endeavour by every means to strengthen the debilitated frame; 
Dr. Hall, however, wrote a letter, still in possession of the family, maintaining 
his opinion, and treating Sir Benjamin Brodie's opinion most contemptuously. 
Some months since, when asked my opinion of mesmerism in the case, I replied 
that, though I had never failed in curing the disease with oxyd of iron in chil- 
dren and youth, when it had not lasted more than some months, I had never 
succeeded with iron or any other medicine when it had lasted some years and in 
adults : that I had never known mesmerism to fail any more than iron in the 
former cases: but that, as iron failed in the latter, 1 could not venture to hope 
that mesmerism would succeed. I advised that, as mesmerism had been begun, 
it should be continued rather' than the case be abandoned ; though I entreated 
them not to be disappointed if no good resulted. For the last four months mes- 
merism has been daily persevered with; and the gradual but steady improvement 
in the strength, the sleep, and looks of the patient, and the decline of the disease, 
astonishes every one. Now that Dr. Hall has learnt the improvement by mes- 
merism, he says that he eil along (while cupping every five days, and giving 
mercury freely, and proposing to do all this for twelve months!) suspected, and 
is now (mesmerism having done great good,) perfectly certain, that the case was 
feigned : ! 1 should like to observe his countenance when he says so. 

Of all persons Dr. Hall should be careful. Because, in his introductory lec- 
ture,* he is at great pains to impress upon his pupils the duty of being careful 
in investigating cases so as not to accuse a sick person of imposition. He quotes 
the following passage from a physician of a Parisian hospital, as '' candid and 
touching." — "How frequently does it happen that individuals labouring under 
inflammation of the cerebral membranes, have been treated as malingerers, or as 
being of lazy disposition. A young girl is brought to the hospital without any 
apparent functional disease: she is morose and stupid, and answers only by mono- 
syllables after having been frequently and earnestly interrogated. The physician 
mistakes this for caprice or dissimulation, but she dies." " I shall never forgive 
myself for having committed a similar error with regard to a schoolboy." "The 
expression of this boy's countenance was perfectly natural ; the pulse not accele- 
rated; he lay in bed, with the knees drawn up to the chin, making no complaint 
of suffering, and merely anxious to be amused by entertaining stories. I made 
the child get up : he did so, but remained moping about the chimney corner. / 
compelled him to walk up and down the room; his steps were uncertain, like 
those of a drunken man. This poor child was forcibly dressed, and even beaten 
by his parents" (the treatment prescribed with a promise of certain success for 
Dr. Wilson's poor boy by Mr. Bransby Cooper),t " who thought ho affected to be 
ill. I was soon, however, painfully convinced of the error into which we had 
fallen ; the poor boy died of hydrocephalus." 

It was but in the same way that those naval men acted who were tried in 
December last for killing a poor man of colour, whom they chose to fancy an 
impostor. He was cook, and had been unwell for some days. Being in his berth, 
he was ordered to prepare breakfast, but said he was very ill. " You skulking 

, there is nothing the matter with you," was the chief mate's reply. To that 

the sick creature answers, "Really, sir, you do not know my feelings:" and the 
reply was, "You lazy fellow, if you don't attend to my orders I will send down 
some tackle and heave you up." As he lay in his bed in the forecastle he was 
heard to groan, and that caused another to say, "If you don't hold your noise, I'll 

• Lancet, Oct. 7lh, 1837, p. 40. t Lancet, March lllh, 1843, p. 876. 

54 

put a rope's end round your neck." The threat was executed ; the rope was 
drawn tightly round his neck, and he vnis pulled forcibly from his berth. As he 
seemed strangling, the rope was shifted to his chest, and he was hauled upon deck, 
and his head as he went up struck against the scuttle. Shortly afterwards he 
was found dead. — The impostor. 

To accuse patients of imposition is very easy. But it is a very vulgar, as well 
as cruel, habit, founded on ignorance, presumption, and heartlessness. VVe 
should never prefer such an accusation on light grounds: and, to be assured of 
the grounds, we should be well acquainted with the subject. He who is igno- 
rant of a subject is surely not justified in giving an opinion : and yet, medical 
men and others, because they are ignorant of the phenomena of the more won- 
derful and uncommon diseases of the nervous system, and of mesmerism, prepos- 
terously pronounce the subjects of them impostors, and those who know the truth, 
to be fools, or rogues, or in league with the devil. It was the same cause which 
made the people pronounce Democritus mad, when he looked for the source of 
insanity in the brain; to pronounce Roger Bacon a sorcerer, who knew physical 
facts of which they were ignorant; to ascribe epilepsy to St. Vitus's dance, and 
numerous other diseases, to demoniacal possession;* to ascribe the phenomena of 
electrical and galvanic apparatus to the agency of spirits, as the savage supposed 
there must be a spirit inside the watch. Of peasants better things could not be 
expected: but the whole of education is so unsound that gross ignorance and 
superstition exist among those who presume to teacl>»and have been judged fit 
for instructing others, and believe they have received the Creator of the Universe, 
or the Holy Spirit, into their persons at the ceremony of episcopal ordination, but 
should be compelled 

" To cast their orders at their bi.shop's feet, 
Take their dishonoured gown to Monmouth-street." 

Cowper. 

The Abbe Wurts of Lyons, in a work on the Superstitions of Philosop^ ers, 
wrote, at the beginning of this century, that, although all belief in the de was 
apparently given up, he was really the chief personage, though disguised, in the 
lodges of freemasons, mansions, and palaces, and acted sometimes under the form 
of a wonderful man, a physical philosopher, a mesmeriser, &c. 

Another Catholic author, in a book published not many years ago in France, 
wrote thus : — " The efiects of mesmerism are not explicable by any natural causes. 
No natural means are employed to produce them. Mesmerism is a stratagem 
invented by the devil to seduce souls, to increase the number of his adherents, 
and oppose the works of Jesus Christ and his ministers. No Christian can em- 
ploy mesmerism for himself or others without mortal sin. Mesmerism under- 
mines faith and morals. Government ought to proscribe it. In order to be 
initiated into its mysteries, Jesus Christ must be denied, and the cross trampled 
upon. All mesmerisers are disciples of Lucifer."f 

How slavishly does the alleged Protestant writer of a disgraceful English ser- 
mon, of which not a copy would have sold but for the wretched state of our edu- 
cation, adopt the thoughts and words of the Roman Catholics, against whom he 
is so fierce. Thus vaccination was discovered to be Antichrist, and sermons were 
furiously preached against it when I was a boy, as they had been previously 
against the inoculation of small pox. Thus we read that the miraculous cures 
of Christ when he was thought " beside himself "by " his friends," were attributed 
to the devil4 as though this were so benevolent an individual. 

Ignorance mistaken for knowledge, is a frightful perpetrator of injustice and 
cruelty. Were I a preacher, there is one sin, — a daily, hourly sin— one produc- 
tive, unheeded, of immense mischief, — against which I would lift my voice in 

* See the Rev. Hugh Farmer's Essay on the Demoniacs. 

+ Foissac, pp. 251, 394. j Mark iii., 21, 22, 

55 

season and out of season, but which I never once in my whole life heard preached 
against, though I find it treated of in one of the late Dr. Arnold's sermons. It is 
the sin of presuming to hold opinions upon which we have not qualified ourselves 
to have any opinion at all. Men and women, young and old, educated and un- 
educated, rich and poor, equally commit this from morning to night, committing 
it not only in word but in action : and yet they, in superficial routine, pray to 
God to keep them from presumptuous sins, — "Keep thy servant also from pre- 
sumptuous sins."* 

Of all classes, the medical profession should conduct themselves the most ra- 
tionally. They profess to be very scientific, liberal, and humane. 

It is the character of a scientific man to acknowledge that he is only an observer 
of the universe, and of a minute fraction of it ; that he comes into existence with 
his peculiar nature and is placed here, without his own interference, and has had 
no share in constructing the universe; that he must admit all that he finds, and 
could never have imagined what he does find ; that he can explain nothing, and 
what he calls explanation is merely the placing of various facts under the same 
head. Medical men constantly tefuse to admit facts, because they presump- 
tuously suppose beforehand that such facts are not ; thus creating the world ac- 
cording to their poor narrow conceptions, and forgetting that it is their duty to 
be " hunji)le, teachable and mild." 

Those who declare they would not believe the facts of mesmerism if they saw 
them, could not have believed the miracles had they lived in the days of Christ, 
and cannot in reason now, because they must believe on the reported evidence 
of other men's senses instead of their own. An exemplary clergyman once said 
to me, " How can I refuse to believe the facts of mesmerism and say that [ be- 
lieve the miracles]" A friend of mine on coming up to town this spring, en- 
quired earnestly if the case of amputation had occurred at all, since the existence 
of Wombell, Mr. Ward, and Mr. Topham, was altogether denied in his part of 
the country. 

It is the character of a liberal man to give others credit for sincerity, a love of 
trufi industry, and sense equal with his own ; yet they are puffed up, thanking 
God ii ' t they are not such fools as some other men are, — even as this mesmeriser. 
"Plagiarist! liar! impostor! heretic! were among the expressions of malig- 
nant hatred lavished upon Galileo," in 1609.f 

Dcleuze proved in 1819 that our " adversaries do not know mesmerism, give its 
partizans credit for absurd opinions, pass over in silence the most convincing 
proofs, while they refute facts which nobody maintains, and, when forced to con- 
fess incontestable phenomena, ascribe them to something inadequate to produce 
them."t 

Foissac, in 1833, complained that "able men write daily against mesmerism 
without knowing any thing about it, or having studied it, and do not hesitate to 
insult and defame those who feel it a duty to do homage to truth, in receiving the 
testimony of their senses and obeying their conscience."} 

The conduct of many up to 1843 shows that they have not advanced in wisdom. 
A friend told me he had sent a copy of Mr. Topham's pamphlet to a Fellow of 
the College of Physicians, who returned it unopened. 

It is the character of a humane man to be anxious that all promises of benefit 
to his fellow-creatures maybe fulfilled; that every alleged means of curing 
disease may turn out, not a fallacy, but a reality, — to " hope all things." Medical 
men should be the humblest of all practitioners of art. Highly as I estimate the 
powers of my art, when carefully and earnestly employed, and invaluable as is a 
skilful, laborious, and conscientious medical man, we know in our hearts that we 
have yet but an insufficient insight into disease ; that the investigation of cases 
is too difficult and too laborious to be carried on efficiently, in the greaternumber 

• Psalm xix. 

t Life of Galileo, published by the Society for the Diffusion of Vsefvl Knowledge, p. 20. 

t Foissac, p. 241. $ Ibid. p. 551. 

56 

of them, by persons who see many in the day, whether in charities or in a profit- 
able round; that well established measures require more pains for tlaeir perfect 
administration than are generally given; that t^ir a very large number of cases 
our means are very inadequate, tor many all but useless; and that medical men 
are receiving money every day for doing little or no good. Were not their art 
so imperfect, they would not have to complain, as they do everlastingly, of the 
prosperity of quacks and persons altogether, and not, like themselves, in part, 
pretenders. They should each feel it a duty strenuously to be looking out for 
improvements of their art; and satisfied that it may be as greatly improved as 
any other art, they, instead of hugging themselves on their receipts and sneering 
lazily at the disinterestedly industrioii-s when a new fact or remedy is mentioned, 
should hopefully listen, and determine to ascertain what amount of good it con- 
tains, ashamed of the errors and vices of their predecessors, who violently op- 
posed the trutlis of the circulation, — the lacteals, and then of the lymphatics, — 
the physiology of the brain, — inoculation, and then of vaccination, — bark, — anti- 
mony, &c; — remembering that our College of Physiciens imprisoned one physi- 
cian tor employing cantharides, and another for differing from Galen; that Am- 
brose Pare was " hooted" for lying wounded arteries instead of applying boiling 
pitch, the pain of which they thought nothing of, and which Dr. Copland would 
have admired ; that just as the course of the earth taught by Pythagoras had to 
be taught afresh by Copernicus, at the end of two thousand years, after being re- 
viled, and then again required all the powers of Newton for its demonstration, .so 
the truth of nerves of sense and motion being distinct fell into contempt in the 
last century, and no preparation of that ancient and powerful remedy, colchicum, 
was in the London Pharmacopceia when I was student at St. Thomas's and Guy's 
Hospitals, in 1808. 

The happiness of a scientific, liberal, and humane course they would find great 
beyond all expectation. They would feel raised as men, and be enabled not to 
view their poor coterie, or college, or profession, as their world, fashioning their 
opinions, and habits, and whole natwre by its cramping influence; but, regarding 
themselves as a part of universal nature, would find themselves always moving 
freely in it, would keep their regards constantly upon its truths only, and, walking 
happily onwards, bestow no more attention upon the sayings and doings of the 
coteries and prosperous men of the moment, than upon the noisy sparrows which 
flutter and chirp outside their window to-day and will not be heard of to-morrow. 

If I have expressed myself strongly in this pamphlet, it is what I intended. 
The adversaries of mesmerism and of mesmerists have had their full sway hitherto, 
and they must be thankful for a change. Our turn is now come. Their conduct 
has shown that patience, sincerity, disinterestedness, and mild persuasion are lost 
upon them. Our objects are of incalculable importance, — the establislimenl of 
means to cure diseases at present more or less troublesome, difficult or impossible 
to cure, — the prevention of pain in surgical operations, — and possibly other 
advances on which I will not venture at present to say anything. This must 
require a great cfltirt, for it will form an era in the history of man ; and those who 
are willing to assist must be in earnest. I feel no hostility to our opponents. 
They merely act the part of puppets;— not knowing why they so act, and blindly 
obeying the general laws by which a supply of opponents to every truth and 
improvement is always provided. The statistics of opposition to good things 
would show that their course obeys fixed laws; and they are to be pitied for 
being destined to the parts which they so eagerly perforai. 

FINIS. 

v.'" 

Accession no 

8141 

Author 

Elliotson,J. 
Numerous cases 

Call no. 
ANESTHESIA 

1.14 a
