. Reaper: al
Bits Mare ye


} i ty
iy) a.


Steam Spe


( M


age eS ae
ce if hae ae re
abe ent oy
. ry ‘ Nf nd te |
eS oe y
‘ vre(panh,


37 3))


HUMAN


PHYSIOLOGY.


rs

s <

HISTORICAL
MEDICAL


1p Rae


aie si LOA
eleo,,


Lonpon:


Printed by A. Srorrtswoonr,
New-Street-Square,


303


CHAP. XIX.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


W« now arrive at the animal functions —those which consist of
feeling and the exertion of a will,—those, therefore, which, in
their nature, must be peculiar to animals.

The organs of these functions are, the encephalon, spinal chord,
and nerves. These, together with bodies called ganglions, con-
stitute the nervous system.

The encephalon, or brain, is encased in the cranium ; the spinai
chord, or improperly, spinal marrow, or spinal prolongation of the
brain, in all the vertebrae, down to the first or second lumbar;
the nerves pass through openings in the skull, between the verte-
bre, and in the sacrum, and run in all directions through the .
system ; while the ganglions are disseminated in the head, neck,
and trunk,

The encephalon is the largest solid organ found in the cavities of
the body, except the liver. Its substance is not firm, and on ex-
posure to the air grows very soft. It consists of a pulpy and a
fibrous portion. Its more external part, and some internal parts,
are pulpy, and of various shades of ash colour and yellowish
brown. The chief portion is fibrous and white. It is, therefore,
said by some to consist of a cortical or cineritious, and of a
medullary or white, portion: but what is not white is not always
cortical, neither is its hue always cineritious ; and the white fibrous
portion is totally different from what is properly called marrow.
Gall, therefore, more properly, says it consists of a pulpy and a
fibrous portion.*


* « We could wish that the term medulla were banished from the nervous
system. The functions of nerves are totally different from those of marrow, and
infinitely more noble. Besides, the idea of marrow always excludes fibrous
structure.”’ (Anatomie et Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux, et du Cerveau en par-
ticulier, 4 vols. 4to. Paris, 1810—19, with an atlas of 100 plates . Vol. i. p. 49.)

While some had said that the white part was all blood-vessels, others that it
contained none, some that it, as well as the cineritious part, was all globules,
some that it was solid, others tubular, Leuwenhoeck, Vieussens, and Stenon,

x


304 ANATOMY OF


It consists of four masses: one many times larger in the adult
than the second, and called cerebrum ; a second, called cerebellum,


‘ < i in I i ff (i aie Nm,


phy -


iy - i


a t.


Dy wr


ff TTT
vi Us ; Hyp


pronounced it fibrous; and Bonnet, Herder, and many others, conceived a fibrous
structure so fit for the operations of the mind that they adopted this opinion. But
Soemmering and Cuvier did not venture to consider it fibrous throughout; and
many moderns, — the brothers Wenzel, for instance, — declared that, after re-
peated experiments and most careful observation, the brain was not at all fibrous,
but equally pulpy throughout. Walter, Ackerman, and Bichat equally deny
the fibrous structure of the brain, and speak of the white part as only medullary.
(Gall, 1. ec. vol. i. p. 235.)

Professor Ehrenberg has lately found the proper substance of the brain and
nerves to be fibrous, under a microscope with a power of magnifying to 300 or
even to 800 diameters. In the white part of the the brain, he says, the fibres are
straight and cylindrical, with others like strings of pearls: in the medullary,
these knotted fibres only exist, contained in a dense network of blood-vessels,
and interspersed with plates and granules. He declares the large cylindrical
fibres to be tubular, and believes that the knotted are tubular also. All micro-
scopical observations require careful repetition by many individuals. (Poggen-
dorf’s Annalen der Physik und Chimie, No. 7. 1833.)


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 305


1. Anterior extremity. 20. Superior extremity of the spinal
2. Posterior extremity, of the great chord.
central fissure of the cerebrum. 21. Central groove, which divides
3, 3, 3. Its anterior lobes. 22. The corpora pyramidalia.
4, 4. Its middle lobes. 23. Corpora olivaria.
5, 5. Fissure of Silvius, separating the 24. Corpora restiformia.
anterior from the middle. 25. Olfactory nerve,
6, 6. Posterior lobes. 26. Its bulb,
7, 7. Convolutions of the external. 27. Extent,
surface of the hemispheres. 28. Its mkldle, and
8. Infundibulum. 29. Internal, root.
9. Tuber cinereum. 30. Optic nerves after their decussa-
10. Corpora pisiformia. tion.


11. Greysubstance between them; and, 31. Their decussation.
The anterior prolongations of the 32. Optic nerves before their decus-
mesocephalon, or crura cerebri. sation.

13. Inferior surface of the mesocepha- 33. Common motor nerve of the eye.
lon,and the groove which lodges 34. Internal motor, or pathetic, nerve.
‘the basilar artery. 35. Trigeminus or trifacial.

14. Groove separating the mesoce- 36. External motor nerve of the eye.
phalon and the superior extre- 37. Facial nerve.
mity of the chorda oblongata. 38. Acoustic nerve.

15, 15. Posterior prolongations of the 39, Glosso-pharyngeal or gustatory.
mesocephalon, or cruracerebelli. 40. Pneumono-gastric or vagus.

16, 16. Inferior surface of the lobesof 41. Accessory.


the cerebellum. 42, 42. Fibres of reinforcement of the
17. Anterior, and accessory..
18, 18. Posterior, parts of the circum- 43. Roots of the hypoglossal, plunged
ference of the cerebellum. in the groove between the para~
19. Fissure separating the lobes of the midal and olivary bodies. ( Gall. )


cerebellum behind.


and placed below the posterior part of the cerebrum; a third,
which unites these, is much smaller than the second, and called
mesocephalon or tuber annulare or pons Varolii; and an apparent
prolongation of this, still smaller, and termed chorda oblongata
or medulla oblongata; an apparent prolongation of which, again,
is the chofda, or medulla, spinalis.

The cerebrum is divided down to its agi into two equal
portions, termed hemispheres. Each of these, again, consists of
three portions or dobes ; an anterior, a middle, and a_ posterior.
The outermost part of the cerebrum is rendered far more exten-
sive than the dimensions of the organ, by these divisions; and
still more by being furrowed to about an inch in depth, the
two sides of each furrow being in contact, so that what are
termed convolutions exist. The inner surface of the small intes-
tines is greatly increased by projections of the mucous membrane;
the inner surface of the lungs, and of glands, by being divided
into innumerable tubes and cells: whence there is far more ab-
sorption of chyle, far more changes of the blood and air, and far

x 2


306 ANATOMY OF


= es


i iN .
i f Mii [ i
i. | ah Matte (| \
if a) }
\ pres N ; \ Was
ie! fi > a*a!


)


——s


if mm


=
By


it.
\N


EX


FA
= ss z
= EA; Des
= a a ae


Fir) )S\\\\


‘
: y i" i


rl a N Dh
x Sk. ene) u


Sa a i tl ie. y 1 in = ss


Superior surface of the cerebrum, narrower at the front than at the back ;
divided into two hemispheres, and consisting of convolutions. — In the cut at
p- 304. the lobes are seen.


more secretion, in these respective parts, than there otherwise
could be. As an equally beautiful contrivance augments the sur-
_ face of the cerebrum, and of the portion immediately subjacent, we
may be certain that the more external parts —those portions which
are thus rendered more extensive (for the mass-is rather diminished
by the contrivance) are of the highest importance; and, as the
‘inner surfaces, thus augmented, are all the seat of the functions of
the respective organs, we may, perhaps, presume that, in the case
of the cerebrum, the seat of chief function is the more superficial
portions. Even a little more increase is effected by the summit
of many convolutions being depressed. In the same way, ‘the
cerebellum is divided into two lobes, and these into sixteen
lobules; the surface of each lobe consists of about sixty plates,
standing side by side; and even in the sides of these are others,
secondary, seen only on separating the primary, and amounting,
perhaps, to 600 or 700. The purpose must be the same. We


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 307


shall find the surface farther augmented by cavities, and the sur-
face of these cavities also increased by irregularities. >

On cutting the hemispheres of the cerebrum away by succes-
sive horizontal slices, we find the mass white and the outermost
portions grey. When the hemispheres are entirely removed, a
continuous surface remains, called centrum ovale ; the two halves


is


ny


Pann se
<a és ay ie ee ys

ii i “a (I ) # nu i
Cap iy i ) f


D> oe: sill fa Hy


3's S
=
=~ aN


Ss


{sy


==


Ai ———= se


Hylan
aii that


i
| AH
Hiatt =”


Ht} Ait er a
i {hin mH


Ba MIT ai
ay uy >. iP s
«aul


—————


wii»


i te
ilk ig


= a
—


pi: sl tii


HUG
[|i


a >
—————————


1| 4 Hl
i mill muh fa F i |) itt 7m f
7 (\ Ne oul i Y | ail IW si ve we Le

i = wiih ip’ aperit a | [J | lee ie | ‘
| " \ "wal / H | aid te “f AS
Ye. a 3 ie = me, |

HM} snl Hil i's
ih an i a : ' ‘all : Hi |


=z


i \


I i i , } ‘i
. aN ie :
eabuif|| tl
th
i
ye
Re a” A


~


i


2 ig af


The cranium is external. The pulpy grey substance next. Then the fibrous
white substance or centrum ovale. The mesolobe in the midst of it; and the


- raphe in the centre of this.


> M. Desmoulins contends, Ist, that integrity of surface is the only condition


constantly necessary for the production of nervous actions; 2d, that these are -


proportionate to extent of surface; and, 3d, that they are performed by the sur-


face, and transmitted from it. The energy of an electric apparatus depends very
much upon surface. Dr. Spurzheim asks whether it is not on this account that


the-encephalic masses are hollow or convoluted; and remarks that the nervous
The Anatomy of the


masses of the lower animals are very commonly hollow.
Brain, by G. Spurzheim, M.D., p. 206. London, 1826.

Dr. Macartney has lately declared that the surface of the human brain is thus
proportionately more extensive than that of any other animal. Second Report of


the British Scient. Assoc., p. 454.
ee,


308 ANATOMY OF


being united in the centre, and their commissure being termed me-
solobe or corpus callosum. It has a longitudinal depression, called
raphé or suture. When still more is removed horizontally, a
large cavity appears immediately on each side of the centre,
called the lateral ventricle: which runs forwards into the anterior
lobe, making an anterior cornu; backwards into the posterior
lobe, making a posterior cornu, ending like a finger, and thus
forming what is called a digital cavity ; and downwards into the
middle lobe, making an inferior cornu. A septum exists between
the two lateral ventricles, called septum lucidum, with a little space
called the fifth ventricle between the two layers of which it con-
sists. In each lateral ventricle is a white mass, called thalamus


All ie \
Ay \


UT


Ss
a
a,


a \
wD


} i‘
TY


itl , f
i in INA Ih | i ali
Ge


if


7 iy >
UP


(
, ny fe
4; g cali tip
ey ON Ue
SSPE See,


Horizontal view of the cerebrum, sufficient being cut away to exhibit, 1, 1, the
great mass of white fibrous substance, surrounded on the surface by the grey
pulp. 2,2. Corpora striata, and lateral ventricles. 3. Septum lucidum. 4. Fifth
ventricle. 5, 5. Semicircular band separating the corpora striata from the thalami
optici, upon which lie, 6, 6, the plexus choroides. 7,7. Fornix. 8, 8. Its posterior
pillars, turning round to face the fimbriated bodies. 9, 9. Part where the superior
part of the lateral ventricles communicates with the inferior, which is not seen.
10, 10, Ergot. 11,11. The posterior part or digital extremity of the lateral ven-
tricles. se


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 309


opticus, with two tubercles on its posterior border, called external
and internal corpora geniculata ; a yellowish mass with white striz,
called corpus striatum; a pale semicircular band, called tena
semicircularis, between the two; and a plexus of vessels, called
plexus choroides. The floor of the cavity has various promi-
nences: one called hippocampus major, or cornu ammonis, which
is a prolongation of the posterior extremity of the mesolobe in
the inferior cornu; and a small one of the same kind in the
posterior cornu, called hippocampus minor, or ergot; another
called corpus jfimbriatum. Under the septum is another long
white body called the fornix, with a few transverse lines called
lyra at its lower surface, extended over a third ventricle, which
is placed exactly in the centre, and to which an opening leads
at each side of the fornix from the corresponding lateral ven-
tricle. The anterior extremity of the fornix divides into two
pillars, which diverge and run down to two projections at the
base of the brain, called corpora mammillaria, pisiformia, or
albicantia, between which is a grey triangular plate, called pons
Tarini: its posterior extremity does the same, and each pos-
terior division itself divides into two, one of which is the corpus
fimbriatum ; and between this and the thalamus opticus exists a
chink through which the pia mater, or innermost covering of the
‘brain, enters into the third ventricle and unites with the plexus
choroides, which is, in fact, a plexus of vessels, connected by
cellular membrane, called, in this part of the body, pia mater. At
the posterior extremity of the fornix are seen four eminences,
called corpora quadrigemina ; the two higher and larger called
nates, or c. g. anteriora ; the two smaller and lower called testes,
or c.g. posteriora ; and, before them all, is a grey body, called
pineal gland, generally containing grit, and attached to the brain
by two medullary prolongations only, which run to the thalami
optici. Behind and below the corpora quadrigemina, is a fine
layer of transverse greyish fibres, called valve of Vieussens, which
is formed by three converging bands, named processus a cerebello
ad testes. Three bands of white matter, called commissures, run
transversely over the third ventricle, establishing more commu-
nication between the two halves of the cerebrum. The anterior
part of the floor of the third ventricle is formed by the upper
surface of a small grey body, called tuber cinereum, which runs
downwards in a conical form under the name of znfundibulum, and
ends in alittle mass called pituitary gland, and lodged in the fossa
y 4


3t0 ANATOMY OF


Say ann


;
Sh,

we SS

IAS


rill ie


a { = FAW ‘ .
’ , aang ss ch vy — i i 4


(l
ys
A
iN “ Cua

fi)
my


\\
is


A transverse section of the brain, on.a level with the lateral ventricles. The
upper part of the corpus callosum, together with the fornix, removed, so as to
expose the upper part of the lateral ventricles, the middle ventricle, the corpora
striata, the optic thalami, tubercula quadrigemina, and the pineal gland with its
prolongations.. ‘The valve of Vieussens and the cerebellum are divided in the
middle line, and separated to expose the fourth ventricle and the calamus scrip-
torius. 1. Fransverse section of the frontal bone. 2, 2. Cranial surface of its
orbitar plate. 3. Anterior extremity of the cerebral hemispheres. 4. Posterior
extremity of the same hemispheres. .5..White substance of the hemispheres.
6, 6,6. Thin) grey substance. 7. Anterior part of the interlobular fissure.
& Cut in the anterior extremity of the corpus callosum. 9. Bent-back portion
of the anterior, extremity of the corpus callosum, placed between the corpora
striata. 10. Anterior extremity of the corpus striatum. 11. Posterior ex-
tremity of the corpus striatum, and: upper part of the lateral ventricle. 12. Tha-
lamus opticus. 193. Semicircular band between the thalamus and corpus
striatum. 14, 14, Anterior pillars of the fornix, divided near their origin.
15. Anterior, and, 16. Posterior, extremity of the middle ventricle. 17. Nerv-
ous band or middle commissure, uniting the thalami in the interior of the
middle ventricle.- 18. Posterior commissure. 19. Pineal gland. 20. Medul-
lary prolongations of the pineal gland in the internal part of the optic thalami.
2L. Tubercula quadrigemina superiora. 22. Tub. quad. inferiora, 23. Crucial fur-
row between them all. 24,24. Valve of Vieussens divided, and each half turned
back. | 25. Vertical section of the cerebellum and arbor vite. 26, 26. Supe-
rior surface.of the cerebellum. 27.-Fourth ventricle. 28. Central groove


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 311


running from the aqueduct of Sylvius and the upper surface of the cerebral
protuberance to the upper surface of the.spinal chord, and united to, 29. the
cavity commonly called calamus sceipbayis.s 30, me oper extremity of the spinal


Marrow.


seen on the upper Rats of the ethmloid! borie, before the cor-
pora albicantia.../ (Cut, p. 304.) From the posterior part of the
third ventricle’a canal, called” aquaeductus ‘Sylvit, or iler a tertio
ad quartum ventriculum, runs back, ‘under the base of the corpora
quadrigemina, into a cavity in the cerebellum called the fourth
ventricle. / |

On cutting the Cerebellum, which has two lobes united by a
projecting” portion: called vermiform process at the superior-ante-
rior and superior- -middle part,-we find it less consistent than the
other parts of) the encephalon. | “Its fibrous substance within is
collected into three masses ; two lateral, and sending off prolong-


1. Continuation of the central fissure of the spinal chord. 2. Beginning of
the anterior pyramids.~-3, 3. Anterior pyramids. 4, 4. Corpora olivaria. 5, 5.Cor-
pora restifgrmia. 6,6. Cross band uniting the corpora olivaria. 7. Horizontal


312 ANATOMY OF-


section of the cerebellum: 7*. Ganglion of the cerebellum. 8. Converging
fibres of the cerebellum. 9. Commissure of the cerebellum or mesocephalon.
10, 10. Par trigeminum. 11, 11. Crura of the cerebrum. 12. Transverse inter-
lacement below the optic nerve. 13. One of the corpora albicantia. 14. Pro-
longation of the corpus albicans towards an anterior pillar of the fornix.
15. Optic nerve. 16. Optic nerve just before their decussation, turned back.
17. Band of transverse fibres of the optic nerve. 17. Reinforcement of optic
nerve at the decussation. 19. Olfactory nerve. 20. Itsinternal root. 21. Its
external ditto. 22. Its middle ditto. 23. Anterior commissure. 24. Internal
part of the great superior ganglion or corpus striatum. 25. External part of
ditto. 26. The bundles of the corpus striatum. 27. Anterior plate of the
corpus callosum. 28. Convolution at the bottom of the fissura Sylvii. — (Gall. )


ations like the tree called the tree of life, whence their name of
arbor vite ; and one central.


A lateral view of the encephalon, sufficient having been removed to show the
interior of the chorda oblongata. 1. Origin of the anterior pyramid, or great
original band of the cerebrum. 2. The fibres of the anterior pyramid entered
into the mosocephalon or great commissure of the cerebellum, and enlarged in
their passage through it. 3. Crura, or great fibrous bands, of the cerebrum.
4. Their locus niger. 5. The corpus olivare or oval ganglion of the great chorda
oblongata. 6. The thalamus opticus or great inferior ganglion of the cere-
brum. 7,7,7. The corpus striatum or great superior ganglion of the cerebrum.
8. Corpus restiforme or original band of the cerebellum. 9. Corpus den-
tatum or ganglion of the cerebellum. — ( Gall.)


A smaller division of the brain, but the firmest, is the Meso-
cephalon, so named from its situation in the centre of the base,
between the cerebrum and cerebellum, and over the spinal chord.
(Cut, p. 311.) Two processes of the cerebrum, called crura cerebri,
which contain some grey substance, whence the name /ocus niger,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 313


i
Mf


fi


fi)


| |


il
An)


The brain placed upon its base. The knife has passed through the middle of
the great commissure or corpus callosum, 1, 1, 1, 1, as far as the infundibulum
2, situated below the anterior commissure 3, and as far as the corpora quadri-
gemina 4,4, 4,4. The two hemispheres are separated and unfolded. The
posterior and superior parts of the nervous mass of the spine and brain are seen.
The grooves 5, 5, are continuous with the lateral grooves 6,6. 7. The central
fissure. 8, 8. The space before the fundamental part or processus vermiformis
of the cerebellum open; viz. the fourth ventrical : it is in connection, by means
of a canal situated below the mass of communication called the valve of Vieus-
sens 9, 9, and below 10, with the third ventricle or space, 11, 11, in the midst of
the great inferior cerebral ganglion or thalamus opticus 12. The'septum lucidum
or common mass of communication and fornix are cut at 13, on each side, and
entirely removed, in order to expose the great cerebral ganglion 12, 12, and
14, 14, 14, 14. On the side a, all the inner surface of the cerebellum is seen cut
vertically through the centre. On the side 3, the cerebellum has been removed
by a horizontal cut from within outwards, and from before backwards, on a level
with the white fibres 15, situated in the fourth cavity or ventricle, the fundamental
part or vermiform process, and what is seen of the anterior surface of the side a.
By a vertical cut in the direction from 13 to 16 (side a), the anterior and inner
part of the hemisphere g has been removed, to show the diverging direction of
the nervous band above the great inferior ganglion or thalamus opticus, the very
fine fibres of grey substance, the great bands 17 in the middle, the direction of
this mass of grey substance in the internal part 18 and in the external 19, and
the proportional size of each of these divisions. 20, 20. Commencement of the
‘pyramidal bundle of the cerebrum. 21. Corpus restiforme or original band
of the cerebellum. 22. Fourth ventricle or the space before the fundamental
part of the cerebellum. 23. Entrance of the pyramids below the pons or
great original band of the cerebrum beneath the commissure of the cere-


-8314 ANATOMY OF


bellum. 24. Median line of the cerebellum. 25. Middle of the nervous
mass of the fundamental part of the cerebellum. 26. Ganglion or corpus
rhomboideum of the cerebellum. 27, 27. Mesolobe. 28, 28. Valve of Vieus-
sens or mass of connection of the primitive part of the cerebellum with the
corpora quadrigemina. 29, 29. Pathetic nerves. 30. Commissure of the corpora
quadrigemina. 31. Pineal gland. 32, 32. Superior band of connection of the
pineal gland with the great inferior cerebral ganglion. 33. Soft or middle com-
missure of the inferior cerebral ganglion. 34, 34. Mammillary bodies. 35, 35.
Transverse interlacement of the great cerebral bundle. 36, 36. Transverse in-
terlacement below the optic nerve. 37, 37. Optic thalamus or great inferior
cerebral ganglion. 38, 38. Transverse interlacement of the nervous bands of
the middle lobes. 39, 39. ‘Transverse interlacements of the great superior cere-
bral ganglion. 40, 40. Fold of the corpus callosum or mass of union of the
inferior convolutions of the anterior lobe. — ( Gall.) '


and two of the cerebellum, called crura cerebelli, appear to run
to it.. The corpora quadrigemina are a part of its superior, or,
as it lies obliquely, posterior, portion ; and it, with its continuation
—the chorda oblongata, furnishes the anterior wall of the fourth
ventricle. This cavity is irregularly quadrilateral, and runs ob-
liquely from the aqueductus Sylvii or iter a tertio ad quartum
ventriculum, under the valve of Vieussens and processus ad
testes, downwards upon the back of the chorda oblongata, and
before the vermiform process of the cerebellum. On the floor of
it, or, as from the oblique position of the parts we might say, the
back of the chorda: oblongata, is a groove which ends in a tri-
angular depression called calamus scriptorius.

The mesocephalon, thus appearing formed of sala atTOHs —
two from the cerebrum, and two from the cerebellum —is itself
apparently prolonged into a short bulbous chord, termed chorda
oblongata, which lies upon the basilar process of the occipital
bone. (Cut, p. 304.) On its anterior or lower surface (for it, like
the mesocephalon, lies obliquely) are seen four elevations ; the two
outer called corpora olivaria, the two inner corpora pyramidalia,
or c. p. anteriora, or anterior pyramids. (Cut, p. 311.) On its lateral
parts are two oblong prominences, called corpora restiformia :
and on its posterior portion two others, called corpora pyramid-
alia posteriora or posterior pyramids. (Cut, p. 313.) . This chord
apparently prolonged becomes the chorda spinalis, which runs in
the vertebral canal, from the foramen occipitale to the first or
second lumbar vertebra, larger and smaller in various parts of
its course: smaller at first than the bulbous chorda oblongata, it —
swells im the middle of the cervical region, diminishes at the
end of this, swells again at the upper part of the loins, and
diminishes through the rest of its course, till it ends in an oval


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. $15


\ \ { } a Hel y F
we . We. Kea A ia Bs SS Df Ak ile
QR NW S. a. MESSE Sina Se
an SS — Vs =. SA a
= - =
= . 5 ~ LEVI TF j Vi, Tye Vy ANVES
hig if ZY y f f Y ‘ Ny


Loe Sjiead
®& \\\.
\ eS
|
-


‘ 3.00
~ S& SS
=


(J
ji


VA


a ad


SS


= a \f
= SSS
SF


in
iN
\\


a, a, Anterior corpora py-
rarnidalia; of the . chorda
oblongata. (6,4, Corpora oli-
varia, .c,c, Corpora restifor-
mia... d,. \Glosso- pharyn-
geal nerve. | e, Pneumono-
gastric. f, Hypo-glossal.  g,
Accessory nerve: | h, Poste-


rior root of the first cervical


pair. 7, Anterior root. The
posterior root in this, as in
many subjects, gives a twig,
k, to the ‘accessory, and
crosses before it to reach the
anterior root. In this in-
stance, not only is there a
communication between the
accessory. and the, posterior
root of the first .pair, but
the accessory actually be-
gins from a twig uniting the
posterior roots together. J,
First root of the accessory.
m, 1, The first cervical pair,
formed of its anterior and
posterior root. m, 2, to
m, 8, are the successive cer-
vical nerves, with their two
roots. 7,1, to , 12, The
successive dorsal ditto. 0, 1,
to 0, 5, The successive lum-
bar. p, 1, to py, 6, The suc-
cessive sacral. 9, 9, % 9
The cervical plexus, formed
by the eight cervical. and
first dorsal nerves ; and fur-
nishing, among other nerves,
r,- The. phrenic. s,) s;°s,. s,
The lumbo-sacral . plexus,
consisting of nerves fur-
nished by the lumbar and
sacral nerves. ¢t, The cer-
vical enlargement of the
spinal chord. wu, The lum-
bar enlargement. vv, Its
termination, where it splits
into many nerves, called
altogether, w, w, The cauda
equina. 2, The last nerve
of the lumbro-sacral plexus,
or sciatic. — (Dr. Manec. )


316 ANATOMY OF


bulbous extremity. A fissure in front, beginning between the
anterior pyramids, (Cut, p. 311.) divides it into two lateral halves.
Another, less deep, beginning between the posterior pyramids,
divides it posteriorly. Thus it appears two long chords, united
in their middle line; for at the bottom of each fissure a layer
of white substance is seen, running longitudinally in the form of
two bands at the posterior fissure, and consisting of transverse
filaments at the anterior, as Gall first pointed out. Two faint
grooves are seen at each side, in the cervical portion; the one
near the posterior, the other near the anterior, fissure. Its con-
sistence is generally less than.that of other nervous parts. It is
composed chiefly of white fibrous substance; but in the midst of
this is seen a fine layer of grey pulpy substance, very irregular in
shape, —not solid, but, as Mr. Mayo mentions, really a capsule.


We will now trace the several parts of the encephalon.


i i i)
a a


n Hi iF

28
B, Right side of the base of the encephalon. I, Hemisphere entire of the
cerebellum. The primitive band or corpus restiforme e ¢ of the cerebellum plunges


~


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 317


between the facial nerve, 11, and the acoustic nerve, 9. The trigeminus or fifth
is still covered entirely by the transverse fibres of the cerebellum. The olivary
ganglion, a, is prolonged below the transverse fibres 6 of the cerebellum ; one
part of the transverse fibres of the cerebellum is removed to show the continu-
ation of the pyramidal band 1, c¢, c, which begins to diverge and be reinforced.
Outside the optic nerve q, ¢, v is seen the expansion of the nervous bands, in the
inferior convolutions w,w, w of the middle lobe 26, 27.

A, Left side of the base. A verticle cut of the cerebellum, directed through
the entrance of its original bundle ee, and through the middle of its ganglion s,
in the direction 92, 28, B, to show the reinforcement of the original bundle in
the ganglion, and the ramifications and subdivisions of the nervous chords. All
the transverse fibres of the cerebellum which cover the trigeminus 4, i, and
the prolongation f of the pyramidal bundle 1, c,c, are removed. The pro-
longation of the olivary ganglions a, a is still covered by the-transverse fibres.
The optic nerve is removed from the great fibrous bundle g, and cut at. », g.
The pyramidal bundle is seen prolonged from the deeussation 1, to the trans-
verse interlacement 35, below the optic nerves. ‘The grey mass 17 has been
removed by scraping, to show the two cords of the mammillary bodies 16, 16; the
one y, towards the transverse interlacement 35, the other, 7, towards the common
mass of communication or fornix. The nervous fibres which spread out in the
convolutions of the middle Jobe, and contribute to its functions, are cut at h,h, h
between 35 and 37, on a level with the anterior commissure; and the middle
lobe is entirely removed. The mass of grey substance of the great superior
ganglion of the brain, and a part of the convolutions situated below the great
fissure, between the middle and anterior lobes, are cut in the same direction.
We thus see how this great mass is divided by the nervous bundles S into an
inner part J, and an outer part, L L; how the finest fibres are implanted in the
grey substance; how the convolutions 40, 41 are formed by the posterior
chords of the great fibrous bundle or crus placed before g, and what are the
depth and length of the great fissure 39,39 between the anterior and middle
lobes. By the removal of the middle lobe, the posterior edge of the great
cerebral cavity N N becomes visible. This cavity is prolonged inwards and
forwards below the great fibrous bundle or crus g. Between 40 and vii. are
seen the convolutions situated above the fissura Sylvii between the anterior and
middle lobes. The anterior lobe is but slightly cut.

21. Internal root of the olfactory nerve. 18. Its external root. 23. Its bulb.
25, 26. Anterior lobe of the cerebrum. 27. Its middle lobe. 28. Its pos-
terior lobe. 20. Optic nerve. 32. Decussation of the optic nerves. v. Optic
nerve after its decussation. 33. Transverse interlacement of the upper edge of
the great commissure of the cerebellum. 34, 34. Transverse interlacement of
the great. fibrous bundle. 36. Transverse interlacement of the nervous bundles
of the middle lobe. 37. Tranverse interlacement of the great superior cerebral
ganglion. 38, 38, 38, 38. Situation of the tissue of the two orders of nervous
filaments. 13. Pathetic nerve. 0, 6. Pons Varolii. 91. Central fissure of the
posterior part of the spinal chord. 61. Anterior commissure of the cerebrum.


— (Gall. )

According to Gall¢, many primitive bundles of nervous fibres
give origin to the cerebrum and cerebellum. The anterior and
posterior corpora pyramidalia, bands proceeding immediately from
the corpora olivaria, longitudinal bands which contribute to form
the fourth ventricle, and many others concealed in the chorda
oblongata, to the cerebrum ; the corpora restiformia to the cere-
bellum.

The bands arising from the anterior pyramids are the only ones


© l,c. vol. i. 270. sqq.


318 ANATOMY OF


which decussate ; the two halves of the cerebrum, the cerebellum
and spinal chord, being united by commissures. MM. Magendie
and Desmoulins, just as Prochaska, Barthez, Sabatier, Boyer,
Dumas, Bichat, and Chaussier did before them, deny the decus-
sation; but it was known of old, as Gall remarks in his demon-
stration of it, and cannot be disputed. The following, from Mr.


a, Corpora olivaria; 5, Corpora pyra-
midalia, seen to discussate at their low-
est part, where are three sets of ascend-
ing fibres on each half —one turning
from behind c, the corpora restiformia,
another running straight, and the third


decussating. This writer, however,
speaks of them not as ascending, but
descending.


Mayo, shows it well. This forms an exception to the rule ob-
served in every other part of the cranial nervous organs, except
the optic nerves and the fibres which run from the genitals to
the cerebellum, of the nervous fibres, destined to each side of
the body, running on the same side of the brain; and we hence
explain why injuries of one side of the brain, causing paralysis,
generally influence the opposite side of the body.¢ The spinal
chord has no decussation, whence injuries of one side of it in-
fluence the corresponding half of the body. Decussation has not
been discovered in the cerebellum; and vivisectors say that an
injury of a cerebellic hemisphere affects the same side; but Gall
found that extirpation of a testicle caused the onpaaiie lobe of
the cerebellum to shrink.e

After their decussation, the bands of the anterior corpora py-
ramidalia ascend on the ANTERIOR part of the chorda oblongata
(called by Gall the grand renflement), enlarging as they proceed.
As soon as they enter among the transverse fibres of the meso-
cephalon, called by Gall the great commissure of the cerebellum,
they divide into many bundles, which are imbedded in a large
quantity of pulpy substance, from which proceed many fibres,


4 J have never known an exception to this; but exceptions are recorded, and
probably some difference of situation is the reason of the difference of effect.

€ ]. c. vol. iii. p. 112. sqq. Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. ili. p. 291. sqq.
Dr. Vimont has repeated Gall’s experiments with the same results. T'raité de
Phrénologie humaine et comparée, par J. Vimont, M.D. 2 vols. 4to. with an
atlas of 120 plates. Paris, 1832—5. vol. il. p. 233.


GALL’S ANATOMY. 319


joining and augmenting them while passing through this ganglion,
for such it really is; so that they come out increased enough
to constitute, on the anterior and outer part, at least two thirds of
the crura cerebri, or, as Gall terms them, the great fibrous bundles
of the hemispheres. They contain a large quantity of pulpy sub-
stance, and enlarge the most at their superior extremity, where
the optic nerve turns round them. Their filaments and bundles
leave the great fibrous mass at the anterior or outer side of the
optic nerve, and, diverging more and more, form the lower,
anterior, and outer convolutions of the anterior and middle lobes,
which, with the anterior and outer part of the crura and gan-
glion in the mesocephalon, are always in direct proportion to the
pyramids, (Cut, p. 311.)

The corpora olivaria are true ganglia. A large bundle pro-
ceeds from each, and ascends with the posTeRIoR bundles of the
chorda oblongata among the transverse fibres of the meso-
cephalon, like the bundles of the pyramids, but» acquiring fewer
additional fibres than these from among the pulpy matter.;:» On
leaving the mesocephalon, they form the posterior and: imner
part of the crura cerebri. They acquire their greatest: increase
on entering the crura, on account of the large quantity of pulpy
substance which is there, called locus niger, which, with the fibres
it produces, forms the two thalami optici, that are here pretty
firm ganglia, and are called the great inferior cerebral ganglia by
Gall.. The bundles, on leaving the superior part of these ganglia,
reunite into fibres less diverging, and then traverse two other
ganglia —the corpora striata, called by Gall the external masses
of the pulpy substance of the great superior cerebral ganglion. Here
they acquire another increase, sufficient to enable them to form
the posterior lobes and all the superior convolutions of the an-
terior and middle lobes (Cut, p. 312.), which are always in direct
proportion to the thalami.

All these fibres of the brain (Cut, p. 312.) are styled bie Gall
diverging, departing, or apparatus of formation. But those of
the two sides, that are united by transverse fibres‘or commissures,
are styled by Gall converging or entering fibres. ‘The mesolobe:is
the great commissure of the superior convolutions of the hemi-
spheres. ‘The inferior convolutions of the anterior lobes are united
by what was called the anterior.fold of the mesolobe,—by the
anterior portion of it, which was considered to bend down and:thus
form the anterior extremity of the lateral ventricles, afterwards

i


320 GALL’S ANATOMY.


forming their floor by running on backwards, just as before bend-’
ing down it had formed their ceiling. This pretended anterior
fold is consequently termed by Gall the mass of the union of
the inferior convolutions of the anterior lobes. The fornix is the
commissure of the posterior convolutions of the middle and of all,
of the posterior lobe, and is called by Gall the mass of the general
communication of the brain. ‘The lyre is the assemblage of the
filaments of union in the fornix. The pretended posterior fold
of the mesolobe is the commissure of the posterior internal con-
volutions of the middle lobe. The anterior convolutions of the
middle lobe, and some situated at the bottom of the great fissure
of Sylvius, called by Gall the great fissure between the anterior and
middle lobes of the cerebrum, give rise, by their union, to what is
called the anterior commissure of the lateral ventricles, but by
Gall the union of the anterior convolutions of the middle lobe. The.
postertor commissure of the lateral ventricles cannot be traced to
the convolutions, but only just into the thalami optici, and is
therefore named by Gall the posterior commissure of the great
inferior cerebral ganglion. ‘The middle commissure, for the same
reason, and on account of its softness, is called by him the soft
union of the great inferior cerebral ganglion. (Cut, p. 313. 316.)
Each of these points of union is proportionate to the parts which
it unites. Gall considers the origin of the converging fibres to
be in the superficial pulpy substance.

The converging fibres of all these commissures, after lining the
interior of the two lateral ventricles, or great cavities of the cere-
brum, as Gall styles them, while he terms the third ventricle the
space between the great inferior cerebral ganglia, interlace with the
diverging fibres, and thus form a true tissue. (Cut, p. 313. No.
35, 36. 38, 39.; p. 316. No. 33, 34. 36, 37.)

The diverging fibres are then prolonged in the form of a
fibrous expansion. 7

If the ventricles are opened, and their walls gently expanded
with the hand, or if fluids collect in them, as in hydrocephalus,
the tissue of diverging and converging fibres is at length lacer-
ated. After this, the expanding force acts upon merely diverging
fibres, and all the convolutions disappear; the brain becoming
expanded into a smooth bag. A convolution is thus proved to be
‘two fibrous layers, placed side by side, and very slightly united :
therefore, if air or water is impelled against the centre of a


GALL’S ANATOMY. ~- 321


convolution cut transversely, it opens this from its base to its
summit. |


~ A convolution. The centre (a) of the white
substance is seen opened by the impulse of air.


Many fibres, especially those at the sides, are short ; while
others are longer, and this the more central they are. Hence
the prolongations and depressions of the surface of the cerebrum—
or, in other words, the convolutions. The parts most developed
have the fewest convolutions ; and, in hypertrophy of the brain,
the surface is also more regular and smooth, the shorter fibres
approaching in length to the longer. The convolutions are sel-
dom quite vertical, and their white substance is thicker at their
lower parts, since there both the shorter and the longer fibres
exist.

All the fibres are covered by cineritious pulpy substance at
their extremities.

The origin of the cerebellum is in the corpora restiformia, ac-
cording to Gall. They increase as they ascend ; and, entering
the cerebellum, penetrate to a mass of grey substance of a
somewhat rhomboidal form and with serrated edges, whence it is
styled corpus rhomboideum or dentatum. It is considered by Gall


f Gall, from observing the mind of hydrocephalic patients to be little or not at all
impaired, was certain that Walter, Ackerman, and numerous others, were wrong,
who maintained that the brain was destroyed in the disease. Finding a female,
54 years of age, with her head greatly enlarged, he entirely supported her, as he
informed me, till she died, in order to prove the correctness of his opinion. He
examined her brain, and was thus led to discover the true nature of the convolu-
tions, and the operation of the distending fluid in hydrocephalus. Mr. Chenevix,
Dr. Spurzheim’s friend, suppresses this (British and Foreign Quarterly, 1830), and.
says that a fortunate accident occasioned the discovery (p. 10.). His article con-
tains other instances of inaccuracy and injustice towards Gall; but received Dr.
Spurzheim’s sanction. By this discovery alone, Gall proved that those, who still
obstinately spoke of the brain as pulp, were wrong. Pulp would be washed or
blown away at the centre, and every where else, by the impulse of air or water;
and would not separate into two regular layers. Yet I recollect that in Edin-
burgh, in 1809, when I was studying, his anatomy and his assertion of the
fibrous structure of the brain were ridiculed as too absurd.

8 Anat. et Phys., vol. i. p. 249. sqq.


Bo"


322 GALL’S ANATOMY.


as intended to increase the formative fibres of the cerebellum, and —
therefore he terms it the ganglion of the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 311.
No. 7*.; p.312. No.9.) One of the principal bands which proceed
from this advances towards the median line, and with its fellow
becomes a long rounded eminence, or ridge, rising from before
backwards, and usually called the vermiform process, but by Gall
the fundamental part of the cerebellum, because it is always found
in animals which have a cerebellum. (Cut, p. 313. No. 8.) The
other bands from the ganglion proceed upwards, downwards,
backwards, and outwards, disposed in thin horizontal layers ;
those which are nearest the middle being the longest, and those
nearest the spot where the original bundles enter the ganglia the
shortest. Their extremity distant from the middle is covered
with cineritious pulpy substance. A vertical cut exhibits the
white layers as branches and twigs, each being surrounded by
cineritious substance; the twigs so surrounded resemble leaflets ;
and the whole is known by the name of arbor vite. (Cut, p. 312,
313: 316:)--

Besides these diverging fibres, there are, as in the cerebrum,
converging fibres, having no immediate connection with the pri-
mitive bundle, with the chorda oblongata, or with the ganglion.
These arise from the pulpy substance, and proceed in different
directions among the diverging fibres towards the external an-
terior part, where those from each side, under the name of crura
cerebelli, unite together and form the mesocephalon, or, more
properly, the large commissure of the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 304.
No. 13.; p. 311. No. 9.; p. 313. No. 27.; p. 316. 5.) The size of
this is in direct proportion to the size of the hemispheres of the
cerebellum, just as the corpus restiforme, ganglion, and cerebel-
lum, are all proportionate to each other. Another cerebellic
commissure exists at the vermiform process, by means of the
soft delicate layers of transverse fibres of its superior and in-
ferior part. A layer of fibres, under the name, according to
Reil, of inferior medullary veil, or commonly of valve of Vieus-
sens and processus a cerebello ad testes, or, according to Gall,
of mass of connection between the primitive part of the cerebellum.
and the corpora quadrigemina, establishes a commissure between
the cerebellum and the corpora quadrigemina: and another layer, ©
termed by Reil the superior medullary veil, establishes a commis-
sure between the lower portion of the fundamental part or ver-
miform process and the posterior pyramidal bodies of the chorda
oblongata. (Cut, p. 313.) The fourth ventricle is a mere space


NERVES. 393


between the chorda oblongata and the cerebellum. (Cut, p. 313.
No. 8, 9, 10.) Gall terms it the space placed before the funda-
mental part of the cerebellum, just as he terms the third ventricle
the space between the great inferior cerebral ganglions ; and the
lateral ventricles he styles the great cavities of the cerebrum.
Dr. Macartney has lately declared that the sides of the ence-
phalic cavities are so closely applied to each other that no cavity
really exists; so that there is merely an extension of internal
surface."


The encephalon communicates with the rest of the body by
the spinal chord and other chords termed zerves. These appear
proceeding from its. base and from the spinal chord. If we in-
spect the base of the brain (see Cut, p. 304.), we observe, besides
the cerebrum and cerebellum with their lobes, the mesocephalon
and chorda oblongata, the corpora albicantia, pons Tarini, tuber
cinereum, infundibulum, and pituitary gland — the four latter of
which are, like the parts in the ventricles, most absurdly named,
and the five latter of which are masses of pulpy substance — eleven
pairs of nerves :— the glosso-pharyngeal, for taste only; the olfac-
tory, for smell only ; optic, for sight only; acoustic, for hearing
only; three conveying volition to the muscles of the eye, the
common motors, trochleare or pathetic or internal motor, and ab-
ducent or external motor; the lingual, conveying volition to the
muscles of the tongue; the facial, conveying volition to some
muscles of the face; the vagum, or, according to Chaussier, pneu-
mo-gastric, but correctly pneumono-gastrici,—a pair of sense
and motion, communicating between the lungs, larynx, trachea,
and stomach, &c., and the brain; and the trigeminum, which also
is double, and furnishes many nerves giving common sensibility to
the face and head at large, and conveys the will to the muscles
of the lower jaw.

h Report of the Third Meeting of the British Scientific Association, p. 453.

1 Such words, compounded of two Greek or Latin nouns, are made with the
dative of the first, its last syllable being generally made to end in o. The geni-
tive of mveduwy is mvedmovos, and the dative mveduov. See my paper on the Medi-
cinal Properties of Creosote, in the 19th vol. of the Transactions of the Royal
“Med. and Chir. Society, p. 11. sqq.

* In old language, the glosso-pharyngeal ; the first ; second; portio mollis of
the seventh; the third, fourth or pathetic, and sixth; ninth; portio dura of the
seventh ; the eighth, of which the glosso-pharyngeal was considered a part; and
the fifth, or mixed pair, as Gall called it from being satisfied of its mixed functions.


z.3


324 NERVES.


The olfactory, optic, and common and internal motors of the
eye, arise from the cerebrum or mesocephalon; the rest from
the chorda oblongata. From the chorda spinalis, thirty-one pairs
of nerves, double in substance and function, like the trigeminum,
proceed on each side, by an anterior and a posterior root ;—
eight pairs in the neck —the first above the first cervical ver-
tebra, the last below the last cervical vertebra; twelve in the
back ; and five in the loins, — the last below the last lumbar verte-
bra. ‘The anterior root of these double nerves is smaller than the
posterior, and each begins by many filaments, which unite in
their passage out. The posterior root forms a ganglion, and the
nerve externally to this unites with the anterior nerve.

The five pairs of the lumbar portion, proceed, enclosed in mem-
brane, together with five or six other pairs, from the bulbous
extremity of the chord, and pass through the foramina of the
sacrum. ‘This splitting of the chord is termed the chorda equina.
Besides these, a pair arises at about the seventh or eighth cervical
pair, called accessory, running up into the cranium through the
foramen magnum, and coming in contact with the pneumonogas-
tric nerve ; and it passes out again through the foramen lacerum.

Many nerves unite: for instance, twigs of the portio dura with
twigs of all the branches of the trigeminum; and twigs of the
ninth with the lingual branch of the trigeminum. Many nerves
unite to separate again, forming what are termed plexuses ; and
the nerves running into and from a plexus may be different in
number. (Cut, p. 315.) On some nerves we observe nodules of
various shapes, called ganglions ; and sometimes more than one
nerve have the same ganglion. We have seen that Gall applies
the word. ganglion to masses of nervous substance also in the
encephalon and spinal chord; and other anatomists, in a similar
manner, apply it to the enlargements of the fifth cerebral nerve
and of the posterior spinal nerves.

Nerves are collections of white filaments contained in delicate
membranes, and united into fibres like those of the brain, and
all invested with another membrane, called neurilema, which again
is enclosed in a firm white membrane. M. Raspail has lately
examined them, and finds them to be aggregations of solid cylin-
ders, each invested, like muscular fibrils, with a fine membrane,
- and the whole with a common covering to form atrunk.! He de-
clares that no tube exists in them, as many have asserted. A


1 Nouveau Systeme, § 513. sqq:


PLEXUSES.: 325


*
thin transverse section of a branch of a ganglionic nerve ex-


Slice of a branch of a ganglionic nerve, —(M. Raspail. )


hibits a single chord; but a similar section of the median of the
arm exhibits several, every chord having its own membrane, as


Slice of the median nerve of the arm :
the cut ends of the fibrils are seen, with
-\ the covering of every bundle, and of the
whole. The single spot represents a
blood-vessel. — (M. Raspail.)


well as the whole one in common; and their number is greater,
the further from the head the examination is made.

A longitudinal view presented the filaments with a granulated
appearance, like the orifices of tubes; but this was probably the
effect of the refraction of light, and it occurred when other
textures were examined in the same way. © (See first cut over-
leaf.) Each cylinder of a human nerve is said by M. Raspail to
be about ‘00787 of an inch in diameter.”

Though the fibres are parallel, their filaments continually unite,
so that a nerve appears more or less reticular. _

A plexus is the same arrangement on a large scale.

Ganglions consist, like the encephalon and spinal chord, and

™ Professor Ehrenberg says that the olfactory and optic nerves, and the branches
of the sympathetic, are entirely composed of granulated or knotted fibres ; while
nerves of motion and the regular spinal nerves are cylindrical and tubular, and
continuations of knotted fibres of the brain now become cylindrical.

n Pr. Macartney asserts, indeed, that in all plexuses a complete mingling of
the substance of all the nerves takes place, and that there no less is a mingling
of the roots of the spinal nerves with the spinal chord. (1. c. p. 451.)


Z 4


326


Lo O96


29 o°O0cnce S =
=


Se)


Longitudinal view of the fibril


GANGLIONS.


a=


)


—


PAP PR fe) a


,


the swellings at the roots of the nerves of sense, called also
ganglia, of white fibrous substance, and of a pulpy, greyish, red-
dish, or whitish substance in which this is plunged and from which
it is easily distinguished. The white filaments anastomose and
interlace or mingle most freely, and membranes exist similar to
those of nerves; within them and without. M. Raspail represents
a ganglion like the median nerve, only that the separate portions


half enclose each other.


Slice of a ganglion of the sympa-
‘thetic nerve. The nervous trunks
are only half enclosed in each other,
but allin acommon covering. The
black spots represent blood-vessels.


— (M. Raspail.)


GANGLIONS. 327


Besides the ganglia of the encephalon and of encephalic and
spinal nerves at their origin, there are, on each side, several
ganglia in the head ;— the ophthalmic or lenticular, the spheno-pa-
latine or Meckel’s, and the cavernous, the otic, and sub-maxillary ;
there are three cervical; twelve dorsal; five lumbar; and five
or six sacral; one at the heart, called cardiac; and two in the
abdomen, called semilunar. Branches connect them with the
encephalic and spinal nerves. Single branches run longitudinally
between them all, connecting their whole series; and the lines
unite in a single ganglion on the os coccygis. Old anatomists
gave the whole the name of sympathetic or intercostal nerve,
and supposed it to arise from the encephalo-spinal nerves.° The
ganglionic nerves are less firm than the encephalo-spinal, and of
a less clear white. 4?

We must not forget that every part of the nervous system
throughout the body is directly connected with others, and in-
directly with all the rest, just as is every blood-vessel in regard
to its system. |

Nerves subdivide and soften till they are lost, with the excep-
tion of the optic, which expands into a membrane called retina,
and of the coalition of nerves. The diameters of branches are
said usually to exceed that of a trunk.

I have used the words prolongations, arise, &c., but merely for
the purpose of ocular description ; since Gall has shown that the
nerves and spinal chord do not arise from the brain, but only
communicate with it; nor the spinal nerves from the spinal chord:
for, when the brain is absent, the foetus may equally possess ence-
phalic nerves and spinal chord? ; and, when the chord is absent,
the foetus may equally possess spinal nerves; and the brain and
spinal chord, and the brain and encephalic nerves, are in no pro-
portion to each other in the various species of the animal kingdom,
nor the spinal nerves to the spinal chord, nor does the latter
diminish as the nerves go off.

The idea of the nerves proceeding from the brain ig as un-
founded as that of the arteries proceeding from the heart, or one
portion of an extremity from another. Foetuses are seen with an
arterial system, and no heart; others born with no arms, but


© Writers say cerebro-spinal. But, if cerebrum is not allowed its classical
meaning — the whole cranial nervous mass — as well as its scientific application to
a portion only, the term cerebro-spinal must be replaced by encephalo-spinal.

P Gall, 4to. t. ii. p.77. sqq.; 8vo. vol.i. sect. ii, For spinal nerves without
chord, see Hist. de l’ Acad, des Sciences, 1746, p. 42.


328 GALL’S ANATOMY.


fingers at the shoulders. Independently of contrary arguments,
we may demand proofs of the opinion: none are given; and it
has, no doubt, been derived from the shooting of vegetables.
Gall’s opinion is now universal. Yet, when he wrote, he found
no recent modern writer doubt that the spinal chord was a —
longation of the encephalon.4

When I published my last edition, Gall’s anatomy was so little
known, and his mode of dissecting the brain by tracing its con-
stituent parts so disregarded, that I felt it right to express my
wonder, as one of his disciples, M. Barbeguiére, did thirty years
ago in Berlin’, that, while students were not instructed to dissect
limbs and trunks by slices, as we cut brawn, they should be taught
no other mode of examining the brain, and thus be left in igno-
rance of its true structure. But now his anatomical discoveries
are referred to in every good book upon anatomy ; and are given
at full length in Dr. Cloquet’s Manuel d’ Anatomie descriptive;
and the excellent Elements of Anatomy by Dr. Quain; and his
mode of dissecting the brain is taught in all the best schools.


7


4 * This was the opinion of MM. Sabatier, Portal, Chaussier, Boyer, Cuvier, —


Fodéré, Dumas, Ackerman, Walter, &c.” (Anat. et Physiol., vol. i. p. 50.)
just as of the ancients, and of other moderns, except Bartholin and Vieussens ;
of whom the former began to doubt, and the latter, indeed, expressed himself
decidedly ; but then in his descriptions and figures Vieussens still represented
the brain as the origin of all the nerves, — an inconsistency committed by Soem-
merring, who, while he regards the spinal chord as self-existent, declares it is
produced by the mixture of the medulla of the cerebrum and cerebellum. Haller,
Soemmerring, Blumenbach, derived the nerves from the brain and spinal chord ;
Prochaska, Reil, Bichat, Cuvier, even the ganglions also from the latter; and
all continued to regard it as a prolongation of the encephalon. The French
commissioners gave way; but Ackerman and Walter persisted! (I. c. vol. i.
p- 49. sqq.

t Exposition de la Doctrine de Gall surle Cerveau et le Crane, par Dr. C. H. Ea
Bischoff; traduit de la seconde édition de |’Allemand, par G. Barbeguiére.
Berlin, 1806. ‘Is it not the height of folly to pretend to demonstrate the brain
accurately by destroying it in slices?” (p.19.) ,

’ We may see in a report of Cuvier’s, upon the experiments of M. F leurens,
after the fall of Napoleon, his admission of many of Gall’s discoveries, which, in
order to please Napoleon, who was jealous of the German, from being vexed with
the honours paid by the Institute to another foreigner, — our countryman
Sir Humphry Davy, he had previously doubted, or absolutely denied (having been
favourable to Gall’s views till he suddenly learned Napoleon’s feelings) in a
report presented by him and others upon Gall’s anatomical discoveries to the
French Institute, in 1808; —‘ A report,” says Gall, “ which will always be
one of the most valuable proofs of the backward state of the anatomical and


NERVOUS SYSTEM. 329


There are great varieties in the absolute and relative amount
of the several portions of the nervous system, But the brain of


physiological knowledge of the nervous system at that time, and how much
science owes me in this respect.” (Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. vi. p. 318.)
Even in this report, Cuvier had been obliged to confess that “ the most accredited
method of the schools, and that usually recommended in books of anatomy,
is to take away successive slices of the brain, and observe the appearances
offered by each. ‘This is the easiest in practice for demonstration, but it is
the most difficult for the imagination. The true relation of parts, which are
always seen cut across, escape not only the pupil, but the master himself.” Yet,
rather than give Gall the due credit of unfolding the brain from the chorda ob-
longata, the Committee of the Institute pretended that Varolius and Vieussens
had, two centuries before, done the same thing; whereas Vieussens dissected the
brain from the centrum ovale, and he is declared by the Committee to have
practised the same mode of dissection that Varolius employed. Varolius, on
the contrary, began his dissection at the base, yet not in order to trace the parts
from the base, through the brain, but simply, he says, because the brain com-
pressed the several organs at the base, against the skull, especially in the dead
body, and rendered the ordinary mode of dissecting from above inconvenient.
He had so false an idea of the anatomy of the brain, that he conceived the crura
cerebri and cerebelli were shoots from the respective parts, and produced the
spinal chord: while, however, he also declares the spinal chord to be formed
from the cerebrum, between the hemispheres and the pons! In truth, our coun-
tryman, Dr. Willis, who lived a century and a half ago (Cerebri Anatome), was
the first who objected to slicing, and dissected the brain from the base: but by
base he understood the corpora striata and the thalami; and from these he both
ascended and descended to the chorda oblongata. (Rapport des Commissaires de
? Institut de France, in Gall’s Recherches sur le Systeme Nerveur en général, et
sur le Cerveau en particulier. j

The Edinburgh Review, which we shall see viewed the whole doctrines of Gall,
“anatomical, physiological, and physiognomical,” as a piece of thorough quack-
ery from beginning to end, in June, 1815, did him justice, like Cuvier, lately, in
a most remarkable manner, but without the generosity of mentioning his name.
(No. xciv. 1828.) “ Even within our own time,’ it now says, * although many
great anatomists devoted themselves almost exclusively to dissecting the brain,
this organ used to be demonstrated by the greater number of teachers in a manner
which, however invariable, was assuredly not particularly useful. It was so me.
chanically cut down upon, as to constitute a sort of exhibition worth nothing. The
teacher and the pupil were equally dissatisfied with the performance, and the former
probably the most. The latter soon gave up the painful attempt to draw any kind
of deduction from what he witnessed, and disposed of the difficulty as he best could,
when he had to render an account of what he had ‘seen. Up to this day, our me-
mory is pained by the recollection of the barbarous names and regular sections of
what was then the dullest part of anatomical study, which, although often re-
peated, left no trace but of its obscurity or absurdity. Here an oval space of


330 WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN.


an adult, probably between 20 and 60 years of age‘, is said
to weigh, on the average, between 40 and 50 ounces; the


white colour, and there a line of grey, or one of red, were displayed: here a
cineritious, there a medullary, mass: here a fraction white without, grey within;
there a fraction white within, and grey without: here a gland pituitary, there a
gland like grains of sand: here a ventricle, and: there a cul de sac with endless
fibres, and lines, and globules, and simple marks with appellations no less fanciful
than devoid of meaning.”” ‘These are just Gall’s views, for which he was loaded
with opprobrium. Anat, et Physiol., vol. i. p. 287. sq. 285. :

Loder, who not only had attended Gall’s lectures at Halle, but dissected nine
human and thirteen brute brains with him, adds, after specifying Gall’s ana-
tomical discoveries, ‘* These discoveries alone. would be sufficient to immortalise
Gall’s name: they are the most important which have been made in anatomy
since the discovery of the absorbents. The discovery of the unfolding of the
brain is admirable.” ‘ I am ashamed and indignant with myself for having,
with others, been slicing hundreds of brains, like cheese: I never perceived the
forest for the multitude of the trees.” “ I say, with Reil, that I have found more
than I thought one man could discover in the course of his life.” * :

‘“« Reil,” said Professor Bischoff, above thirty years ago, “ who, as a profound
anatomist and judicious physiologist, requires not my praise, rising superior to alk
the littleness of vanity, has declared that he found more in Gall’s dissections of
the brain than he thought any man could have discovered in his whole life.” Ez-
position, just quoted, p. XXvi. 5

Such is the judgment of Reil on what Mr. Mayo calls Gall’s “ popular and
showy anatomy,” dependent for its correctness, when it is correct, “ rather to
bold and fortunate conjecture, than to cautious and philosophical research ;””
amounting to “ little more than an expansion of the views of Willis,” and -desti-
tute of the force of ‘‘demonstration which belongs to the researches of”? Reil —
their “rival.” Gall, so far from regarding Reil as a rival, thus speaks of him:
— “ With what readiness would the nervous system, this noble part of anatomy
and physiology, the knowledge of which has so long made such small progress,
have been restored to its dignity, if, in every country, men like Reil, animated
with the love of truth, and endowed with a spirit of profound observation, had fol-
lowed his example! We are proud that the discoveries made by this able
naturalist in the cerebellum, by following a totally different course from ours,
agree so perfectly with ours.” (Anat. et Physiol.,p. 250.) In truth, Gall was
too good towards Reil; for, after Gall’s report tothe French Institute, Reil,


t Dr. Sims has just published, in the 19th vol. of the Trans. of the Royal Med.-
Chir. Society, the most extensive averages of the weight of the brain. His average
weight of the adult brain, between 20 and 60 years of age, is from rather above
44 to rather above 46 ounces.


* Bischoff, ].c. p. xxix. Also Gall, 4to. vol. iv. p. 378. sqq.; 8vo. t. vi.
p. 493. In this sixth volume will be found copious answers to Tiedemann,
Rudolphi, Serres, &c., and a refutation of many of their anatomical assertions.


WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN. 331


spinal chord about an ounce and a half; and the corresponding
nerves, could they be collected to their minutest ramification,


EO IS SS OLE ESI) Stk ts ER en |S” ARE ieee a
from whom Gall was said by Dr.:Gordon and Mr. Mayo to have borrowed, but
from whom he could have learned nothing, because Reil had not published at
the time of Gall’s discoveries, promulgated, in his Archives, views similar to those
of Gall, without, indeed, claiming them as his own, but without ascribing them
to Gall or any one. “He also gave the parts different names — such as wings,
mountains, teeth, lobules — agreeable to none but mechanical dissectors, who,
like Dr. Gordon, as Dr. Spurzheim remarks, consider the anatomy of the brain
unnecessary to physiological and pathological views.

Gall demonstrated the Brain to Reil, in the summer of 1805, privately, and so
much pleased him that he gave Gall some of his drawings. (Examination of the
Objections made in Great Britain, &c., by Dr. Spurzheim. Lond. 1817.) Dr. Spurz-
heim here says, that Gall and he demonstrated. But he had been engaged by
Gall only some months before as his assistant and dissector ; and Reil’s presents
in return were, he confesses, all to Gall. Reil calls them Gall’s demonstrations,
and wonders at such discoveries being made by one man. A medal had been
already struck to Gall at Berlin (Bischoff; p. xvi.); all the attacks for both the
Anatomy and Physiology were made upon Gall; and all the accounts of the
anatomy and physiology published by his pupils were given as of his discoveries,
without the mention of Dr. Spurzheim’s name, except once, when he is thus
spoken of as Gall’s assistant at lecture : — ‘“‘ Gall unfolded the convolutions
without any difficulty by means of the fingers of the director Spurzheim.”
(Cranologie, ou Décowertes nouvelles du Docteur F. J. Gall, concernant le Cer-
veau, le Créne, et les Organes ; ouvrage traduit del’ Allemand. Paris, 1807, p. 32.,
the original having appeared at Dresden in 1805.) We learn from this, which,
curiously enough, is the only notice of Dr. Spurzheim in the early history of Phre-
nology, how Gall and he demonstrated! ‘ While at Vienna, we spoke of the
great leading points of our anatomical demonstration.” ‘In 1805, at Berlin,
we repeated our anatomical demonstration.” Outlines of our anatomical and
physiological propositions were published during that spring by Professor Bis-
choff.” This is the work already quoted. Now, Bischoff speaks of them solely
as Gall’s, and does not once mention Dr. Spurzheim’s name. ‘* At Dresden,
M. Bloede published outlines of owr anatomical and physiological views.” I
have read Bloede, in the work just referred to, and translated at Paris under the
title of Cranologie,—a part of which is called Découvertes Anatomiques du
Docteur Gall, @ apres 0 Exposition du Docteur Bloede, — and find only Gall men-
tioned, except in the quotation just made, where he is said to have used the fingers
of his managing man Spurzheim to unfold the convolutions. The accuracy of
Bloede’s work is vouched for on the ground of its being approved of by “ the
discoverer Gall.’’ (p. xv.) Dr, Spurzheim then goes on to say that Gall and he
continued to lecture and demonstrate the brain in Weimar, Jena, Gottingen,
Brunswick, Hamburgh, Keil, Copenhagen. Now, he never gave a lecture; and
only obeyed Gall’s orders mechanically in silence, while Gall was demonstrating.
Dr. Spurzheim never then pretended to discoveries; and yet all the great discoveries
were already made. Gall assured me that the discoveries, both anatomical and


$32 WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN.


would weigh several ounces. The ganglions and ganglionic
nerves can weigh but little comparatively. Dr. Macartney de-


physiological, made after he engaged Dr. Spurzheim as his assistant, were merely
slight modifications, — des nuances were the words he used ; and the truth of this
is evident to those acquainted with the early literature of the new anatomy and
physiology of the brain. Dr. Spurzheim himself affords, in many parts, refutations
of his unjust and absurd attempts to arrogate what is not his due. For instance,
he says (Anatomy of the Brain, p.148.), Modern anatomists before Gall and
myself were divided in opinion on the subject of the decussation.” Yet, at p. xi.
he says that, having completed his studies in 1804, he was associated with Gall,
“‘and at this period Dr. Gall, in the Anatomy, spoke of the decussation of the
pyramidal bodies ; of their passage through the pons Varolii, of eleven layers of
longitudinal and transverse fibres in the pons, &c.”!! Yet at p. 5. Dr. Spurzheim
says the opinion that the white substance was fibrous is, that “ which Dr. Gall and
I have espoused.” An instance of his short-sighted ambition is afforded at p. 95.
of his Anatomy, where he positively says, “ Before Dr. Gall and I began our:
researches, all other anatomists were in the habit of cutting down the brain by
slices,’ &c. ; whereas, before Gall ever saw him, Gall had taught his new method
to thousands: Gall taught it to him among the rest, and engaged him as his pro-
sector. Atp.178., he says, “ Until Dr. Galland J published, it was the custom
to take merely mechanical views of these” (the commissures); whereas, in
Bloede and Bischoff it appears that Gall taught all the true views of them before
he saw Dr. Spurzheim. At p. 110. he says,—‘ Dr. Gall and J claim the merit of
having been the first to compare the relations between the development of dif-
ferent cerebral parts and peculiar functions.’” When every where, even in the first
volume of the 4to. work, to which Gall, in the kindness of his heart, affixed’
Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his own, in order, as he often said, to encourage
him, and because he thought that Dr. Spurzheim would carry on phrenology -
after his death as he himself had done, Dr. Spurzheim, like all the world, ac-
knowledges Gall to have been the first discoverer of the functions of different
parts of the brain, and of course through observing development. At p. 115. he
claims this all for himself ! though at p. xvi, of the preface to Gall’s 4to. work,
with his name added by Gall, this is all given to Gall. ‘‘ I claim the merit of
having been the first to maintain that the analogy or differences of cerebral parts:
in different classes ought to be determined by the combined aid of Anatomy
and Physiology!!” Dr. Spurzheim gives another striking refutation of his own
assumption. Gallhad made and promulgated his discoveries, when Dr. Spurzheim,
as he himself admits, having finished his studies in 1804, joined Gall. (Anatomy
of the Brain. London, 1826. p. xi.) Yet, in his eagerness to be equal with
Gall, he unluckily writes, in his Examination, &-c., “ I beg to observe that, in
the summer of 1805, we-demonstrated to Reil the same leading points in the’
anatomy of the brain which we still maintain!” He whose fingers only were
employed on the occasion! he who had joined Gall but a few months from the’
class room! In truth, the new anatomy of the brain did not consist in this
little detail of discovery, or that, but in grand general views of structure ; and this


WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN. 333


clares he has ascertained the real nervous substance to be so incon-
siderable, that he thinks “ it is, perhaps, not assuming too much


was entirely Gall’s, and completed before Dr. Spurzheim knew any thing of the
matter. Possibly Dr. Spurzheim occasionally made a few little mechanical dis
coveries, like the person who was Gall’s previous dissector, a M. Niklas; of
whom Gall says in his preface (4to. vol.i. p. xvi. ), ‘I taught M. Niklas my method
of dissecting the brain; and, thanks to his industry and address, he made such pro-
gress that he directed my attention to many mechanical points till then unknown.’’
But Dr. Spurzheim, like him, worked under Gall: was ordered to dissect this and
that, and to ascertain what was the fact on this point or on that: and the shades of
discovery, as Gall terms them, made after he was engaged by Gall, must evidently
be ascribed to the working master-mind, and not to the fingers of him who only
obeyed, and received his knowledge all but perfect at first, and was very long before
he jcould be taught by Gall to dissect a brain decently according to Gall’s
method, Gall told me that he taught Dr. Fossati in a quarter of the time it cost
him to.teach Dr. Spurzheim. Because M. Niklas worked and discovered me-
chanically, Dr. Spurzheim declares (Votes, &c., p. 61.) that the investigations
directed by Gall had merely mechanical views, and, referring to the last quota-
tion for his proof, he insinuates that Gall’s investigations were too mechanical ;
whereas, Gall’s merit was in rejecting all mechanical views. Dr. Spurzheim’s
character is put by himself in the strongest light in the Notes (p. 60. sq.), by
his quoting with triumph a passage from Gall, in which are the words, ‘‘ beaucoup
de personnes manifestent une tendence singuliére d’attribuer nos découvertes a
d’autres, par exemple, a Reil; et M. Spurzheim a déja dans plusieurs endroits re-
vendiqué Notre propriété.” Now, Dr. Spurzheim knew that Gall used the plural,
according to the habit of authors, for the singular: because, immediately before
this passage, in the large edition, Gall says, — ‘‘ J have repeated, and ordered to be
repeated, hundreds of times, the researches upon the brain. ‘Sometimes we
thought we had discovered something new; but, by repeating the dissections,
we have always come back to owr old ideas, ‘Therefore J have no reason to mo-
dify what J said in the first volume of this work.”” He then, in both editions, in
order, he says, to set those right who ignorantly attribute the discoveries to others,
subjoins to this passage the declarations already quoted, of Reil and Loder,
respecting his anatomical discoveries, which they ascribe to Gall alone; and
finishes with a summary of all the anatomical and physiological discoveries,
speaking of them as his own entirely. (Gall, 4to. vol. iv. p. 377. sq.3 8vo. t. vi.
p. 490.) In the volume and a half to which Gall affixed Dr. Spurzheim’s name
with his own, he always wrote in the plural ; in the rest, he from the first wrote
generally in the singular; and he refers in the singular to what he had said in
the first volume in the plural. (See l. c. p. $78. supra; and vol. ii. p. 213.) I
give another striking instance of Dr. Spurzheim’s self-refutation, and the short-
sightedness for which he was remarked in Paris when under the influence of his
inordinate love of fame, Gall kindly affixed Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his
own, not only to his great work, but also to the memoir presented to the French
Institute. Yet Dr. Spurzheim acknowledges that the Commissioners received the
discoveries as Gall’s; for, in order to show that Reil must have known the


334: WEIGHT OF THE BRAIN.


to suppose that the whole nervous system, if sufficiently expanded,
would be found too tender to give any resistance to the touch,


discoveries before writing, he quotes, in his Notes to the Foreign Quarterly
(p. 59.), the following words, with which they opened their report: —‘ The
anatomical doctrine of Gall, through the delivery of lectures by /im in the chief
cities of Europe, and the numerous extracts published by his pupils, have be-
come nearly as well known as though they had appeared in an authentic impres-
sion.’? In these Notes he says that he settled his anatomical account with Gall
in 1820, and that Gall never answered this and other claims, Gall certainly
never would have condescended so far, Indeed, Gall was perfectly ignorant of
the greater part that Dr. Spurzheim wrote. After reading some of Dr, Spurz-
heim’s first English work, published on his arrival in England, Gall gave the
book with disgust, but half cut, to Dr. Fossati, and knew nothing more of Dr.
Spurzheim’s sayings and writings afterwards than what was pointed out to him ;
and it was with the greatest difficulty that he could be prevailed upon to take any
notice, even for a moment, of what was pointed out to him. My friends Dr.
Fossati and Dr. Dancey, who were constantly with Gall, assure me of this, and
are astonished at Dr. Spurzheim. Indeed, Gall, in the preface to his third 4to.
volume, which contains all the anatomy, had, in 1818, given an answer to all
Dr. S.’s anatomical claims. He shews that Dr. S. had no more to do with the
volume than to furnish the references. (p. xvii.) At the end of his 8vo. work,
Gall also disposes of these claims by summing up the anatomical discoveries as
his own. In the American edition of his Phrenology (vol. i. p. 12.) Dr. S. grows
so ambitious that he no longer shares with Gall, but at once boldly asserts, * all
anatomical discoveries made after 1804 are the result of my labours; and in
his Anatomy (p. xiv. ), he madly says, as to Gall’s 4to. volume, “ My discoveries
form its principal object”!!!

When Gall was entreated to do himself justice with Dr. Spurzheim, he always
mildly answered, that enough had been published of his discoveries before Dr.
Spurzheim’s time for posterity to see Dr. Spurzheim’s folly ; and that all the
world knew the great quarto work to be his, though he had been silly enough to
join Dr. Spurzheim’s name with his own. I fear that Dr. Spurzheim relied on _
Gall’s dignified pride for escaping his deserts.

Yet among those who never saw Gall, and who have derived: their knowledge
second-hand from Dr, Spurzheim’s works, and read slightly, or not at all, the
works of Gall, and especially those who, in addition to these disadvantages,
mixed much with Dr. Spurzheim, his pretensions are allowed. In France he was
nothing ; his lectures little attended, while Gall’s were crowded; and he ne-
glected, while Gall had high practice and the highest consideration. But Gall’s
works have not been translated, while Dr. Spurzheim published again and again
in English, and spent much of his time in Great Britain, and died in America.
The result here and in America cannot be better shown than first, in the following
ridiculous passage from “ an anatomical report on the skull of Dr. Spurzheim,
read before the Boston Phrenological Society, by Dr. N. B. Shurtleff, and
printed in the Boston Annals of Phrenology : —“ Having been appointed a com-


DURA MATER. 335


too transparent to be seen, and A poset would entirely tae
the cognizance of all our senses.”


The nervous system is invested with peculiar coverings.

« Besides the bony cranium, a threefold covering is afforded to
the brain*, viz. the dura and pia mater, and, between these two,
the tunica han aes These coverings are termed meninges.

« The dura mater ¥” belongs to the class of fibrous membranes,
and “lines the inside of the cranium, like a periosteum, forming
various processes. By the falx it divides the hemispheres of the
cerebrum and cerebellum; by the tentorium® it supports the


mittee on the skull of our lamented friend Spurzheim, the anatomist, who, by dis-
secting the brain, first displayed to the eye its fibrous and ganglionary structure,
and demonstrated the direction and connection of its filaments,’ &c.! But
the case is much worse, when I mention that this piece of folly and ignorance is
published in the last Number of the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal (June 1.
1836) without any remark. When I arrive at the subject of Phrenology, I shall
resume this task of doing justice to Gall.

uj. c. p. 450. sq.

’ * « Elustachius, tab. xvii. xvili.
Haller, Icones, Anat., fase. vi. tab. i. ii. iii.
_ Santorini, tab. posth, ii. iii.

¥, B. Osiander, in the Comment. Soc. Reg. Scient. Gotting., vol. xvi. p. 105.
tab. i. li.

Detm. W. Soemmerring, De oculor. sect. horizontali, tab.

Y « J. Ladmiral, Icones agg matris in concava et convexa superficie vise.
Amst. 1738. fase. i. ii; 4to.’

* Sir Anthony Carlisle, on opening a woman who had died after amputation of
a foot, found no falx. The cerebrum was not divided into hemispheres. The~
edge of the longitudinal sinus was received into a depression, about half an inch
deep, that existed along the middle of the superior part of the cerebrum. The
head had been unaffected, and the mental faculties perfect, as far as observation
was made during the woman’s stay in the Westminster Hospital. (Transactions
of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Chirurgical bate vol. I.
p- 212. sqq.)

I presented to the London Phrenological Society, the cast of the head of a
male idiot, aged eighteen years, that was given me by Dr. Formby, of Liverpool,
and is only 16 inches in circumference, and 73 inches from ear to ear over the
vertex. The cerebrum weighed but 1lb. 740z. The hemispheres were united
as far back as the vertex, and no falx existed except for about two inches from the»
anterior part of the tentorium.

* « Tn the skulls of some genera of mammalia, a remarkable lamina of bone
penetrates a duplicature of the tentorium and supports it. Cheselden (dnat. of
the Bones, ¢. 8.) supposes this bony tentorium to exist in fere only ; but it is
found in the equine genus, the cercopithecus paniseus, the delphinus phocena,


AA


$36 ARACHNOID.


posterior lobes of the cerebrum, and prevents their pressure upon
‘the subjacent cerebellum.


_
# cg LU
xij) “ SS
cae: iil Itey ——


ret

1. Falx. 2. Tentorium. 3,3. Superior longitudinalsinus. 4. Inferior longi-
tudinal sinus, and, 5. Venz Galeni; both opening into, 6. The straight sinus,
7. Posterior extremity of the superior longitudinal sinus. 8. A small portion
of the left lateralsinus. 9, The confluence of the sinuses, or Torcular Herophili.
10. Right lateral sinus. 11. Internal jugular vein.

‘¢ In its various duplicatures it contains and supports the venous
sinuses >,” which receive blood from the veins of the brain, and
convey it to the internal jugular vein, “and it prevents their
pressure.” It is prolonged in a tubular form throughout the
canal of the spine, and- has openings for the various encephalo-
spinal nerves; and is prolonged a very short distance around the
greater part. —

«¢ Next to the durea mater lies the arachnoid, so named from its
thinness.” It is aserous membrane, “ destitute of blood-vessels,
and extended, like the dura mater, merely over the substance of


orycteropus capensis, &c. Its use is uncertain; that which is generally ascribed
to it (for instance, by Laur. Nihell, De Cerebro. Edin. 1780. p. 4.), — of pro-
tecting the cerebellum in those mammalia which leap very swiftly — is improbable,
because we find it in the bear and other animals of still slower motion, and not in
the ibex which moves with the greatest rapidity.”

b « Vieussens, Neurograph. universal., tab. xvii. fig. 1.

Duverney, Euvres anatom., vol. i. tab. iv.

Haller, Icones Anat., fasc. i. tab. vi.

Walter, De morbis peritonai et apoplevia. TBerol. 1785. 4to. tab, iii, iv.

Vicq d’Azyr, Planches Anatomiques, xxxii, et xxxv,”


ARACHNOID. 337


the brain, without following the course of its furrows and promi-
nences ;” but it enters the third ventricle by an oval opening, dis-
covered by Bichat in the base of the telum choridianum, sur-
rounded by the vene Galeni, and leading from a canal called
arachnoidean between the corpora quadrigemina and pineal gland,
and it lines the third and afterwards the two lateral and fourth
ventricles. It is a close sac, thus affording, as the. peritoneum
does to the abdominal viscera, a double covering to the whole
brain and spinal chord, and to the nerves before their departure.
through the foramina of the dura mater, and lining the four ven-
tricles ; insulating the organs on which it lies, and affording them
great facility of movement ; and liable to all the morbid affections
of serous membranes. °

Between the pia mater and arachnoid of both the brain and
spinal chord, Dr. Magendie says he has discovered the existence
during life, of a large quantity of clear and colourless fluid, pass-
ing from the surface of one organ to that of the other.4 Cotugno ¢
had long ago asserted its existence in the cranial and spinal
cavities, after death, and its free communication, and accurately
described its qualities; but, notwithstanding he gave excellent
reasons for believing its existence during life, he -imagined the
space around the spinal chord, observed by him to be larger in
the emaciated and old, and the space which in these two descrip-
tions of subjects he found also around the brain, to be filled with
an aqueous vapour; he also believed its occasional mixture with
the fluid of the ventricles. Many deny at present that more than
vapour exists during life and health in any serous membrane. But
I certainly saw, as I formerly mentioned, a large quantity of clear
fluid pass from the spinal canal the instant that Dit. Magendie
opened it, in one of his barbarous experiments, which, I am
ashamed to say, I witnessed, and in which he began by coolly
cutting out a large round piece from the back of a beautiful little
puppy, as he would from an apple dumpling. Dr. Magendie
thinks he has proved the communication, not only of the fluids
of the spinal with that of the cranial cavity, but also of these with
that of the ventricles, by an opening at the point of the calamus
scriptorius of the fourth. He conceives it to move from one


© Bichat, Traité des Membranes.
4 Journal de Physiologie, t. v. | :
© Dissertatio de Ischiade Nervosa. Published in Sandefort’s Thesaurus.
f Journal de Physiologie, t. vii. p. 21.

aaa @


.


338 ARACHNOID.


part to another, as they are severally compressed by sanguineous
turgescence during muscular efforts. He says he never observed
the fluid escape at the spot near the vene Galeni. There is no
doubt that he did not, nor by any other: for large serous accu-
mulations often exist in the head, and none in the spine. Most
persons have no doubt that the fluid is usually contained, not be-
tween the arachnoid and pia mater, but in the serous membrane —
the arachnoid. Because, Ist, the true anatomy of the parts shows
that the old opinion is wrong,—shows that the arachnoid is a sac
like all other serous membranes, and covers the brain and lines
the dura mater ; that the ventricles are lined not with pia mater,
but with the arachnoid, under which the pia mater exists only as
subserous cellular membrane; and that hydrocephalus is analo-
gous with dropsies of the pericardium, pleura, peritoneum, and
_ tunica vaginalis. @2dly, Ifthe fluid was in the pia mater, it would

be under the arachnoid, and the arachnoid, whether of the surface
or of the ventricles, would be raised in proportion to its quantity,
so that we should find a membrane upon the surface of the fluid
both in the interior and exterior of the brain. This is not the
case in common; and where it is, as in a case described by Dr.
Magendie and: one by Dr. W. Heberden, presently -to be quoted,
the close portion of the arachnoid lies conspicuously upon the
fluid. Iam therefore satisfied that Dr. Magendie’s account is
wrong, and that what he calls pia mater in the ventricles is the
arachnoid.h

Dr. Magendie found the removal of the fluid to occasion imme-
diate dulness and immobility; but says that these disappeared as
soon as the fluid was replaced, and that its secretion took place very
rapidly. He believes that two ounces may exist in the ventricles
without disturbance, but that a larger quantity, whether secreted


® I may mention that ina child I saw with hydro-rachitis the aqueous tumour
in the loins disappeared, and the head immediately enlarged with hydrocephalus.
This looked like any thing but communication.

h He appears to me ignorant of the true anatomy of these membranes, and to
confound the two, as was the case of old, till the Anatomical Society of Amster-
dam confirmed, in 1665, the doubts which were arising on the subject, and Van
Horne demonstrated both membranes distinctly to his pupils. i>

Ackerman contended that fluid always exists in the ventricles, and for the
purpose of maintaining a degree of pressure necessary to the functions of the
brain ; an increase or diminution of it arresting the cerebral functions. Sir E.
Home repeated the same opinions in the Ph. Drang. 1814, part ii. See Dr.
Spurzheim, Phrenol., Amer. ed. p. 45. sq.


PIA MATER. $39


or injected, for example, into the spinal cavity, causes more or
less apoplexy and palsy. Much must, however, depend upon the
quickness of the accumulation, as the powers of accommodation
are very great in living systems, and if the bones expand, very
many pints may exist without impediment to the functions of the
brain. Dr..W. Heberden knew a man who had been long deaf
only, with the exception of vertigo and a temporary attack
of confusion, and who suddenly died; when not less than eight
ounees of fluid was found in the ventricles, and four on the brain
under the arachnoid.i Morgagni gives a similar case.* Still these
might have been instances of rapid effusion.

The blood-vessels of the brain are the two internal carotids
and the two vertebrals. They are twice bent at their entrance
into the cranium, to lessen the force of the blood; for not only is
the organ delicate, but its arteries are thinner and weaker than
others of the same size. In some brutes the internal carotid
splits, for the same purpose, into a network of vessels, called rete
mirabile, which re-unite into a trunk. The veins of the brain
pour their blood obliquely into strong, winding sinuses, which
transmit it to the internal jugulars (Cut, p. 336.); and the pos-
sibility of its reflux into the cerebral veins is thus lessened. The
cerebral arteries are said by Béclard to have no third, external
coat.

The pulpy substance has an immense number of blood vessels ;
the fibrous, a smaller number. M. Raspail exhibits one blood-
vessel in the membranous investment of the median nerve, and
many in the coverings and septa of the ganglion of the sympa-
thetic, but none appeared to enter into the fibres. (Cut 2, p. 326.)

* The membrane, called pia mater by the ancients,’’ corresponds
with cellular membrane, “ closely follows the cortical substance of
the brain!, and possesses innumerable blood-vessels which pene-
trate into the latter. Hence, if a portion of this membrane is
detached, we find the external surface very smooth, while the
interna! is villous and resembles the roots of moss.’™. | It pene-
trates into the lateral ventricles at the semicircular fissure which
exists on each side between the corpus fimbriatum of the fornix
and thalamus opticus ; and into the third ventricle, at the central
fissure which exists between the posterior extremity of the meso-


i Trans. of the Coll. of Phy., vol. v. k Ep. Anat., 4. 35.
t « Ruysch, Respons. ad ep. problemat. nonam. Amst. 1670, tab. x.”
m < B.S, Albinus, Annot. Acad. 1. i. tab. ii. fig. 1—5.”

AA 3


340 MOTION OF THE BRAIN.


lobe and the upper surface of the mesocephalon. These three
fissures, united, and establishing a communication between the ex-
ternal and internal parts of the brain, were named the great cere-
bral fissure by Bichat. It runs over the third ventricle, forming
with the arachnoid what is called the velum interpositum or telum
choridianum ; and the sides of this portion, extended and filled
with a plexus of vessels, form with them, in each lateral ventricle,
what is called the plexus choroides, also, of course, covered by the
arachnoid. :

The pia mater invests the spinal chord equally with the ence-
phalon, but is there paler and firmer. It also invests all the
nerves, and not only their chords and fibres, but their individual
fibrils and filaments.

Dr. Macartney finds the pia mater to consist of two portions,
one of which is exceedingly subtle and pervades the whole
encephalic mass, acting as a framework for the nervous substance.
Its delicacy allows the external portion to be readily separated
from it on the surface; and it forms, he says, so large a portion
of the mass, that the amount of nervous substance, as was re-
marked above, is very small.

If from deficiency of cranium the brain is seen, it is observed
to experience two motions— the one correspondent with the im-
pulse of blood into the arteries, the other correspondent with the
distension of the veins by expiration. It slightly pulsates at the
stroke of the left ventricle ; rising during expiration, and sinking
again during inspiration ; and it sinks in proportion as inspiration
is desisted from the longer.°

It is found also in such cases to be more distended during the
waking state than during sleepP : — a circumstance showing that


. Report of the Third Meeting of the Brit. Scient. Assoc., p. 434.

° « T. Dan. Schlichting first accurately described this striking phenomenon.
Commerce. litter. Noric. 1744. p. 409. sq., and more largely, Mém. présentées @
P’ Acad. des Sc. de Paris, t. i. p. 113.

Haller sagaciously discovered the cause of it by numerous dissections of living
animals. J. Dit. Walstorf, his pupil, Experimenta circa motum cerebri, cerebelli,
&c. Gotting. 1753. ,

Consult also, after F. de la Mure’s works, Lorry’s dissertations on the same
point, Mém. présentées, t. iii. p. 277. sq. 344. sq.

Also Portal on a similar motion observable in the spinal chord, Mém. sur la
Nature de plusieurs Maladies, t. ii. p. 81.”

P’ « T once enjoyed an opportunity of very distinctly observing this motion, and
making some experiments with respect to it, in a young man eighteen years old.


PULPY SUBSTANCE OF THE BRAIN. 341


in active states, of the organs they have more blood. Indeed,
during strong feelings and intellectual efforts, the brain, in cases of
deficiency of bone, has been seen to enlarge, experiencing a tur-
gescence which is common to all organs during their excitement.1
In emotions, even that of grief, the head not only aches and feels
tight, but burns: hard study for many hours has the same effect.
The functions of the nervous system, like those of all other organs,
require a copious supply of arterial blood ; and no solid can per-
form its living functions but by means of a fluid supplied to it.
Gall considers the pulpy substance of the nervous system as
the matrix or producer of the fibrous. It is so copiously supplied
with blood vessels, that Ruysch, Schallhamner, Leuwenhoek,
Valisneri, Vieussens, Schwendenborg, and almost all the contem-
poraries of Haller, pronounced it a tissue of fine vessels; and |
Walter and Ackerman merely a prolongation of finer and finer
blood-vessels, — an opinion that Boyer thought probable. Albinus
and Sémmerring, however, showed by injection that a soft sub-
stance existed as well as the blood vessels.t« Now, Gall argues,
1. That all parts of living bodies, as is now universally allowed,
are gradually and successively developed — that their form and
substance, as well as size, totally change from their origin to their
perfection —not, as too many had absurdly asserted when he
wrote, that all parts pre-existed of inappreciably minute size;
and he asks, how the head of the snail reproduced after de-
capitation, how the transformation of stamina to petals, a work-


Five years before, he had fallen from an eminence and fractured the frontal bone
on the left side of the coronal suture, since which time there had been an im-
mense hiatus, covered by merely a soft cicatrix and the common integuments.
The hiatus formed a hollow, very deep during sleep, less so when he was awake ;
and varying according to the state of respiration, i.e. very deep if he retained
his breath ; much more shallow, and even converted into a swelling, by a long-
continued expiration. At the bottom of the hollow, I observed a pulsation syn-
chronous with the pulsation of the arterial system, such as deceived Petrioli,
Vandelli, and others, at one time the adversaries of Haller, who all foolishly con-
founded it with that other remarkable motion which depends upon respiration, —
I may add, that this wound on the /eft side of the head had rendered the right
arm and leg paralytic.”

4 In one such case, during the excitement of one set of organs, the collapse of
others was sufficient to produce a depression: and the anger of the person could
always be known by merely “ the holes which would appear in his head” on the
coronal surface, where the bone was defective.— Ep. Phren. Journal, Sept. 1835.

® Gall, |. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 235.

AA 4


342°. PULPY SUBSTANCE OF THE BRAIN:


ing to a quéen bee, by modifications of external circumstances,
are consistent with the original existence of every part. Thus,
as it is clear that one part may produce another which did not
exist, that the fibrous portion of the brain may proceed from the
pulpy. 2. As all the fibres of nerves are seen to begin in pulpy
substance, and, the greater the mass of grey substance, the greater
number of fibres are seen to proceed from it; and as, whenever
in the brain or spinal chord an enlargement occurs in the fibrous
band, there is an accumulation of pulpy matter, that the pulpy
appears destined for the production and support of the fibrouss;
and this not only in regard to. nerves, but to the encephalon and’
spinal chord. For, whenever a portion of the fibrous part of the’
brain increases, a quantity of pulpy substance is found at the
point of increase; just as wherever a branch springs in a tree,
its origin is ina mass of soft substance, so that the diameter of
all the branches exceeds that of the stem, and they are not
divisions of it.’ Again, before fibres appear at all, the brain and
other nervous parts are altogether pulpy and greyish. For, though
Dr. Tiedemann asserts that the pulpy substance of the spinal
chord is not formed before the fibrous, Gall refutes him in the
most masterly manner, showing that he allows the chord to be at
first fluid, then ‘“ soft, reddish, and sprinkled with numerous small
vessels,” and that at length, in the course of the first two months,
or about the beginning of the fourth month, fibres are seen.
These are Tiedemann’s own words; and yet he fancies he opposes
Gall, who contends for the very same thing, saying, “ it is the
pulpy, gelatinous, non-fibrous substance sprinkled with innumer-
able blood-vessels, secreted the first by the pia mater, which
engenders, nourishes, and multiplies the nervous fibres.” Dr.
Tiedemann also objects that, if the swellings or ganglions of the
chord were found first to engender the rest, and the nerves cor-
responding with them, they should be found in the embryo; but
that they are not. Certainly this cannot be expected, replies Gall,
before the chord becomes consistent, or the period for the pro-
duction of nerves has arrived; and when the great nerves of the
extremities begin to form, and not before, can we expect that the
pulpy substance which produces them will be observed.t Dr. Tiede-~


$j. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 44. and p. 242. :
_* See Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 65. sqq. A masterly refutation, but apparently
unknown to English anatomists.
Dr. Bellingeri fancies that the pulpy substance is for sensation, the fibrous
or motion. I think it is Dr, Foville who fancies that the pulpy is for the pecu-


COMPOSITION OF THE BRAIN. 343


mann actually says, “ Gall is right in asserting that in the adult
the parts of the chord most supplied with cortical substance are
those where the largest nerves are given off.”" He allows that
nervous fibres go off wherever there are ganglions ; that whenever
a nerve joins a ganglion, it is reinforced; and that all nerves are
accompanied by more or less of this substance, through which
they acquire a successive increase, so as to become conical; and
that the soft substance is, at the ninth month, more abundant
where nerves arise, and still more abundant at the origin of the
great nerves of the extremities. Dr. Bellingeri allows the fact
of the pulpy far exceeding the fibrous in childhood*; and Mr,
Mayo allows that the origin of a nerve is always in part from fine
grey matter, and that the ascending fibres of the chorda oblon-
gata receive additions from the internal masses of grey matter,
‘as from new organs.’Y

Old anatomists were perfectly ignorant of the uses of the
various parts which they viewed so mechanically, and distin-
guished by such a collection of strange names. Gall views some
of them as organs of increase, others as organs of union, and
others as the bands of fibres which execute the nervous functions.
‘What are considered the parts of increase, and what of union,
must appear from the descriptions given.

Just as the extreme parts of nerves execute their chief func-
tion, as seen in the case of sight, smell, taste, hearing, touch;.so,
probably, the extreme portions of the fibrous substance of the
brain execute its functions. This opinion is rendered the more
probable from the pains which I showed nature to have taken to
increase the surface of the cerebrum and cerebéllum, so that the
fibrous substance may ultimately be spread out amidst the pulpy
to an immense extent.

‘The substance of the brain is said to be different from that of
all other animal textures. Vauquelin, in 1812, found, in 100 parts,


Water - = - 80:00 | Phosphorus ates 1550
Albumen _ -~ - 7:00 Muriate of soda, and
White fatty matter - 4°53 phosphate of lime, BLS
_ Red ditto - - 0°70 potass, and mag-
Osmazome - ~ si LQ nesia, with sulphur


liar nervous functions. But Dr. Marshall long ago gave strong reasons for
ascribing them to the fibrous. (I. c. p. 239. sqq.)

u Anatomie du Cerveau, traduit par M. Jourdain, p. 135.

* De Medulla Spinalt Nervisque, S. ii. c. vi.

¥ Outlines of Physiology, p. 241. 253. London, ed, 3.


344 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


M. Couerbe discovered a large quantity of cholesterine in the
brain ; and asserts that in the brain of sound persons as much as
2 or 23 per cent. of phosphorus exists, but about half as much
in the brain of idiots, and nearly double in the brain of maniacs !
M. John finds firmer albumen and more fat in the-fibrous than in
the pulpy substance.2. The oblong and spinal chords, according
to Vauquelin, contain more fat, and less albumen, osmazome, and
water: the nerves much less fat, much more albumen, and more
fat analogous to adipocire. M. Raspail remarks that the invest-
ments of the nervous fibrils, chords, and trunks, explain the pre-
dominance of albumen. He also reminds us that a nervous dries
to a horny substance without putrefying, whereas the brain putre-
fies in twenty-four hours.


Where feeling occurs in matter, mind exists. But the capa-
bility of feeling would be useless, were not volition united with it.
Feeling might exist without will, but could lead to nothing: and
means neither of obtaining or protracting pleasant sensations, nor
of escaping from painful ones, could be adopted. Volition could not
exist without feeling ; for we will through motives only. Neither
can the existence of feeling be known, but by the certain effects
of volition sensible to others. Now feeling may be excited by
external things, or by changes within. In the former case, some
Scotch metaphysicians term it sensation, and, if an idea of the
external thing is also excited, perception : in the latter case, they
term it consciousness. When we smell, we have a sensation ; when
we see an object, we have a perception; when we have a wish, or
an idea, or an internal pain, we are conscious. But sensation and
consciousness are the same, except as to their immediate causes.
Before will is exerted, on the occurrence of feeling, a wish must
also be felt —a desire to escape from the feeling, or to increase
or prolong it: and, therefore, even.in the lowest and most simple
cases, a faculty, if so it may be called, probably must be aap
posed to exist wherever there are feeling and volition.

_ There are various feelings, and modifications of feelings. The
external world produces immediately as many as five kinds


” Journal de Chimie Médicale, Aott, 1835.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 345


in the most complicated beings; so that man is said to have
five external senses — touch, taste, smell, hearing, and sight. The
word touch is used to signify both the power of sensation on the
contact of bodies, and also that general feeling which pervades
every part, and is able to produce endless varieties of sensations
from diversity of causes. If the external world, however, excites
merely sensations, the knowledge is very scanty, and the execution
of the will and the motives are as limited. But as we ascend in
the scale of animals, faculty after faculty is added: so that various
properties of the external world are learnt, —form is distinguished,
and symmetry, and distance: the relation of colours, sounds, and
numbers ; and a power is at the same time given for viewing, as a
whole, any object which excites these sensations and inner feelings,
—so many internal senses, as some have named these powers.

As we continue to rise, powers still higher are given;—the
power of viewing all things in connection, of comparing, contrast-
ing, inferring: and in some individuals these, to which the term
intellectual powers is especially given, are of great strength. At the
same time, motives are given in increased numbers. The lowest
animal has little more than a desire for food or life or an agree-
able sensation, and an aversion from uneasiness: but to some, a
desire of an act for the purpose of continuing the species; to
others, a desire to construct a habitation, and in a particular
manner; to some, a desire to attack and destroy, &c., is given, —
desires few or more and in various proportions. These are all
internal feeling, or so much consciousness. Now, any feeling may
not only occur, so that sensation, perception, or consciousness
are common attributes; but, when a feeling occurs which had
occurred before, the circumstance that it is the recurrence of a
feeling may be noticed. An odour may be recognised as one
smelt before; a desire, a thought, as. one experienced before.
The philosopher may recognise a great thought as not new to
him ; and the lowest animal may probably be aware that a savour
is the same it experienced once before. This is called memory.
The impression may return in an obscure manner, without the
recurrence of the original cause: so that we feel we had it before,
— we remember having witnessed something. Feelings from even
external causes may recur without the recurrence of the external
cause. The impression is not so lively as when excited origin-
ally; if we figure to ourselves a- building which we have seen,
the feeling, though strong enough for thinking and discoursing


546 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


upon, is far short of that experienced with the aid of the external |
senses. In diseased states of brain, the feeling, however, is as
strong as before; as well as where a large portion, but not the
whole, of the brain is torpid, or, in other words, a large number
of faculties are inactive, and not merely inactive, but roused to
full action with difficulty, as in dreaming. The insane and the
dreamer, from the powerful action of parts only of the brain, have
as strong impressions as though they were employing their ex-
ternal senses.

Any feeling or train of feelings may be thus renewed; a string
of words be conceived, though perhaps, at the time, neither
heard, spoken, nor written, or even a train of thought. Whether
a former impression is directly excited from without, as it was
at first, and recognised; or whether feelings of any kind are re-
excited from merely internal or indirect external causes of excite-
ment, and recognised ; or whether the impression of the former
occurrence of any feeling is renewed ;—in all these cases of
memory, or perhaps more properly, in regard to the two first
instances, recognition, the matter is precisely the same.

The mere recurrence of former impressions, without regard to
their recognition, is termed imagination or fancy: and innume-
rable combinations of past impressions may occur, in such form
and order as they did not occur before; and it is to this, strictly,
that the term imagination or fancy is generally applied.

Feelings thus re-excited, whether intellectual or moral, do not
start up insulated, but draw forth one another in association —
just as they previously occurred in combination or in succession.
An odour will re-excite the idea of the place where such an
odour was vividly perceived; and all the circumstances and
occurrences of the place will present themselves to the mind in
succession or conjunction. It is thus that language spoken and
written is an instrument of connection. Any connection between -
two feelings, of any kind whatever, serves this purpose ; and every
faculty may be thus excited; and the excitement of the very
propensities excites ideas connected with the propensity, and the
excitement of any one faculty may excite another.

While any feeling takes the lead, we are said to attend to it.
We can for a time idee it steadily vivid. This power is called
attention. The lowest animal can attend to its sensations, just as
the greatest philosopher to his profoundest thoughts. We cannot
call up a thought or feeling at pleasure ; but, by keeping vividly


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 347


before our mind any present feelings connected with it, it sooner
or later springs up through association, perhaps very compli-
cated: and in this way, by keeping up impressions connected with
certain propensities, we can excite even our propensities. The
other mode in which our will operates, is by causing muscular
contraction. We can will attention, and will muscular motion.

We are able to compare feelings of all kinds, and to infer one
thing from another. This is called judgment. The animal, with
but two external senses, taste and touch, judges of the quality of
what it tastes and touches, — whether the object is like that to
which he is accustomed. An animal with sight also judges if
the aspect of food or drink is like that to which it is accustomed.
With the faculty for the-feeling of the relation of tones, it judges
of music ; with that relating to numbers, it judges of them.

To draw large inferences, see the relation of many feelings, and
judge of cause and effect, seems a peculiar faculty; and, like all
the rest, may exist in various degrees of force.

All these powers, of course, tend to action; and the various
mere propensities are so many tendencies to action. Their im-
pulse is called znstinct2; and their highest tendency to excite-
ment, passion. But instinct and passion are common to them
all. | :
These modes or different operations of faculties were considered
by old writers, and are still considered by those whose knowledge
is but the remains of the ignorance of former days, as fun-
damental faculties. Every faculty, when it acts, acts in the way
of one of them; so that they are nearly common to all our
faculties; and, except attention, which is an act of volition, they
are all modes only of action. Gall, therefore, instead of dividing
them into perception, attention, memory, judgment, &c., as fun-
damental faculties; and viewing “the Power of Taste, a genius
for Poetry, for Painting, for Music, for Mathematics,” &c., as
‘‘more complicated powers or capacities, which are gradually
formed by particular habits of study or of business>;”’ regards
these last powers as distinct faculties, and perception, atten-
tion, memory, judgment, &c., merely as modes or varieties com~
mon to the action of each faculty. He contends that, when
we see a boy, brought up exactly like his brothers and sisters, dis-

@ Some limit the term instinct to the natural tendency to an act, without any


knowledge of its purposes.
> Dugald Stewart, Outlines of Moral Philosophy, p. 10.


/
348 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


playing fine musical talents or an astonishing power of calcu-
lation, though in all other respects a child, his pre-eminence cannot
be explained by particular habits of study or of business, nor by
mere strength of judgment, memory, &c.: — That the boy has a.
strong perception of melody, a strong memory of tunes, a strong
musical imagination, a strong musical judgment, or a strong per-
ception, memory, and judgment, of numbers; but may not be
clearer-headed or more attentive on any other point: while men of
the strongest sense may have no perception, memory, or judgment,
of tunes, or may calculate with extreme difficulty. It is the same
with regard to instinct. Writers consider instinct a general fa-
culty, while it is only the inherent disposition to activity possessed
by every faculty; and there are, therefore, as many instincts as
fundamental faculties. By instinct ‘the spider spreads a web and
ensnares flies: the working bee constructs cells, but does not kill
flies to support itself; it takes care of the young, but does not
copulate. Many male animals copulate, but take no care of their
young: the cuckoo, both male and female, abandons the charge
of bringing up its young to other birds, although it is compelled
to copulation by a very ardent instinct. The castor builds a hut,
but neither sings nor hunts; the dog hunts, but does not build;
the butcher-bird sings, builds, and preys; the quail does not
mate, but copulates, takes care of its young, and migrates; the
partridge mates, copulates, and takes care of its young, but does
not migrate ; the wolf, fox, roebuck, and rabbit, marry, and take
care of their young conjointly with the female : the dog, stag, and
hare, copulate with the first female they meet, and never know
their offspring. The vigorous wolf, the artful and timid hare, do not
burrow like the courageous rabbit and the cunning fox. Rabbits
live in republics, and place sentinels, which is done by neither the
fox nor the hare. How can these various instincts exist in one
species of animals, and not in another? How can they be com-
bined so differently ? Ifinstinct were a single and general faculty,
every instinct should show itself, not only at once, but also in the
same degree ; and yet while in the young animal many instincts
act with great force, others are still quite inactive: some instincts
act at one season, others at another. There is one season for pro-
pagation, another for emigration ; one season for living solitarily ;
another for assembling in companies, and for collecting provisions.
And how can we explain, on the supposition of a general instinct,
why the different instincts do not exist merely separate in dif-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 849


ferent species of animals, but that many of them are even con-
tradictory ?”¢

For my own part, when I reflect upon the various talents and
dispositions of persons who are all placed in the same circum-
stances, — how unsuccessfully some apply, with the utmost perse-
verance, to a branch of study, in which another, under the same
instructors, or, perhaps, scarcely assisted at all, or even with every
impediment thrown‘in his way, reaches excellence with little
trouble, and, again, fails in one in which the first is, on the other
hand, successful,—how early various tempers are developed among
children of the same nursery, — how the best moral education is
often thrown away, while in the midst of the worst examples and
every incentive to vice a virtuous character is sometimes formed,
— how hereditary are peculiarities of talent and of character, —
how similar some persons are to each other im one point of
talent and character, and disszmilar in another, — how positively
contradictory many points of the same character are found ; — how
exactly the same is true of all species of brutes4, and of all in-
dividuals among them, as far as their faculties are the same as
ours, —each species having its peculiar nature, and each indi-
vidual its peculiar character : —I confess myself unable to deny
that there is one innate faculty for numbers, another for colours,
a third for music, &c., &c., with a variety of distinct innate pro-
pensities; and that memory, judgment, &c., are but modes of
action common to the different faculties.

The faculties of whose existence Gall satisfied himself are:
1. The instinct of generation; 2. The love of offspring; 3. The
disposition to friendship; 4. Courage ; 5. The instinct to destroy
life; 6. Cunning ; 7. The sentiment of property ;'8. Pride; 9. Va~
nity; 10. Circumspection ; 11. Sense of things, by which we take
cognisance of individual objects and occurrences; 12. Sense of
locality, or of the relations of space: 13. Sense of persons;
14. Sense of words; 15. Sense of language, or philological talent ;
16. Sense of the relations of colours; 17. Sense of the relations.
of tones; 18. Sense of the relations of numbers; 19. Sense of
construction ; 20. Comparative sagacity, by which we compare ;

° Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 332. sqq-, 8vo. t. vi p. 352. sqq.

4 See the poet Cowper’s amusing account of the different characters of his
three hares. But all persons conversant with horses, dogs, cats, or any other
domestic brute, know that every individual among them is proportionally as dif-


ferent in its various abilities and dispositions, from others of its species, as every
human being is from other men.


350 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


21. Metaphysical sagacity, by which we examine into cause and


effect; 22. Wit; 23. Poetic talent; 24. Goodness, and moral.


Sense; 25. Faculty of imitation; disposition to have visions;
26. Religious feeling; 27. Firmness. He had been long inclined
to admit also a sense of order and a sense of time, ane waited
only for proofs of their organs.

Gall gives various other names to each faculty, more anxious


to express his view of the nature of each than to quibble for:


appellations.°¢


For information respecting the precise nature of _ faculty, »


many of which may be ill understood from their designations, I
refer to the third and fourth volumes of Gall’s work, Anatomie du
Cerveau, and the third, fourth, and fifth volumes of his Fonctions
du Cerveau — portions of the work which the most abe will
find entertaining.

That the faculties enumerated are not modifications of each
other, or of any other, but distinct and primitive, Gall considers
proved by the circumstance of each having one or more of the
following conditions.

«¢ An instinct, inclination, sentiment, talent, deserves,” says he,
«the denomination of fundamental, primitive, radical :

<1. When a quality or faculty (or its organ) is not manifested
nor developed, nor diminishes, at the same time with others.
Thus the instinct of generation (with its organ) is generally


developed and manifested later than other inclinations. Thus,.


the memory of names usually grows weak sooner than the other


faculties. REX:
“When, in the same individual, a quality or faculty is more
or less active (and its corresponding cerebral part more or less


. © Dr. Spurzheim gave to the majority of these faculties new names, which
he afterwards changed from time to time, some of which were long and uncouth,
and still destitute of the uniformity he aimed at, some new-coined words, and
some expressive of a doubtful, if not decidedly erroneous, view of the faculties ;
and to most of which Gall objected, as I confess I do. Dr. Vimont thus gives
his opinion of them : — “ Des expressions ridicules. J’ai vu avec plaisir que les
medecins les plus distingués en France n’ont jamais pu condescendre & recevoir les
mots sécrétivité, marveillosité, &c. — langage prétentieux, de mauvais goitt, et qui
figurerait a merveille dans la comedie des Précieuses Ridicules, ou des Femmes
Savantes.” (T'raité de Phrénologie, 4to. Paris, t. ii. p. 105.) It would have
been much better to have followed the example of Gall, and rested contented
with a few names for each faculty, so as to show what was meant, and waited
till the science is so far advanced that an appropriate name cannot be difficult.


’


\


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 35]


developed) than the others, Thus, the greatest sculptors, painters,
designers, have sometimes not the least disposition to music ; the
greatest poets little talent for mathematics.

“3, When a single quality or faculty is active, whilst the
others are paralysed (and only the corresponding organ deve-
loped). Thus, persons imbecile in every other respect, are often
violently impelled by physical love, or have a great talent for
imitation, &c.

“4, When, all the other qualities and faculties being active
(and all the other organs sufficiently developed), one single quality
or faculty is inactive (and one single organ not developed). Thus,
certain individuals cannot comprehend that two and two make
four ; others detest music, or women.

«5. When, in mental diseases, one quality or faculty only suf-
fers, or one only is entire. Thus, one insane person is mad only
in regard to religion, to pride, &c.; another, although mad in
every respect, still gives lessons in music with great intelligence.

“6. When the same quality or faculty is quite differently ma-
nifested in the two sexes of the same species of animal (and the
organ is differently developed in the two). Thus, the love of off-
spring (with its organ) is more developed in the females of most
animals: thus, among singing birds, the male only sings (and has
the organ well developed). |

“7. Lastly, when the same quality or faculty (and the same

. organ) always exists in one species and is deficient in another.
Thus, many species of birds, the dog, the horse, &c., have no in-
clination (nor organ) for construction, though this is so strikingly
manifested in other kinds of birds, in the squirrel, in the beaver.
Thus, certain kinds of animals are predaceous, migrate, sing, take
care of their young, while other kinds are frugivorous, lead sta-
tionary lives, do not sing, abandon their offspring.”


fl. c.t. ni. p. 213. sqq. See also 4to. vol. iii. p. 81. These were Gall’s own
philosophic principles, resulting from a view of his discoveries, and employed by
him to test farther discoveries, Yet Dr. Spurzheim details them with no im-
portant difference as his own, and says, “ I have no hesitation’to maintain that, in
pointing out the social or fundamental powers of the mind, my proceeding is
philosophical, founded on principles, &¢.;’’? whereas “ Gall did not determine
any of the organs in conformity with these views.” (Phrenolog., vol. i. p. 197.
American edition.) Gall began, of necessity, empirically; but these were the
general principles which he laid down after his discoveries aud published in the
volumes which bear his name only. “I renounced all reasoning, and’ gave


BB


352 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Perception, memory, judgment, &c., are modes of action of
these distinct faculties. “* As often as there exists a fundamental
faculty, a particular and determinate intellectual power, there
necessarily exists likewise a perceptive faculty for objects related
to this faculty. As often‘as this faculty is active upon the objects
of its sphere, there is attention. As often as the idea or traces
which the impressions of objects have left in the brain are re-
newed, either by the presence or in the absence of these same
objects, there is remembrance, reminiscence, passive memory. —
If this same renewal of received impressions takes place by an
act of reflection, by a voluntary act of the organs, there is active
memory. As often as an organ or a fundamental faculty compares
and judges the relations of analogous and dissimilar ideas, there
is comparison, there is judgment. A series of comparisons and
judgments constitutes reasoning. As often as an organ or a funda-
mental: power creates, by its own inherent energy, without the
concurrence of the external world, objects relative to its func-
tions ; as often as the organ discovers, by its own activity, the
laws of the objects related to it in the external world, there is
imagination, invention, genius.

‘“‘Whether, now, we consider perception, attention, memory,
reminiscence, recollection, comparison, judgment, reasoning,
imagination, invention, genius, either as gradations of different
degrees of the same faculty, or as peculiar modes of being of
this faculty, it still. remains certain that all the fundamental
faculties which have been demonstrated are endowed, or may be
endowed, with perception, attention, memory, recollection, judg-
ment, imagination ; and that, consequently, it is they which ought
to be considered intellectual and fundamental faculties, and that
the pretended mental faculties of my predecessors are only com-
mon attributes. Here, then, is a perfectly new philosophy of
the intellectual faculties, founded upon the details of the natural
history of the different modifications of human intellect. The same
may be said of the appetitive faculties, or rather qualities.” s


;


myself up entirely to observation. In this way I discovered twenty-seven quali-
ties or faculties essentially distinct, which must all be reduced to fundamental
qualities or faculties. It was only after this discovery that I-was enabled to
point out the characteristic conditions of the fundamental qualities o1 faculties.”
(4to. vol. iii. p. 81.) Then follow the seven characteristics.

5 |. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 327. sqq., 8vo. t. vi. p. 405. sqq., t. iii, p. 131. sqq.


THE .NERVOUS SYSTEM. 353


«© When a person has the talent for music, poetry, construction,
judging of distance, &c., in only a weak degree, he will not have
a very decided inclination for those objects. If, on the other
hand, the organs of these fundamental forces are more energetic,
the person feels a pleasure in the exercise of their functions; he
has an inclination for these objects. When the action of these
organs is still more energetic, he feels a want to occupy himself
with them. Lastly, when the action of these organs prepon-
derates, the person is impelled towards these objects; he finds
his happiness in them, and feels disappointed, unhappy, when he
cannot follow his inclination; he has a passion for these objects.
Thus it is that certain individuals have a passion for music,
poetry, architecture, travelling,” &c.}

*« «You shall not persuade me, however,’”’ Gall fancies it will
be said to him, “that the faculties acknowledged by philosophers
as faculties of the soul, are chimeras. Who will dispute that
understanding, will, sensation, attention, comparison, judgment,
memory, imagination, desire, liberty, are not real operations of
the soul, or, if you please, of the brain?’’’ ** Yes,” replies Gall,
“ without doubt these faculties are real, but they are mere ab-
stractions, generalities, and inapplicable to a minute study of a
species, or of individuals. Every man, who is not imbecile, has
all these faculties. All men, however, have not the same intel-
lectual or moral character. We must discover faculties, the
various distribution of which determines the various species of
animals; and the various proportions of which explain the varie-
ties among individuals. All bodies have weight, all have exten-
sion, all have impenetrability; but all bodies are not gold or
copper, all are not any plant, or any animal. Of what use to the
naturalist would be the abstract and general notions of weight,
extension, and impenetrability? If we confined ourselves to
these abstractions, we should still be in the most profound igno-
rance of every branch of physics and natural history.

“This is exactly what has happened to philosophers with
their generalities. From the most ancient period down to the
present day, one has not made a single step farther than another
in the precise knowledge of the true nature of man, his inclin-
ations and his talents, or of the source of his motives and deter-
minations. Hence we have as many philosophies as sot-disant


>], c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 328. sq., 8vo. t. vi, p. 408.
BB 2


354 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


philosophers: hence the vacillation and uncertainty of our insti-
tutions, especially of those which relate to education and criminal
legislation.” i }

Gall does not pretend to have discovered the ultimate nature
of all the fundamental faculties which he has pointed out. The
poet’s faculty, for example, he regards as distinct and fundamental,
because it has the conditions of a fundamental faculty above
enumerated ; but what are the ordinary functions of that part of
the brain, which, when greatly developed, produces the poet, he
dares not determine.* <‘I have made it,” says he, “ an invariable
rule to advance nothing which I could not strictly prove, or at
least render very probable by very strong arguments: for this
reason, in regard to the qualities and faculties, the existence of
which I maintain, I have always confined myself to the degree of
activity in which I could discover them and observe their mani-
festation.. I know it would have been more philosophical always
to refer to their fundamental forces the qualities or faculties
which I could detect in only their highest action : but I preferred
leaving something for those who came after me to do, rather
than give them an opportunity to disprove what I had prematurely
advanced.”!


1. c. 8vo. t. Lp. 49. sq. “See also 4to. vol. iv. p. 318. sqq., and 8vo, t. vi.
p. 392. sqq.

k ]. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 181., 8vo. t. v. p. 243.

' J. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 275. sq., 8vo. t. v. p. 407. Gall was of opinion that
there is a faculty for judging of time, and another of order. (1. c. 4to. vol. iv.
p. 61. sq., 188. sq., 8vo. t. Iv. p. 466. sq. t. v. p. 153. sqq-) He held, that there
must be a faculty which determines the desire of a particular habitation (1. ¢.
4to. vol. iii, p. 314. 8vo. t. iv. p. 280.), and might be one which gives pleasure in
wonders ; but, like the faculties of time and order, he “¢ was always of opinion
that they should not be received into the list till the situation of their organs was
proved by a sufficiently large number of exact observations.” (1. c. 4to. vol. iii,
p. xxiv. sq.) Dr. Spurzheim and phrenologists in general admit all four. Dr.
Spurzheim splits Gall’s sense of Things into two: one for objects, and one for
occurrences. Gall conceives there is a cerebral organ for the desire of taking food
(J. c. 8vo. t. iv. p.63.); and Dr. Hoppe of Copenhagen is generally thought
to have established it. (Phrenolog. Journ. Edin. Nos. 5. and 7.) Dr. S. assigns
its establishment to a person who never uttered a word to us upon the subject
till, many months after Dr. Hoppe’s first paper was published and six weeks after
the second paper had been read in the Edinburgh Society, he surprised us all in
the London Phrenological Society by reading a paper upon the point. Gall
originally fancied that there was a faculty of the love of life, and that he had dis-
covered its organ; but he afterwards thought he had been mistaken. Cranologie,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 355


Neither does Gall pretend to. have enumerated all the funda-
mental faculties of the mind. “ Probably,” says he, “those who


ou Découvertes nouvelles du Docteur Gail, traduit de ? Allemand. Paris, 1807, p.72.
Gall, 8yo. t.iv. p. 63. sq.) Dr. A. Combe, however, in the Ed. Phr. Journ., 1826,
contended that the love of life was a distinct faculty, and mentioned the case of an
_old lady who had long been remarkable for her love of life, and in whose brain
the only thing peculiar was an enormous convolution at the base of the middle
lobe. Dr. Spurzheim, without referring to Dr. A. Combe or any one else,
coolly says he thinks “it is highly probable that there is a peculiar instinct to
feel a love of life; and I look for its organ at the base of the brain, between the
posterior and middle lobes, inwardly of combativeness.” (Phrenology, ed. 1832,
_ vol. i. p. 142.) Dr. Vimont says ( Traité de Phrénologie, 1835, vol. ii. p. 165.),
that persons assured him that Dr. S., in his lectures at Paris, in 1830, arrogated
to himself the discovery of the organ. Dr. Vimont, however, is equally culpable
with Dr. S.; for he not only says that Dr. 8. made no such discovery, but
that neither Gall nor Dr. S. speaks of the faculty ; and Mr. G. Combe only in
the third edition of his System of Phrenology, in 1830. Now, 1. Dr. Spurz-
heim did mention it in his edition of 1832, under the beautiful name vitative-
ness; and Gall long before, though to disprove it. 2. In the passage which Dr.
Vimont refers to, in Mr. G. Combe’s work, the case seen by Dr. A. Combe is
fully detailed fromthe Ed. Phr. Journ., vol. iii. p. 467. sqq., published in 1826.
But, Dr. Vimont’s mention of it is in his second volume, published 1835,
p- 105. and 160. sqq. ; and he there says that he mentioned it in a memoir pre-
sented to the French Institute only in 1827.

‘Gall, in treating of attachment, gave strong reasons, in opposition to Dr. Spurz-
heim, for believing that there is a faculty for marriage. Dr. Vimont fancies that
he himself has established this; as well as, in certain brutes, a faculty which
he calls sens géométrique, inclining them, when moving in numbers, to arrange
themselves in a certain figure ; and one in men, which he terms sens du beau dans
les arts. Dr. Spurzheim conceived that there is a distinct faculty for judging of
weight or resistance, one for judging of size, as well as one of hope.* Gall was
opposed to all three. In Edinburgh they fancy there is a faculty for keeping
other faculties in simultaneous action towards one object, and they call it concen-
trativeness. Dr. Spurzheim argues against it through no fewer than eleven
pages; and Gall considered it unfounded. Dr. Spurzheim says that a friend
of his, a M. De Tremmon of Paris, suggested the idea of an organ of which
agriculture is the result. (Phr., Am. ed. vol. i. p. 168.) An Irish gentleman,
who had just commenced the study of phrenology, announced the discovery of
seventy-four new faculties one night to the Phrenological Society of London.
It appears to me, however, that there must be a faculty which makes us wish to
communicate our ideas to others, and another which makes us love society.
Some persons can keep nothing for an instant. Now no want of secretiveness
(if there is such a faculty, though Gall more properly, as I imagine, con-


* Phrenology, or the Doctrine of the Mental Phenomena. By G. Spurzheim,
M.D. 2 vols. Boston, 1832. Editions of some of his works, with his latest cor.
rections, were printed there by Marsh, Capen, and Lyon, 1832-8.


BB 3


356 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


follow me in the career which I have opened, will discover some
fundamental forces and some organs which have escaped my
researches.”

He doubts, however, whether so many will be discovered as
some apprehend. A modification of a faculty must not be mis-
taken for a faculty, nor the result of the combined action of
several faculties for a particular faculty. “If,” he says, “we
reflect on the number of possible combinations which may result
from the twenty-seven or thirty fundamental faculties or qualities,
from the reciprocal action of as many organs, we shall not be
surprised at the infinite number of shades of character among
mankind. How many different combinations result from the ten
ciphers, from the twenty-four letters. How many different coun-
tenances result from the different combination of the small number
of parts which compose the human face: how many shades of
colours and tones result from the small number of primitive
colours and fundamental tones.”™ They, moreover, may be
variously modified in different animals.

This view of the mental faculties may be considered quite in-
dependently of the peculiar doctrines of Gall respecting the
cerebral organs of each faculty, and even quite independently of
the fact of the brain being the organ of the mind. It may be
examined precisely like the metaphysics of Locke, Reid, Stewart,
Brown, &c."


siders that what Dr. S. names secretiveness is a disposition to artfulness and
stratagem) can explain it. There must be a positive propensity. The dis-
ciples of Dr. S. must allow that the want of a disposition to conceal would
not impel a person to communicate; as they maintain, in opposition to Gall,
that the deficiency of combativeness will not give fear, nor of any feeling its op-
posite. Again, some persons, not at all remarkable for attachment, cannot bear
to be alone; they have a propensity to society too strong to allow them to
be alone a moment, though they have no regard for the person whose presence
may suffice them. Gall is decidedly of this opinion (1. c. 4to. vol. ili. p. 175.
sq-, 8vo. t. iii. p. 492. sq.); and, having been unable to localise the tendency,
is inclined to regard it as a modification of attachment. Solitariness and silence
are dreadful punishments. .

m ]. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 275., 8vo. t. v. p. 406. sq. Bacon, De Dignit. et Wi.
Sc. l. vii. cap. ii. is striking on this point.

2 It is remarkable that nearly every one of these faculties has been admitted
by one metaphysician or another. See Mr. G. Combe’s Letter in reply to Mr.
Jeffrey, the editor of the Edin. Review, reprinted in the Edin. Phrenol. Journal,
1827.

Notwithstanding, too, that memory, like judgment, attention, &c., was con-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 357


It, however, derives its great proofs from the fact of the in-
dividual faculties being, ceteris paribus, strong in proportion
to the development of particular parts of the brain, as we shall
presently see.

Every faculty was given us for a good purpose, and it is only
when one or more are excessive, or defective, or too much or too
little excited by external circumstances, or by disease, that error
occurs. The lower faculties given to brutes as well as to our-
selves are evidently to yield to those which are of a superior
nature and peculiar, or given in a higher degree and with peculiar
modifications, to man. Happiness is ‘‘ our being’s end and aim.”
Not individual, partial, temporary happiness, however intense ;
but the greatest and longest happiness of the greatest number,
Sound morality in individuals and nations, —and in what, through
elective representation should be, at least virtually, identical with a
nation,—government, tends to this. No act is virtuous that does
not lead to the greatest happiness of the individual and of: the
greatest number of individuals: nor does any act lead to the
greatest happiness of the individual and of the greatest number,
that is not virtuous. The whole set of faculties, each allowed
to act, but the inferior in subordination to the superior, lead to
virtue ; and this to happiness. ‘All the faculties,” says Gall,
“are good, and necessary to human nature such as it should be
according to the laws of the Creator. But I am convinced that
too energetic an activity of certain faculties produces vicious in-
clinations — causes the primitive destination of propagation to
degenerate into libertinism, the sentiment of property into an
inclination for theft, circumspection into irresolution and a tend-
ency to suicide, self-love into insolence, disobedience, &c.” ©
To employ all our faculties so as to produce the largest amount
of individual and general happiness, therefore, is the law of our
nature ; and, like all the laws of nature, is intended to be obeyed.
When we attempt to act contrarily to any law of nature, evil
arises either to ourselves immediately or ultimately, to others


sidered a distinct and fundamental faculty, some writers taught that there were
three sorts of memory; one for facts (memoria realis), one for words (memoria
verbalis), and one for places (memoria localis). See Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. iv.
p- 14. sq., 8vo. t. iv. p. 380. Some, that there are four; a memory for words,
another for places, a third for time, and another for cause and effect, or causality,
See Gall, l. c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 357. sq., 8vo. t. ii. p. 353.
* 1. c. 4to. vol. ili. p. xxxi.
BB 4


355 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


contemporaneous with us, or to our successors, be they our pro-
geny or not. To obey them is, therefore, our solemn .duty.
Christianity teaches the very precepts which lead to the greatest
happiness: and, if any one disregard the authority of them as
taught by Christ, because he sees no proofs of Christ’s super-
human authority, he must remember that they are already esta-
blished in nature ; and that Bishop Butler himself, in his Analogy,
declares that man, ‘from his make, constitution, or nature, is, in
the strictest and most proper sense, a law to himself, — he hath
the rule of right within,”P and that Christianity, as regards its
moral precepts, is a republication “of natural religion in its
genuine simplicity,’ and that ““moral precepts are precepts ‘the
reason of which we-see,” and ‘‘ arise out of the nature of the case
itself, prior to external command.”4

So imperative are the natural moral laws, that a man is equally
bound to obey them and be virtuous, though he disbelieves not
only the divine authority of Scripture, but a future state. Indeed,
in proportion to the necessity of being influenced in our conduct
by the hope of future reward or the fear of future punishment
must be the deficiency of real virtue. Nay, a man would be
equally bound to obey the moral laws, though, notwithstanding
the evidence of universal design, he should, from the difficulties
of the subject, reason himself into a doubt of the personality of


P Sermon ili.

4 Analogy, P. ii. c. i. Melancthon says, ‘“‘ Wherefore our decision is this,
that those precepts which learned men have committed to writing, translating
them from the common sense and common feeling of human. nature, are to be
accounted as not less divine than those contained in the tables given to Moses ;
and that it could not be the intention of our Maker to supersede by a law given
on a stone, that which is graven with his own finger on the table of the heart.”

Volney’s Loi Naturelle deserves reading; and that part of Dr. Spurzheim’s
Phrenology which relates to the moral constitution of man. Mr. Combe’s work
on the Constitution of Man is plain and forcible, and should be in every body’s
hands, as a guide to happiness and a protection from absurd and superstitious
notions. Through a phrenological benefaction, its price is very low.

Upon the subject of metaphysics, or the science of mind, all our knowledge,
I think, may be found in Gall’s works, — Sur l? Anatomie et Physiologie de
Systeme Nerveux, and his Fonctions du Cerveau; in Dr. Spurzheim’s Phrenology,
in 2 vols; and in the admirable Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind,
by Thomas Brown, M.D. Edinb. 1826, 1 vol. 8vo.

Dr. Thomas Brown is not only among the ablest metaphysical writers, but is
the latest, and his work approaches as near to phrenology as was possible without
the aid of Gall’s method of investigation,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 359


the great cause of creation. The wicked man who holds any of
these opinions, in the idea of being loosened from the bonds of
virtue, is as ignorant as he is ickowd

Bishop Butler, in his profound metaphysical sermons, preached
at the Roll’s Chapel, and which all should study, proves that
the natural tendency of all our united faculties and feelings is
to virtue and the greatest happiness."


‘ Serm. i. Upon the social nature of Man. Serm. ii iii. Upon the natural
supremacy of conscience.

Some have, in the most bigoted manner, denied that there is any foundation
for virtue, but in revelation. ‘ I never took any pleasure in moral ethics,” says
Mr. Gilbert Wakefield (Memoirs of his own Life, vol. i, p. 512.), “ and would
not give one penny for all the morality in the world.’”’ Yet, as the present
Dean of Peterborough, Dr. Turton remarks (p. 222.), “this gentleman wrote a
book of about 230 pages in defence of Christianity ; and the volume is almost
entirely confined to the internal evidences and moral excellence of the system.
It fs not unpleasant to observe the natural feelings of people thus completely
overthrowing their theoretical positions. ‘ Natural religion,’ Dr. Hey observes
‘is pre-supposed in revealed.’”? Socinus even declared (Toulmin’s Memoirs
of Faustus Socinus, p. 216.) that no man could discover the truths of natural
religion, not even the being of God, by the light of nature ; “and that the first
notices of a Divine Being were derived from Revelation or immediate com-
munications from God.” Archbishop Magee held the same doctrine; and Bishop
Horne and the greater defender of the Trinity, Mr. Jones, went further, by be-
lieving the Bible to contain a system of natural philosophy (“ as certain critics,”
equally absurd in regard to another book, “are used to say, hyperbolically,” that
if all sciences were lost, they might be found in Virgil, (Lord Bacon, Advance-
ment of Learning), and, by becoming disciples of a person named Hutchinson,
who thought that, by the “light which revelation afforded him, compared with his
own observations, he saw farther into the constitution of the universe, and the
operations carried on in it, than Sir Isaac Newton had done.” (Bishop Horne’s
Works, vol. i, p. 445.) ‘ Mr. Hutchinson looked upon natural religion as an
engine of the devil, in these latter days, for the overthrow of the Gospel; and
therefore boldly called it the religion of Satan or Antichrist.” The fancy
was, however, old. ‘ Paracelsus and some others,’’ says Lord Bacon (I. c.)
have pretended to find the truths of all natural philosophy in the Scriptures,
scandalising and traducing all other philosophy as heathenish and profane.”
‘« But neither do they give honour to the Scriptures, as they suppose, but much
embase them.” ‘ The scope or purpose of the spirit of God is not to express
matters of nature in the Scriptures otherwise than in passage, and for appli-
cation to man’s capacity and to matters moral and divine; and it is a true rule
auctoris aliud agentis parva auctoritas ; for it were a strange conclusion, if a man
should use a similitude for ornament or illustration sake, borrowed from nature
or history, according to vulgar conceit, as of a basilisk, an unicorn, a centaur,
Briareus, an Hydra, or the like ; and that therefore he must needs be thought to
affirm the matter thereof positively to be true.”” — The mind is a subject of natural


360 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


We will now consider the special functions of the different
parts of the nervous system.

The mind is evidently the property of the brain; and the
operations of the mind, whether relating to sensation, will, intel-
lect, or affections, are evidently the operations of the brain. In the
division of this work devoted to general physiology, I proved the
brain to be the organ of the mind, as much as the liver is the organ
of the secretion of bile; that what holds good of the function of
every other part, holds good of the function of the brain; and that
to ascribe the power of the brain to an immaterial imaginary
- something called a soul, is a mere hypothesis, the remains of un-
enlightened times, and not only unnecessary to the belief of a
future state through a divine revelation, but calculated to throw
discredit on such revelation, by making its annunciation of a
future state appear superfluous. §


science, and Lord Bacon’s remarks apply to it equally as to astronomical and
geological matters ; and I consider that a soul stands upon the same foundation
as a centaur or a Briareus. .

* An old argument, which I thought too puerile to notice, and which was
disposed of by Gall (1. c. 8vo. t. ili. p. 119. sq.), has just been revived by Lord
Brougham to uphold the existence of something called soul distinct from matter.
(Paley’s Natural Theology, illustrated by Henry Lord Brougham. London, 1835.
The body is said to be incessantly changing its constituent particles, so that no
part of it is the same after a certain lapse of time; and yet we feel ourselves to
be mentally the same. Now, the change of the particles of the body may be
granted. But what then? Do not all the properties of all parts of the body
remain the same, as much as its mental character? are not the fresh particles so
assimilated to each part, that all we can see or feel of our bodies, and the
qualities of every part, remain the same, as much as all we observe of the
mind, throughout all the changes of particles? Is not a man held to be the
same bodily as well as mentally all the days of his life? If the face is marked
with the small-pox, do not the pits remain throughout life, though the particles
may have all changed tentimes? Ifa nervous or dyspeptic affection exists here-
ditarily, does not the morbid functional peculiarity continue through all the
repeated changes of the particles? If a person acquires immunity from small-pox
by vaccination, or by having once passed through the disease, is he not in nearly
all instances safe against it, though he live long enough to change all his particles
again, and again, and again. What is true of all other organs and parts is true,
to just the same extent, of the brain, in regard to its substance and its qualities.

Anassertion of Lord Brougham’s, that the mind does not decay with the body, _
but acquires vigour while the body declines, is incorrect. ‘“ It is equally cer-
tain,” says he, “that while the body is rapidly decaying, between 60 or 63 and
70, the mind suffers hardly any loss of strength in the generality of men: that
men continue to 75 or 76 in the possession of all their mental powers, while few


>


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. $61


If it is clear that the brain is the organ of mind, it is extremely
probable that particular portions of it have different offices.


can boast of even their physical strength; and instances are not wanting of per.
sons, who, between 80 and 90, and even older, when the body ean hardly be said to
live, possess every faculty of the mind unimpaired.” (p. 120.) This statement is
perfectly opposite to sound observation. Gall published when between 60 and 70,
and in conversation appeared in full possession of his intellect; nay, as to cere-
bellum and body at large, he declared that he never omitted matrimonial duties
for 24 hours. Madame Gall assured me, in regard to the whole man, “que le
docteur n’étoit pas épuisé; que ses forces n’étoient pas diminuées!” But what
he wrote did not contain a single discovery or new view, and was merely the
offspring of his former labours and mental powers. He told me his mind’s
vigour was impaired, and his head somewhat diminished. A man’s judgment.
may become greater near 60; not from greater strength, but from enlarged
experience and longer habit. But let him attempt what is not habitual with him,
or let him attempt originality, and, though he may not discover his decline,
the rest of the world will. The Archbishop begged to be informed when his
sermons showed his mind to be falling off; but was offended beyond forgiveness
when Gil Blas told him that his last homily “ne paroit pas tout-da-fait de
la force des précédents.” ‘‘ Mon esprit, grace au Ciel,” replied the indignant
old man, “n’a rien encore perdu de sa vigeur.”» When old men work at some-
thing original, or pursue a course of public intellectual effort, their falling off
is manifest, and we discover that the phrase ‘ retained their faculties to the last,’ is
vague and incorrect, just as I formerly remarked it to be when applied to persons
near dissolution. I am not aware of any great discoveries or original productions
by men who had attained the age of 60; but, should any instances of full mental
vigour in old men be adduced, they would only be exceptions, just like octoge-
narian fathers, cr persons who we see continually in the papers lived to 90 or 100,
and walked so many miles daily to within a week of their death for I know not how
many years. An eminent agriculturist has been begetting a family at past 70.*
Yet who would fix upon a man of 70 as a postman, or to ensure an heir? Are
not elderly men found to fall off from their full and palmy condition of mind,
till they all acquire the title of old women? There may be varieties in the
period of general decline, as there are of full development; and there may be
varieties in the decline of different organs in the same system. Will not the
stomachs of some old men receive and digest food as well as those of young ones ?
But decline arrives; and those who use such arguments should show that the


* Every Sunday newspaper records the death of some wonderful old poor
person, and I take this by. chance from the Morning Chronicle of the 20th of last
November. ‘The veteran Lord Lynedoch has been visiting at Holkham; and
we are happy to understand that, notwithstanding his advanced age (we believe
the venerable General to be in his ninety-second or ninety-third year), he enjoys
the diversion of shooting, and sees well enough to killa hare. Mr. Coke (the
agriculturist I alluded to) enjoys and sbagee the battues with the same health
and energy he has done for many years.’


362 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Numerous old writers had assigned situations for the faculties,
but in the most fanciful manner ; and, from regarding as distinct


mind does not require sleep, is not weakened by over-exertion of the brain or
any other part, by want of food, by cold, &c., and is not affected by narcoties
and stimulants. Those who wish to show the mind independent of the brain in
one point, must show it in all.
In reply to the argument for an immaterial something from the consciousness
of personality, I reminded my readers formerly that the fly must be as con-
scious of its individual being —its personality — as the philosopher about whose
head it buzzes. If he must be believed to have an immaterial and immortal
soul on this account, so must the fly, and so must the smallest microscopic
creature. Nay, if an animal is of such a nature that it will re-acquire bodily per-
fection, or can live when divided into two or more, its mind can do the same : so
that a planaria’s'consciousness may be made into two or ten if we please (see supra,
p. 254.) —each new animal made from sections having its sense of personality,
and therefore its pretension to an immaterial principle, as much as the original
and as much as a philosopher ; and simply because its sensorial nervous system,
though divided, fully thrives. Our own minds, and those of all other animals,
are known to us only as powers generated merely by matter, through being of a
certain composition and placed under certain circumstances, possessing or acquir-
ing the property of changing and developing, till at length brain results, with its
mental properties ; and, as the respective parts of this brain are farther improved
in texture and developed, so increased and fresh faculties appear. The properties
of every other organ come in the same way.
Lord Brougham (p. 102. sqq.) censures former writers for not using an argu-
ment which, unfortunately for their characters as observers of nature, was used
by Drs. Barrow (7th Sermon on the Creed), Bentley (Sermon ii.) Clarke (On the
Being and Attributes of God, Prop. viii.), Reid (Essays on the Powers of the
Human Mind, vol. i. p. 97.), Beattie (Dissertations, chap. i. sect. i.). A parti-
cular combination of matter, he asserts, cannot give birth to what we call mind,
because this would be “an assertion altogether peculiar and unexampled,” of
which ‘“‘ we have no other instance ;” because “ we know of no case in which
the combination of certain elements produces something quite different, not
only from each of the simple ingredients, but also different from the whole
compound,” — “ both the organised body and something different from it
and not having one of its properties — neither dimensions, nor weight, nor
colour, nor form.” (p. 102. sqq.) — ‘* To think,” says Dr. Barrow, in anguish,
‘a gross body may be ground and pounded into rationality, a slow body may
be thumped and driven into passion, a rough body may be filed and polished
into a faculty of discovering and resenting things; that a cluster of pretty thin
round atoms (as Democritus, forscoth, conceited), that a well-mixed combin-
ation of elements (as Empedocles fancied), that a harmonious contemperation
(or crasis) of humours (as Galen, dreaming, it seems, upon his drugs and his
potions, would persuade us); that an implement made up of I know not what fine
springs, and wheels, and such mechanic knacks (as some of our modern wizards
have been busy in devising), should, without more to do, become the subject of


-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 363


faculties what are merely modes of action of faculties to which they
were altogether strangers, their assertions on the subject were


so rare capacities and endowments, the author of actions so. worthy and works so
wonderful, &c. &c. — how senseless and absurd conceits are these! How can
we, without great indignation and regret, entertain such suppositions?” Asa
son of Galen, [ would reply to Barrow (‘‘ dreaming, it seems, upon his”? dusty
folios of divinity in his study, instead of looking abroad through nature) and to
Lord Brougham, — 1. That the brain, matter though it be, is seen, in positive
fact, to have these capacities and endowments — that it has them in proportion as
it is better organised and has a greater bulk of its respective portions — that the
mental phenomena are disturbed by all the means, applied to the brain, that dis-
turb the functions of other organs. when applied to them: 2. That there is an
insensible transition of mental qualities from the lowest brutes through the
cleverest, and through human beings of the dullest apprehension and feelings
(many of whom are far below most brutes) to the highest among us; and that
the mental properties of the lowest are neither ‘‘ dimensions, nor weight, nor
colour, nor form,” any more than the mental properties of ourselves, and must
therefore arise from something more than matter, or our high capacities may be
merely properties of matter. What faculty or degree of faculty that appears in
the scale of animals is the first sign of soul? Nay, the properties of simple
life, such as vegetables have in common with us, are neither “dimensions, nor
weight, nor colour, nor form,’— they cannot be produced by “ grinding, pound-
ing, thumping, driving, filing, polishing, by springs, wheels, and such mechanic
knacks.” They, I suppose, are not now ascribed to a soul, though they once
were, and ought to be still by such believers in souls.

The vital properties of a cabbage, I presume, are allowed to result from a
well-mixed combination of elements; and if such a combination produces such
a result, other combinations may and do produce results still higher. What in
common with extension, impenetrability, and inertness, have heat, electricity, mag-
netism ? yet matter placed under certain circumstances displays these properties;
and a change of circumstances changes them. Biniodide of mercury is yellow ;
but reduce its temperature to a certain point, nay, only touch it, and instantly it
becomes red. Soft iron and nickel have magnetic properties at a certain tem-
perature, but suddenly lose them at a higher, and nickel at a less elevation than
iron. Soft iron connected with a magnet, or encircled by a coil of copper wire
and connected with a galvanic battery, becomes magnetic, but no longer than the
connection lasts.

What property of dimension, weight, &c., is that possessed by mercury, iron,
and so many other elements, of variously affecting living natures, both corporeally
and mentally? A few elements combined in various proportions acquire various
such properties, and, in some, properties of the most deadly kind. : Prussic acid is
only certain proportions of carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen — all which, in other
proportions and combinations, are essential elements of our bodies. The living
matter of vegetables and animals is common matter arranged and compounded
as in no other instances, and which, properly circumstanced as to temperature, &c.


364 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


necessarily groundless and ridiculous. Burton, for example, in his
compilation, says, “ Inner senses are three in nun®er, so called


gives rise to the phenomenon of life. When living matter arranges itself, accord -
ing to its properties, into that peculiar combination which we call nervous, other
peculiar phenomena appear; and if its vital powers arrange it into that compo-
sition and organ called brain, and this is properly circumstanced, mind appears.
In truth, no combination of elements and arrangement of matter thus combined
occurs in inanimate substances as we find in vegetables; no such combination
of elements and such organisation in vegetables as we find in brutes ; and no
such combination and organisation in the other organs of brutes as we find in
the brain, and the brain of no brute is equal to the development of its various
parts to the human brain. The vital and mental phenomena are unexampled
in the inanimate world — result from no combination or organisation there,
simply because no such combination and organisation occur in the inanimate
world. Combine and organise inanimate matter by supplying seeds and young
plants with proper inanimate matter, and every vegetable may be generated
from one or two, in indefinite abundance, as long as matter is supplied and ne-
cessary circumstances attainable ; and you give liying properties to matter. pre-
viously inanimate. You may do this equally with animals, and thus multiply
minds; you may do it equally with human animals, and thus multiply human
minds indefinitely — generate souls! Nay, you may generate what quality of
mind you please, just as you may generate the properties of a rose, or of a lily
if you prefer them, by propagating from a rose or lily, thus converting inanimate
matter into roses or lilies; and just as you can propagate the intellectual and
moral qualities of the intelligent and affectionate dog, or the musical qualities of
the bulfinch, if you prefer them, by propagating dogs.or bulfinches, thus con-
verting inanimate matter into dogs and bulfinches.. You may generate not only —
human faculties, but any variety of them you please, as much as you can varieties
of body, by propagating and feeding different varieties of human beings, —by con-
verting common matter into human beings, and human beings of whatever sort is
preferred. Propagate from cretins in Switzerland, and you have idiotism; from
sagacious parents, and you have intelligence; from parents endowed with a
specific talent, you produce this talent, be it musical or any other ; from violent,
vicious, half mad parents, and you beget a curse to mankind, in ferocity, de-
pravity, or eccentricity; from mad parents, you produce madness ; from the
gentle, and benevolent, and affectionate, you generate gentleness and love. With
but one parent so marked, you may often succeed in generating his or her quali-
ties ; and when, with two alike, you fail, the failures are not. more frequent,
nor caused by other circumstances, than failures of transmission of corporeal re-
semblances, or of the transmission of the mental qualities of brutes or of the
properties of vegetables. Strange souls, to be thus under our command as
to numbers and qualities! So far from there being, as Lord Brougham says,
no case in which the combination of certain elements produces something quite -
different, the world is incessantly filled with such cases; all the vegetable and
animal creation are examples of inanimate matter incessantly combined into the
production of new qualities totally different from those previously possessed.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 365


because they be within the brain-pan, as common sense, phantasie, .
and memory.” Of “common sense,” “the forepart of the brain is


It is asserted by Lord Brougham, who positively says that we have a “ per-
petual sense that we are thinking,” “ quite independent of all material objects,”
(p. 56.) that the circumstance of the existence of matter is only an hypothesis,
and that materialists grossly and dogmatically assume that matter exists.
Now, we do not assume — we know, that matter exists. From certain sens-
ations, we believe inevitably, intuitively, by the laws of God, that what we
term matter exists. He allows, indeed, ‘ that we believe in the existence of
matter, because we cannot helpit.” (p. 241.) Thisisenough. As to our minds,
we observe that no mind exists in nature but as a property or power of matter.
We never see mind. We certainly learn the existence of matter by the property —
of our brain called mind: but that is no reason for saying that the power called
mind exists alone. If it were felt by ourselves to exist, though we had no know-
ledge of matter around us, it would only show that we felt personality without
knowing the cause of it, — without knowing that we had brains. It would show
our ignorance only. The elephant, and whale, and the smallest insect, with their
sense of personality as real as ours, know nothing of their brains; yet we know
that their mind belongs to abrain. If even we were ignorant of the external world,
we should know there is something more than an immaterial soul without dimen-
sions. For, though we could live for a time without our external senses, we could
not live a few minutes without breathing. We should, as usual, internally feel our
personality in that part of space where our head is. Weshould also internally feel
the uneasiness arising from want of breath at a distance from this—in the part of
space where our lungs are. We should be compelled to will a motion to remove
this uneasy sensation. All this must inform us of matter. Nay, could we live
without breath,—mere heads, since the head might ache in different parts, we
should have internal evidence of extension. When Lord Brougham reminds us
that we learn the existence of matter only by our minds, he should remember that
we are not conscious of our existence till matter makes an impression upon us.
The existence of mind as’a property of peculiarly arranged and circumstanced
matter was fully proved before, and therefore these considerations, like every other
fact, harmonise with the account; and the doctrine of the existence of mind,
independently of matter, indicates a want of modern knowledge and involves us
in endless absurdity. Its studied display usually proceeds in our profession from
rank hypocrisy and malice, as though a materialist may not be a devout Chris-—
tian, and these pharisees say aloud, “ I thank thee, Lord, that I am not as other
men are — even as this materialist.”” I agree with the early Christians and Mr.
Carmichael (dn Essay on such Physical Considerations as are connected with Man’s
ultimate Destination, &c., by Andrew Carmichael, M.R.I.A. Dublin, 1830.),
that, as all nature is one whole, all other created beings are also organised. They
and we are in but one spot at a time, and can move from one spot to another :
what does so, cannot be else than matter and a property of matter. I consider
this alone a proof that we possess no such imaginary thing as an immaterial soul.
A masterly exposure of Lord Brougham’s strange misstatements and sophisms on
the subject of materialism will be found in Observations on the Discourse of
Natural Theology by Henry Lord Brougham ; by Thomas Wallace, Esq. LL.D.


366 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


his organ or seat;” of ‘“‘phantasie or imagination, which some
call estzmative or cogitative,” ‘‘his organ is the middle cell of the


one of his Majesty’s Councillors in Ireland. London, 1835. An equally able
and very learned exposure of the innumerable literary errors of this unfortunate
book is contained in a work which must delight every man of education, and
from which I have gained much information, — Natwral Theology considered with
Reference to Lord Brougham’s Discourse on that Subject ; by Thomas Turton,
D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge, and Dean
of Peterborough. Cambridge, 1836. The Creator is a distinct being, to whom
there is nothing “simile aut secundum,” whose essence is incommunicable ;
and no created being has His attributes, though we speak of the Divine Mind.
He is every where — has always existed — will always exist —and orders and
sustains all things. His nature is past finding out; and, therefore, to attempt to
conceive His nature, or to speak of Him except as speaking of His works and
laws, is vain — and to think the highest created beings even approach His nature
is absurd. In the words of Mr. Carmichael, —‘ There is no spirit in the uni-
verse but His incommunicable essence.”

If Lord Brougham is deeply in error when he calls, as he does, the insensible
change of particles during life “ an entire destruction of the body,” — “ the body’s
death”’ and “dissolution,” though organisation and life have not experienced the
intermission of a moment, he is equally wrong when he derives a proof of the
existence of something immaterial from the invariableness of our consciousness of
identity. Not only does our memory often fail us, so that we cannot say whether
we did or said certain things which others know was the fact; not only are we
continually deceived in dreams, as having said and done what never was the fact,
so that, as Mr. Wallace remarks, we frequently exclaim, “ Did I really do so and
so, or did [ only dream it?” but insane people daily believe themselves to be others ;
and, after violent affections of the brain, people not unfrequently forget who they
are, and believe themselves to be other persons. (See Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 122.
sqq-) Nay, cases occur in which a man has the consciousness of two persons. As
the brain, like all other organs of animal life, is double, and the sperations of the
two halves of the brain proceed like one, just as the double impressions on the eyes
and ears are known only as one, so one side of the brain is sometimes diseased or
injured to even a great amount, without impairment of the mind. But if their
action is rendered discordant — not the action of one arrested, but thrown out of
harmony with the other —or if they act alternately, we have the phenomena of
two. states of consciousness. “ One of Gall’s friends, a physician,” says Dr.
Spurzheim, “ often complained that he could not think with the left side of his
head’; the right side was one inch higher than the left. Gall attended a gentleman
who for three years heard peasants insulting him on his left side. -He commonly
discerned his derangement, and rectified his error ; but if he took a little too much
wine, or had a fit of fever, he always imagined there were voices abusing him.
Tiedemann mentions a certain Moor who was alienated on one side of his brain,
and observed his madness with the other.

«¢ All monomaniacs have a complicated consciousnees. I saw in Dublin a
hunatic who fancied himself the Duke of Wellington. He thought to have com-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 867


brain;” and of memory, “his seat and organ, the back part of the
brain.”t This was the account of the faculties given by Arabian


manded in Spain, and to have gained the battle of Waterloo! yet at the same
time he was a clever and excellent servant, did his service at table and in the
house with great propriety. I saw him handing round at a table, where there
was a large party, every thing with perfect order and decency, so that no guest
could suspect his aberration.

“‘ There are other sorts of remarkable cases which prove that consciousness is
not always single. Mr. Combe (System of Phrenology, p. 108.) quotes from the
Medical Repository, the case of a Miss R., in the United States, who naturally
possessed a very good constitution, and arrived at adult age without having it
impaired by disease. She possessed an excellent capacity, and enjoyed fair
opportunities to acquire knowledge. Besides the domestic arts and social attain-
ments, she had improved her mind by reading and conversation, and was versed
in penmanship. Her memory was capacious, and stored with a copious stock of
ideas. Unexpectedly, and without any forewarning, she fell into a profound
sleep, which continued several hours beyond the ordinary term. On waking she
was discovered to have lost every trait of acquired knowledge. Her memory was a
tabula rasa. All vestiges both of words and things were obliterated and gone.
It was found necessary for her to learn every thing again. She even acquired,
by new efforts, the art of spelling, reading, writing, and calculating, and gra-
dually became acquainted with the persons and objects around, like a being for
the first time brought into the world. In these exercises she made considerable
proficiency. But after a few months another fit of somnolency invaded her. On
rousing from it, she found herself restored to the state she was before the first
paroxysm, but was wholly ignorant of every event and occurrence that had be-
fallen her afterwards. The former condition of her existence she called the old
state, and the latter the new state ; and she is as unconscious of her double cha-
racter as two distinct persons are of their respective natures. During four years
and upwards, she had undergone periodical transitions from one of these states
to another. The alterations were always consequent upon a long and sound
sleep. In her old state she possessed all her original knowledge; in her new
state, only what she acquired since. If a gentieman or lady be introduced to
her in the old state, or vice versa, and so of all other matters, to know them
satisfactorily, she must learn them in both states. In the old state she pos-
sesses fine powers of penmanship, while in the new she writes a poor awkward
hand ; having not had time or means to become expert. In January, 1816,
both the lady and her family were able to conduct affairs without embarrassment.
By quickly knowing whether she is in the old or new state, they regulate their
intercourse, and govern themselves accordingly. The Rev. Timothy Alden of
Meadville has drawn up a history of this curious case.

*‘T know the history of a noble family where a son had similar fits, accom-


a


* Anatomy of Melancholy, P.i. S.1. Mem. 2, Subs. 7.
CC


368 MENTAL. FUNCTIONS OF


authors, as Gall, remarks", and.repeated with. little, variation, by
the European writers of the middle ages."’ .In the) 13thjcentury,


ets Lert


panied by a special’ memory $ ‘so “that ‘consciousness was double; one ‘for the
ordinary state, and the other for the fits. ta maolod 4s
‘¢ Dr. Devan read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, j in rudy 1822, the
history of a case, observed by Dr. Dyer of Aberdeen, in a girl, 16 years old,
which lasted from 2d March to 1lth J une, 1815. The first symptom was an un-
common propensity to fall asleep’ in the evenings. ' This was followed ‘by the
habit of talking i in her sleep | on those occasions. _ One evening she fell asleep i in
this manner: imagining herself an episcopal clergyman, she went through ‘the
ceremony ‘of baptising three children, and gave an appropriate prayer. Her
mistress‘ shook her by the’ shoulders, on which she awoke, and appeared 1 uncen-
scious of every thing, except that she had fallen asleep, of which she showed her-
self ashamed. She sometimes dressed herself and the children while | in ‘this
State, or, as Miss Li. called it, . dead asleep ; :? answered questions. ‘put to “her. in
such 4 ‘manner as to show that she understood the question ; but the answers
were often, though not “always, incongruous. “One day in this state ‘she sat at
breakfast, with perfect” correctness, with her eyes “shut. She afterwards awoke
with the’ child’on her knees, and wondered how she got on her clothes. — ‘Some-
times the cold air awakened her; at other times she was ‘seized with the affection
whilst walking out with the sAikotos ' She sang a hymn delightfully i in this
state; and, from a comparison which Dr. Dyer had an opportunity of making,
it appeared incomparably better done than ‘she ‘could accomplish when’ awake.
In the mean ‘time a still more singular and interesting symptom. began | to make
its appearance. The circumstances which occurred during the ‘paroxysm were
completely forgotten by her when the. paroxysms were over, but were perfectly
remarked during subsequent paroxysms., Her mistress said, that when in this
stupor, on subsequent occasions, she/told her what.was said to her on the evening
when she baptised the children,.., A.depraved,fellow,servant, understanding that
she wholly forgot every transaction.that, occurred during the fit, clandestinely
introduced a young man into the house, .who.treated her with the utmost rude-
ness, whilst her fellow servant stopped. her,.mouth) with the bed-clothes, and
otherwise overpowered a vigorous, resistance.which was made by her even during
the influence of her complaint. .... Next: day.she had not the slightest recollec
tion even of that transaction ; nor did.any.person interested in her welfare know
of it for several days, till she was in one. of ,her paroxysms, when she related the
whole fact to her mother. Next Sunday she was taken to church by her mistress
while the paroxysm was on her.... She shed tears during the sermon, particularly
during the account given of the execution of three young men at Edinburgh,
who had described, in their dying declarations, the dangerous steps! with which


" 4to. vol. ii. p. 358., Bo. t. ii. p. 353. . See Avicenna, 1. i. sect.  ¥ doctr. 6.
cap. v. p. 25.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 369


a head divided‘into regions according to these opinions was de-
signed by Albert the Great, Bishop of Ratisbon*; and’ another
was published by Petrus Montagnana, in 1491.y One was pub-
lished at Venice, in 1562, by Ludovico Dolce, a Venetian, in a
work upon strengthening and. preserving memory #; and another
at Bologna, in 1670, in a work styled Apologia Fisonomica; by


their career of vice and infamy took its commencement. When she returned
home, she recovered in a quarter of an hour, was quite amazed at the questions
put to her about the church sermon, and denied that she had been to any
such place; but next night, on being taken ill, she mentioned that she had been
at church, repeated the words of the text, and, in Dr. Dyer’s hearing, gave an
accurate account of the tragical narrative of the three young men, by. which her
feelings had been.so powerfully affected.

“«‘ The same phenomena present themselves when in the state of somnambulism
produced by animal magnetism. It has been repeatedly observed that some
magnetised persons acquire a new consciousness and memory during their mag-
netic sleep. When this state has subsided, all that passed in it is obliterated,
and the recollection of the ordinary, state is restored. If the magnetic sleep is
recalled again, the memory of. the circumstances which occurred in that state is
restored, so that the individuals may be said to live in a state of diyided or double
consciousness.” (Dr. Spurzheim, Phren. Am. ed. p. 78. sqq.) See Gall on Per-
sonality (moi), 8yo. t. ii. p. 401. sqq.

“x In the Tesorretto of Brunetto Latini, the preceptor of Dante, published in
that century, the doctrine is taught in rhyme :—


Nel capo son'tre celle,

Ed io diro di quelle,
Davanti &1o intelletto

E la forza d’ apprendere
Quello che puote intendere.
In mezzo & la tagione

E la discrezione

Che scherne buono e male.
E lo terno e |’ iguale
Dirietro sta con gloria

La valente memoria,

Che ricordo e retiene
Quello ch’ in essa viene.


Y Gall, Ato. vol. ii. -—p.. 358, .sq.; 8vo. t. ii. p. 354. sq., where as many his-
torical details are given as the greatest detractor from Gall’s originality could
wish,

* A friend presented me with this book :— Dialogo di M. Ludovico Dolce,
Nel quale si ragiona del modo di accrescere e conservare la memoria. In Venetia.


ce 2


370 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Ghiradelli Bolognonese. In the British Museum I have seen a
chart of the universe and the elements of all sciences, and in
it a large head so delineated is conspicuous. It was pub-
lished at Rome so late as 1632, and, what is singular, engraved
at Antwerp by one Theodore Galleus, and the head is really a
good family likeness of Dr. Gall, who, however, was born at
Tiefenbrunn in Suabia, between Stuttgard and the Rhine, March
9. 1758. *


@ Notice Historique sur le Docteur Gall,
par M. Fossati, M.D. Journal de la So-
citté Phrénologique de Paris, t. i. 1832.

It is remarkable that Aristotle, in his
Physiognomy, though he gives a number of
ridiculous signs of character from the face
and numerous parts of the body, gives
three only from the cranium; but that
these are-in strict accordance with the
phrenology of Gall, who admitted of no
deduction of intellectual or moral charac-
ter from the developments of the face, but
from those of the cranium only.* « Those
who have a large head, are sagacious — are :
like dogs; those who have a small head, are se
stupid —are like asses; those who have a Head given by Dolce, 1562. It is
conical head, have no shame—are like copied into the Edin. Phrenolog.
birds with curved claws.” Journ. vol. ii. No. 7.


Nae a


.
%
on -
*
.
. S
‘e c
i eth
yy


Cu
S


xii}


Meydany ob Thy uEparny ExovTes, aicOnrinol dvahétperas mt rods udyvagt of BE fAbupey,
dyaicOnros avaéperat emt rove dyoug. of Tag uEparag potol, dvaidetc dvapéperas earl rove
yop ovouxag.—= De Physiognomid, cap, vi. :

It is no less remarkable that one of each of these points is spoken of by each
of the three greatest poets.

Milton distinguishes man from Eve and all the other beings in Eden, above
whom he was intended to rule through the force of intellect, by his spacious
forehead :


“* His fair large front and eye sublime declare
Absolute rule.” Paradise Lost, b. iv.


* |. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 234. sqq., Svo. t. v. p. 429. sqq. He of course allows
pathognomy, or the art of judging of the state of the feelings by the expression of
the countenance in action, to be real; and he mentions a number of curious facts
illustrative of the coincidence of pathognomy with the seat of the organs. His
original genius is very conspicuous on this subject.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. ST


It is, however} more than probable that the different parts of
the brain have different offices. Its faculties are so various, that
it is impossible to imagine them possessed by the same portion.
The faculty for melody is perfectly different from the love of
offspring. If to suppose all parts of the brain are organs for all
faculties is difficult, the difficulty appears greater on reflecting
that in that case the whole brain would be concerned in every act
and feeling, or, if the whole brain is not thus constantly at work at
all things, that different parts would perform the very same offices
at different times, each part working in every kind of mental act
and feeling in its turn. Neither does the brain perform merely
one thing, as the whole liver performs the secretion of merely one
fluid — bile; nor is its structure the same throughout, like that
of the liver.

The best authors hold that its various parts have various
offices >, and Gall proves that they have.


Shakspeare makes Caliban say —


« T will have none on’t: we shall lose our time,
And all be turned to barnacles, or to apes
With foreheads villainous low. Tempest, Act iv. sc. 1.


Homer gives the basest fellow who went to Troy, a conical head — a miserable

development of the seat of the moral sentiments : —
Oepcitns a one
wae alorxioros OE avip bard “IAtov HAE.
Dokig Eny nEpariiv.
Ilias, B.

> « The brain is a very complicated organ,” says Bonnet, “ or rather an
assemblage of very different organs.” (Palingénésie, t. i. p. 334.) Tissot contends
that every perception has different fibres. ((uvres, t. iii. p. 33.) Cuvier says,
that “ certain parts of the brain in all classes of animals are large or small ac-
cording to certain qualities of the animals.’’ (Anatomie Comparée, t.ii.) Sdém-
merring trusts that we shall one day find the particular seats of the different
orders of ideas. “ Let the timid, therefore, take courage,” says Dr. Georget,
in his admirable work upon the nervous system, ‘ and, after the example of such
high authorities, fear not to commit the unpardonable crime of innovation, of
passing for cranioscopists, by admitting the plurality of the faculties and mental
organs of the brain, or at least by daring to examine the subject.” (De la Phy-
siologie du Systéme Nerveux, et specialement du Cerveau, t. i. p. 126.) Gall’s suc-
cessful reply to some very unjust observations made in this work, will be found
in his 8vo, edit. t. v. p. 488. sqq. Dr. Vimont repeats these, apparently in
ignorance that Gall had fully replied in his small work; and censures Gall
for having incorrectly said that Bonnet considered every cerebral fibre as having
a distinct function. Now Bonnet’s words really are, —“ I thus consider every

cc 3


372 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


If the old course, recommended by Mr. Dugald: Stewart, of
investigating the mind by attending to’ the’ subjects of our ‘own
consciousness, had been persevered in, ‘the ‘science: ofismind
would have remained) stationary for ever.¢:Our powers and’
feelings are distributed:in’such various degrees; and the external
circumstances which have acted’ upon them: are so: various,sthat:
every man, judging from himself only, wouldsdraw up a different:
account of the human mind); as: different from the: attemptscof
all others, as the’ representations of the human face and) head
would be, if every painter were to’ execute his own likeness only.
The account would be as inaccurate ‘as if an individual: were®to
determine the bodily powers and susceptibilities of the operation
of agents by his own, «Unquestionably much must be learned by:
observing the workings of our minds, and much ‘can’ be Jearned’


‘Sticke
5 ‘


sensible fibre as a very little organ with its own Functions.” ’ “ ‘The brain contains
a prodigious number of sh wanes small, Slaia Nels to sentiment: and
thought.” 0

© Although Mr. Dugald Stewart aaclagen ae in pe own inquiries ie has
“ aimed at nothing more than to ascertain, in the ft place, the laws of our con-
stitution, as far as they can be discovered by attention to the subjects of our own
~ consciousness ;” (Essays, Preliminary Dissertation, p. 2.) “ that the whole of a
philosopher’s life, if he spends it to any purpose, is one continued series of expe
riments on his own faculties and powers ;’” (p. 40.) ‘and that ** the structure of
the mind (whatever collateral aids may be derived from observing the varieties of
genius in our fellow creatures) is accessible a those only, who can, retire into the
deepest recesses of their own internal frame ;’’. yet he adds, _‘* even to those; pre-
senting, along with the generic attributes of the ace, many of the specific peculi-
arities of the individual,” (Elements, vol. ii. p. 513.) and has really the following
passages in the forty-second and forty-third pages of the Essays. —-* To counter-
balance the advantages which this science of mind lies under, in consequence of
its slender stock of experiments, made directly and intentionally onthe minds,
of our fellow creatures, human life exhibits to our observation a boundless variety,
both of intellectual. and, moral phenomena, by a diligent study of which we may.
ascertain almost every point that we could wish to investigate, if we had expe-
riments at our command.” ‘ Savage society, and all the different ‘modes of
civilisation ; the different callings of individuals, whether liberal or mechanical ;
the prejudiced clown, the factitious man of fashion; the varying phases of ehe!
racter, from infancy to old age; the prodigies effected by human art, imall the
objects around us,’ laws, government, commerce, religion ; but above all, the
records of thought preserved. in those volumes which fill our libraries ; — what are
they but experiments, by which nature illustrates, for our instruction, on her own
grand scale, the varied range of many intellectual faculties, and the omnipotence
of education in fashioning the mind.”


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 373


in novother way ; just:as we may learn much of the external form
of the human’ body. by looking at ourselves,,and cannot learn
what are the feelings of hunger and thirst, heat and cold, except
from our own consciousness. But. itiis only by» extensive ob-
servation of others, of different: sexes, ages, races, education,
occupations,’ and shabits, in» addition» to» the study of, ourselves,
that:this knowledge is:to be:acquired. , Nor would’ much pro-
gress‘have’ been made without) the discovery — that: strength of
individual talent and: disposition was associated with proportionate
development | of »particular. portions of the: brain. By this. re-
mark; confirmed by the opposite observation of deficient. deve-
lopment; of the same portions of the brain: being accompanied. by
deficiency of talent : or: disposition, the existence: of particular
faculties was firmly established ;,and: indeed Gall discovered them
by observing persons conspicuous in some mental points to have
certain portions of the head extremely large. I did but allude
to craniology while detailing Gall’s account of the mind, because
the arrangement, may be perfectly accurate, although ,craniology
be false; nor when speaking of the brain as the organ’ of. the
mind; because ‘that fact ‘also “is: independent of Gall’s: system.
But, if the account of the mind, the use ‘of the’ brain, and the
development of the brain, generally observed by that of the cra-
nium — by craniology, be now viewed together, they will all be
seen mutually and beautifully to confirm each. ot)er.
Muchvignorant invective; >but: no:argument, bas, been written
against the doctrine; nora single fact adduced. in: opposition to
it. We are presented with a simple statement’ — that’ constant
strength of certain parts of the mind is ‘accompanied by. strong
development of certain, parts of the brain, and, consequently, of
the skull, except.in.disease and.old age; and deficient development
of certain parts.of ithe brain, and, consequently, of the. skull,.accom-
panied by deficient strength of certain partsof the mind: ‘The truth
must be ascertained, not by speculating; quibbling, and abusing, not
by giving improper way to the lower feelings of our nature, but by
observing whether this is the case; and every one hasit in his power
to make the necessary observations.. Those who pretend to have
facts to:offer in objection, must first beso well acquainted. with cra-
niology as to be able to judge accurately of the development which
they adduce, and have carefully ascertained the ‘character and
exact talents of the individual whom they fancy to be an exception.
Yet accounts the most absurd, and the most remote from truth in
cc 4


374 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


these particulars, are uttered and printed every day, even by those
who assume the character of sczentific men. Inquirers, however,
must not expect always to find the converse of the statement
verified, —to find strength of development always attended by
strength of certain parts of the mind; nor deficiency of the mani-
festations of certain parts of the mind always attended by deficient
development. Because the development of the head may arise
from other causes than brain, or the quality of the brain may not
be healthy ; and, on the other hand, deficiency of the manifest-
ations of a part of the mind may arise from mere want of excite-
ment, or from disease. The head may be large, generally or
locally, from fluid, morbid growth of bone, &c.; or the brain,
though the cause of the size, may be of bad quality from original
fault of structure, from subsequent disease, or from old age. But
the existence of disease is generally known, and old age must be
evident. Again, defective manifestations of a part of the mind
from mere want of excitement rarely occurs except in regard to
the intellectual powers; for external circumstances almost always
exist around sufficient for the play of the feelings. Thus, although
any phrenologist may always without fear assert positively of the
head from constant positive exhibitions of the mind, and always
fearlessly assert negatively of the mind from negative exhibitions
of the head;. he would not assert respecting the mind from
positive exhibitions of the head, nor respecting the head from
negative exhibitions of the mind, without certain provisions, viz.
that the size of the head depends upon healthy brain, and the
deficiency of mind arises from no want of excitement, or from
disease. Yet, in the far greater number of instances, the de-
velopment of the head agrees with the mind. In the greater
number of those in which it does not, the probability of the want
of agreement is evident ; and in the rest, the phrenologist cannot
be wrong, because he will never assert from positive develop-
ment of the head, nor from negative manifestation of the mind.
Even in unsoundness of mind, the character generally agrees
with the development ; the parts of the mind that may remain
sound, generally manifest themselves according to the develop-
ment of the head; and those faculties which are diseased, are
usually excited in proportion to the development of the cor-
responding parts of the head.4


4 Let the antiphrenologist get over the diagnosis of Gall in his visit to some
Prussiav prisons (1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 369. sqq., 8vo. t. vi. p. 476. sqq.), and of


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 375


The exact situation of the organs can be learnt from delineations
or marked heads only. I shall therefore confine myself to Gall’s
general remarks. Ist. The organs of the faculties or qualities
common to man and brutes, are placed in parts of the brain com-
mon to man and brutes, —at the inferior-posterior, the posterior-
inferior, and inferior-anterior parts of the brain ; v.c. of the instinct
of propagation, the love of offspring, the instinct of self-defence,
of appropriating, of stratagem, &c. 2dly. Those which belong
to man exclusively, and form the barrier between man and brutes,
are placed in parts of the brain not possessed by brutes, wz. the
anterior-superior and superior-anterior of the front: v. c. of com-
parative sagacity, causality, wit, poetic talent, and the disposition
to religious feelings. 3dly. The more indispensable a quality, or
faculty, the nearer are its organs placed to the base of the brain,
or median line. ‘The first and most indispensable — the instinct
of propagation — lies nearest the base; that of the love of offspring
follows. The organ of the sense of localities is more indispensa-
ble than that of the sense of tones or numbers; accordingly the
former is situated nearer the median line than the two latter.
4thly. The organs of fundamental qualities and faculties which
mutually assist each other, are placed near to each other; v.c.
the love of propagation and of offspring, of self-defence and the
instinct to destroy life, of tones andnumbers. 5thly. The organs
of analogous fundamental qualities and faculties are equally
placed near each other: v.c. the organs of the relations of places,
colours, tones, and numbers are placed in the same line, as well
as the organs of the superior faculties, and the organs of the in-
ferior propensities.¢

Although the arrangement of the ergans is so beautiful, we
must not imagine that Gall mapped out the head at pleasure,
according to preconceived notions. He discovered one organ
after another, just as it might happen, and marked down its situ-
ation and size upon the cranium; and after all left several spots


Mr. Combe, in his visit to the Richmond Lunatic Asylum, Dublin, and the pri-
sons and lunatic asylums of Newcastle. (Dr. Combe On Mental Derangement :
and Ed. Phr. Journal, No. xlvi.) On Idiotism with no defect-of development,
see Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 50.

© Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. iii, p. 78. sq., and 8vo. t. iii. p. 208. sqq. So much
less have the writings of Gall than those of Dr. Spurzheim been studied in Edin-
burgh, that Mr. Scott published these two last principles as his own; and they
thus stand, with great praise, in Mr. Combe’s System of Phrenology, p. 534. sqq,

Rove &


376 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


blank, which others have filled with faculties corresponding, with
those around. The organs are represented, in the engraved. heads.
which he published, as so many prominences ; because each is just
as it showed itself to him in single instances where it was extra-
ordinarily developed. This habit of representation for distinctness
and fidelity of form and size, and that of speaking of individual
parts as prominent, gave origin to the vulgar notion of bumps, and
those ignorant views which still disgust us in.persons) who should.
know betters, Often.one organ became known» to:-him situated
very remotely from the organ last discovered. | The set of organs
discovered by him turned out'as it is, and a strong argument is”
thus afforded of the truth of his system, He viewed a thousand ”
times what he had remarked, before he was aware of the great
general truths just mentioned.

«All mustbe struck,” says.he, “with the profound. wisdom
which, shines forth in the arrangement and-successive: order of
the: organs. This’ connection is, in’ my eyes, one “of the most”
important proofs of the truth of my discoveries. I defy those who
attribute my determination of the fundamental faculties and of
the seat of their organs.to caprice or,arbitrary choice, to possess.
a tenth part of the talent .necessary)for the, most obscure.presenti-,:
ment..of this beautiful arrangement ;. once discovered; it displays
the hand. of God, whom we cannot cease to adore with wonder*’
increasing as his works become more disclosed to our eyes.” :


fl, c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 210. sq. See also 4to. vol. iii, p, 80. Mr. Combe
(l. c. p. 586.) presents these beautiful remarks. as Mr. Scott's, with no. other a
mention of Gall than that the system must thus be the work of nature, _ and not.
“of Drs. Gall and Spurzheim.” Dr. 8... divided, all the faculties, after ‘the _
ancients, into effective and intellectual; and_the. former again into propensities |
and sentiments ; the latter into perceptive and reflective. (l.c. p,131.) For a
this he has been said to have “infused philosophy and system into the facts
brought to light by observation,” (Ed. Phr. Journ. vol. v.) — to, possess a,
power of arrangement which throws light upon every subject.” (Star of Bruns-_.
wick, quoted in his Biography, published at Boston, p. 99.). Gall, again, -
was declared to have no such powers. of systematising. . What is the, truth?
Gall disliked artificial systematic division and subdivision, and that justly. His
very order of examining is as great a classification as nature will admit. His
order was, ‘as much as possible, that which the Author of nature observes in the
gradual perfectionnement of animals.” (1..c. 4to. t. ili. ps vi.) “Beyond the erder |:
which;he followed in his writings, nothing could be done; and, as: Mr. Gio»
Combe truly says (Preliminary Dissertation to the.Phr. Journal, p. 25.), ‘as soon
as, observation, had. brought to light. the great body of facts, and the functions of


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 377


Gall followed this natural order of the faculties, “I conform
to the order which exists in considering the inclinations or inferior


losophy of the human mind presented itself almost spontaneously to view.”
Gall saw nothing satisfactory in Dr. S.’s classification, ‘ The most natural
and philosophical order,” says Gall, “* must be that which nature has observed
in the successive arrangement of the cerebral parts. But M. Spurzheim
begins by establishing new divisions of the faculties of the mind.” ‘ The
philosophical spirit of M. Spurzheim shines in divisions, subdivisions, sub-
subdivisions, &c. ; and this is what he calls infusing more philosophy into the
physiology of the brain, than I had the ambition of introducing. By these
divisions he has imposed on himself a constraint which totally inverts the
gradual succession of the organs. He is forced to jump from one region
of the brain to another; from the disposition to theft, to destruction; from this
to construction ; from circumspection, to benevolence ; from benevolence, by
a great effort, to veneration; from supernaturality (he is using Spurzheim’s
terms), he comes to the external surface part of the forehead, thence to imitation ;
from imitation, to the external senses! ‘Then he retires to the brain towards the
frontal region — there again he treats every thing péle-méle, all in a manner op-
posite to nature ; —a perfect monstrosity, which one would believe to be invented
with the design of rendering the study impossible. The propensities and
sentiments, and often the intellectual faculties, are so confounded together,
that it is hardly possible to discover the characteristic signs which distinguish
one from another. What more reason is there to place constructiveness among
the propensities, than melody, benevolence, and imitation? Are. not amative-
ness, philoprogenitiveness, inhabitiveness, attachment, courage, as much sen-
timents as self-love, love of approbation, veneration, &c.? In what sense are
perseverance, circumspection, imitation, sentiments? With what propriety does
he exclude imitation, wit, ideality or poetry, circumspection, secretiveness,
constructiveness, from the intellectual faculties?” * Wit and imitation were
originally placed by Dr. S. among the intellectual faculties, and then removed
to the sentiments in later editions. The Feelings were divided into superior
and inferior, and those common to brutes and man and those peculiar to man;
and imitation was ranged with the superior and peculiar to man! but, no sooner
has he done this, than he admits imitation to exist among many tribes of brutes!
(Phr. Am. ed. vol. i. p. 257.) Wit, the organ of which is amidst the intellectual, he
dislodges for mirthfulness, which he calls a superior sentiment peculiar to man, and
given to “render him merry and gay” ! — to be “as gay as a lark,” however, I sup-
pose, and ‘merry as a kitten.” He forgets that mirthfulness always implies noise :”


‘¢ Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the cricket on the hearth.”


His opinions on this faculty appear to me most extraordinary. In one of his
works (Essai Philosophique), he classed benevolence with those peculiar to man ;


*]. c. 4to. vol. iii. p.xxvi. sqq. Dr. Vimont also exposes the faults of
Dr. S.’s classification. (I. c. t. ii, p. 106. sqq.)


378 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


qualities ; then those which have more and more nobleness; and
end with the highest sentiment —that which leads us to reverence
the divinity.”


in another allows it to brutes (Phr. Am. ed.) ; and, having subdivided sentiments
into superior and inferior and finished the inferior, saying he has “ gone over
the affective faculties which are common to men and animals,” he begins with
the superior, and says the first (benevolence) ‘ cannot be entirely denied” to
brutes. (p. 222.) He arranges the five external senses with the intellectual
faculties ; —‘‘ the triumph of his new arrangement,” as Gall severely terms it.
Dr. S.’s classification had been devised and published ten years before by Bischoff.
Yes; Dr. S., in all his works and editions, gives his arrangement without a
hint that any one had classed the faculties before; whereas in the work already
quoted (Exposition de la Doctrine de Gall, traduite de la seconde édition d’ Al-
lemand, 1806), Bischoff’s division into three orders will be found, — the first
containing the propensities and sentiments; the second, the perceptive facul-
ties; and the third, the intellectual. Three faculties are in the second class,
and one in the third, which Dr. S. puts in others; but he himself shifted some
occasionally, and the difference is insignificant; and Dr. S,’s invariable silence
as to this arrangement, while his own forms a conspicuous part of nearly all
his books, is a fact in complete harmony with the rest of his conduct. ‘ I con-
ceive it possible to divide them” (the faculties), says Dr. S., ‘‘and to establish a
new classification ;” “and I established a new division of the mental operations.” °
(Phren. Amer. edit. vol. i. p. 129. sq.) In his first London edition, he most
innocently says, * I am now led to think that the objects which are still to be
added to our large work must assume a more scientific arrangement, and be
considered in a more philosophic manner than Dr. Gall has been accustomed to
do in his lectures.” (p. vii.) Then follows his most trifling variety of Bischoff’s
arrangement, to which he no where alludes, though he proves his acquaintance
with the book in his notes to the Foreign Quarterly, p. 62. The following is Gall’s
opinion of classification’: — “* Every one may arrange the moral qualities and in-
tellectual faculties according to his own views of them. They may be divided
into sentiments, propensities, talents, intellectual faculties; — pride, for example,
and vanity, would be sentiments; the instinct of propagation, the love of off-
spring, propensities ; music, mechanics, would be talents; comparative sagacity
would belong to the intellectual faculties. But there is frequently embarrass-
ment in rigorously fixing the bounds of each division. The intellectual faculties
and talents, when their organs are very active, manifest themselves with desire,
propensity, and passion ; the sentiments and propensities have also their judg-
ment, their taste, their imagination, their memory and recollection. The
division into qualities and faculties common to man and brutes, and faculties
and qualities peculiar to man, is, I confess, of great value in a philosophic point
of view ; but,” ‘‘ when the most careful observer dares not decide where the
faculties of the brute cease, and those of man begin, this division cannot be con-
sidered satisfactory. ‘The best division, in my opinion, is into fundamental qua-


—


6]. c. Svo. t. lil. p. 224,; also, 4to. vol. iii, p. 85.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 379


If Gall’s is the only satisfactory account of the mental facul-
ties, and to me it certainly appears so, this alone is a proof of


lities or faculties, and general attributes of these qualities and faculties. In this
division, the fruits of the labours of my predecessors are preserved, and, while
we avail ourselves of them, we establish the true theory of the primitive and fun-
damental instincts, qualities, and faculties of man and brutes.” (1. ¢, 4to. t. iv.
p- 344. sq., 8vo. vol. vi. p. 433. sq.)

Dr. Spurzheim, in bis fondness for changing his names, his arrangement, and
his numbering of the organs, introduced confusion without advancing knowledge,
To prove his speculative spirit, I may mention that, instead of giving the origin
of any of his asserted discoveries, as Gall did, and adding a host of examples,
he tells us, in regard to the organ of inhabitiveness, only that a gentleman much
attached to his house had a particular spot of his head hotter than any other; and
in regard to the organs of hope, marvellousness, conscientiousness, size, weight,
order, time, he neither tells how he discovered them, nor adduces a single proof.
Gall was too much of a philosopher to wish others to examine a mere assertion.

But, in regard to all the organs discovered by Gall, except that of colour,
Dr. S. gives the circumstances which led to the discovery, and a certain number
of individual facts; though but a very small number of those related by Gall.
«‘ He has changed the names,” says Gall, ‘ but treated the organs according to
my principles; yet in so hasty and feeble a manner, that this part of my doctrine
would be deplorable, if it were not established on a better foundation.” (1. c. 4to.
vol. iii. Preface ; a part which every body should read, for its exposure and de-
molition of Dr. S.’s unjust and weak attempts.) His own alleged discoveries may
be real; but the remarkable circumstance I have mentioned tends to create a
suspicion that he reasoned himself into a belief of certain faculties, and gave
them localities according to their nature ; having learnt from Gall where “ per-
ceptive ” and where ‘reflective faculties,” where “ sentiments ” and where “ pro-
pensities,’® touse his own language, reside. Localisation, after Gall’s discoveries,
was easy, especially as Gall had not mapped out the whole head, but left blanks
where he possessed no facts.

He changed even the situation and extent of organs in his last plate. The space
allotted by him to marvellousness was originally between wit, imitation, hope,
and ideality; now it is more than twice its former size, and placed between
these four and veneration. Covetiveness was placed by Gall, and admitted by
Dr. Spurzheim, before cunning and under ideality ; now it is over cunning,
and between ideality and cautiousness. Ideality in his first edition was chiefly
above covetiveness and before circumspection; now it is above constructive-
ness, and a large organ stands between it and covetiveness. Yet he declares,
that, “though marked busts or plates may be numbered differently, the places of
the respective organs, once considered as established, have never been altered.”
(Phr. Amer. ed. vol. i. p. 136.) If he is right as to the new situation of
the organ of covetiveness, all the observations which led Gall to its discovery,
and originally convinced Dr. S., fall to the ground. Dr. S., in the Notes
(p. 62.), says, ‘that he has been occupied for three years with showing the
regularity of the cerebral portions, and with specifying the individual organs


880 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


the truth of his organology. For such an ‘account could ‘not have
resulted from imagination ; and observation, unaided by reference


> wiigidel


and ‘their boundaries ;” ‘‘an additional discovery, of! which Dr; Gall’ died’ in
ignorance.” Yet Gall, in ‘both ‘his ‘works, refers to the individual’ convo.
littions which he regards as‘ the organs of the individual faculties: Dr. ‘S‘) iti
these (Notes p. 63.), then says, “that it was he biniself who directed phrenologists
to attend to the individual regions of the head; in reference to the thrée lobes of
the brain, and to the three regions of the animal propensities, the human sénti-
ments (among which he puts some not ‘exclusively human), and’ intelléctual
faculties (but he admits the five’senses among these), rather than’ tothe protuber=
atices and depressions, to which Dr. Gall attached ‘himself almost exclusively.”
Now ‘Gall over and over again ‘speaks of the development-of regions (1. ¢, 4to.
vol. iii, p. 85.,° 8vo0. t. iii. p. 221. sqq. ;°4to. vol. ii ps 400. sq. )S¥0. ti Hie
p: 423. 'sqq. 5 4to. vol. iv. p. 13. sq., 8vo. t. ive p.378.5 4to. voleiv. —p. 161) sqiy
8vo. t. Vv. p. 191. sqq. ), and expressly advises that the size of the whole head'should
be first observed ; then that of the frontal, occipital, lateral, and sincipital regions 5
and lastly the subdivisions of these regions; ‘and “it will be soon found;’” says he,
«that the best developed organs:do not form any of the bumps’ of the’antiphre=
nological buffoons, ‘nor Dcpinpences like an egg or a pein KR c: 8vo. tiiiiv
a4 221.'sqq-)~ , oi) “.to9F
Dre Sealso says: “( Notes; p. 63.); that ¢ Gall diedtly commied himself tothe com-
parison of ‘talents, character, and certain modes of acting, with individual cerebral
portions ;”’ and I have ‘heard it often’ asserted ‘that’ we owe to Dr; Sv only our
knowledge ‘of the mutual influence of organs, But Gall insisted strongly wpon
this, though he ‘left’ the endless working’ out of the self-evident ‘effects’ of the
varied proportions of organs to us all. (1. ¢:' 4to. vol. iii) p. 192, 8vo. ti ivi
p- 243.5) 4to. vol. ili. p.°298. sq., 8vo. ‘t. iv. p. 258. sqi;° 4to. vol. “iv:
p. 256. sq., 8vo. t. V. p. 374. sq., 8vo. t. ii. p.318. sq.) So, in regard to mania,
the substance of all that Dr. 'S. has written upon it may be found in'Gally
(1. ¢. 4to. vol. ii. ili. iv., 8vo. t. i. ps 370. sq., and t. iii. tii. ivewe passim.) 04%
He illustrated and applied Gall’s philosophy on the’subject of morals, educa-
tion, &c.; but, when he is satisfactory, I see nothing more than is to be found,
expressed far more concisely, powerfully, and elegantly in the writings of Gall.
.. Themerit of Dr. Spurzheim was that of an able and. persevering pupil of Gall.
It is possible that, having worked under Gall’s direction so Jong, after he left. his
great master he discovered a mechanical anatomical point or two—though I know
not that he did. It is possible that he discovered the organs of three faculties,
which Gall believed to exist — time, and order, and conscientiousness. He had,
however, only to look for the spaces left vacant by Gall amorig the organs of the
perceptive faculties to locate time and order; and he no doubt remembered,
as. all Gall’s acquaintance do, that Gall always said that the organ of time
would be found close to that of tune, and had actually left a space there.
It is possible, that he established a few more faculties and their organs —
weight, size, and hope. But I am not yet certain of the two former. Hope
I do not believe to be a primitive faculty. I believe, with Gall, that every


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 381


to development, never produced much that is. satisfactory in. me-
taphysics..,.It was in fact derived from studying the organisation.


faculty desires its gratification, and that its prospect of this, or hope, is regulated
by the degree of cireumspection and of the intellectual faculties.*,. He of course
had,only'to;place conscientiousness and hope in, the spaces left.,vacant. by. Gall
among the moral: sentiments. :,._In. regard..to. marvellousness,, Gall had assigned
that, part.of the brain .to, the disposition to, see visions; but regarded these as
only. an excess.of activity of, some fundamental, power, and had often discussed
with Dr..S,. the: possibility of a faculty, for wonder ;, though he. refrained . from
publishing mere speculations., (1. c. 4to. t, iii. p. xxiv,, 8vo. vol. v. p.345,) Then,
as.to the organ: of-inhabitiveness,' we must remember that Gall left the space va=
cant, and pointed. out} that, animals.inclined to inhabit high places had. the. part
immediately above itlarge; — that.Gall taught, the existence of a faculty inclining
to particular habitation, and placed that faculty in the region where Dr. Spurzheim
has: fixed his organ of inhabitiveness. If Dr..S,.is correct, he has cleared: up what
Gall considered unsettled. :- But Dr. S. could not,consider himself certain, as.in
his last.edition, he beggéd,phrenologists to make observations on ‘the point ;, and
the Edinburgh phrenologists ;actually give to that part. the faculty-of what they
call).concentrativeness — the, faculty..of ‘‘,maintaining two or more- powers in
simultaneous and combined activity,,so that they may be directed.towards.one,ob-
ject.” (Dr. S. Phr., Amer. ed. vol. i. p. 169.) They attempt to reconcile. matters,
by, seeing no inconsistency in both views. To this Dr..S, cannot agree, and he
Satirically.says, 'that;;with all, possible deference to Mr, Combe’s acuteness and
greater, development.of. the organ of ,concentrativeness, he cannot believe the in~
elination to. inhabit a particular spot, and the power of keeping two or more facul-
ties in simultaneous action, tobe: the same. /The publication of such speculations,
such, deviations; from rigid observation — from ,true inductive philosophy — it
was that distressed Gall in-both Dr. S.:and.some Edinburgh phrenologists,.. _,

Dr.S.. differed from Gallon certain points regarding the.various faculties which
he admitted; but..I .confess that, so. far, from improvements, 1, think: that his
opinions.in, general are. unsatisfactory or-incorrect, and exhibit subtlety:rather
than depth, andan immeasurably less. powerful and philosophic’ mind. than that


* « Most authors confound the affections with the passions. By passion’ T
mean the highest degree of voluntary or involuntary activity of any fundamental
force. Every passion implies a particular organ; but this organ produces the
passion of its function, only when at the maximum ofits activity. It is different
with the affections. In the passions, the organs are active, exalted in their fun-
damental function; in the affections, on the contrary, the organs are passive,
modified, seized ina particular manner, agreeable or disagreeable. Shame, fear,
anguish, sorrow, despair, jealousy, anger, joy, ecstasy, &c., are involuntary sens=
ations, passive seizures, either of our nervous system, of one organ, or of the
whole of the brain. There consequently can be no peculiar organ for ie ans
sorrow, for despair or discouragement, for hope, nor for any affection whatever.”
(Gall, 1. c. 8yo. t. vi. p. 431. sq: )


382 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


He never once allowed himself to speculate, having early learnt
the fallacy of @ priori reasoning; but abandoned himself entirely
to observation.

Gall discovered each organ and its faculty either by meeting
with individuals very remarkable for the latter, so that he was
led to examine their heads; or by noticing a peculiarity of form-
ation in the head which induced him to ascertain their talents
and character. He did not examine remarkable persons accord-
ing to the views entertained of the faculties by metaphysicians ;
but according to points in which the world at large pronounced
them remarkable,—accordingly as they were courageous, avari-
cious, kind-hearted, or excelled as poets, mimics, linguists,
philosophers. He would never have made his discoveries, had he
not met with persons remarkable in these respects. Sometimes
the relation between the remarkable faculty or quality and the
local development was tolerably obvious, but generally he had to
make numerous observations before he found himself right. After
having found two individuals remarkable in the same point of
character, and cast their heads, he sometimes examined the casts
daily for months before he could discover the precise spot in which
they agreed. The discovery being now made, a good organologist
will give judgments upon character which must astonish, and in-
contestably prove the truth of phrenology; but the difficulty of
making the discovery when all was utter darkness must have
been extreme.» The indefatigable industry of Gall, during the
whole of a long life, constantly observing all persons he met with,
and searching after all who were in any mental respect remark-


of Gall. Dr. Lélut.has just published a work which he calls Qu’est ce gue la Phré-
nologie ? and says thatGall’s psychological doctrine is ‘souvent heureusement cor-
rigée, mais quelquefois aussi gatée par Spurzheim hy par la phrénologie.” (p. 398.)
Yet he mentions ten points of deterioration by Dr. S., and but four of improve-
ment, and among these four, two appear to me improvements only because Dr.
Lélut isin error as to Gall’s opinions,

h «¢ T had innumerable difficulties to overcome ; as long as a quality or faculty,
or even its organ, was not discovered, I was in the deepest ignorance. I never
had the slightest idea of what I should at length discover, nor where I should
find the organ. A large number of facts was requisite to put me in their way.
How often have I not been obliged to reject, after years, what had appeared to
me well established! Often I was tempted to give up all inquiries of this nature,
and to declare, with my predecessors, that it is impossible to discover the traces of
the operations of the soul.” (Il. c. 4to, vol. iii. p.'77. sq. See also 8vo. t. iii.
p. 206. sqq-)


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 383


able, travelling as he did to most of the prisons, mad-houses, and
hospitals of the Continent ; examining the habits and heads of
brutes innumerable for comparison; and engaging M. Niklas,
Dr. Spurzheim, and others, for a pecuniary consideration, to work
under him and examine points for him, in the way of reading,
dissecting, casting, moulding, and observing living persons,
is astonishing *; and the success and importance of his re-
searches will, I am satisfied, ensure him a place among the great-
est names of the human race, although, like every other great
discoverer and benefactor, he has been loaded with ridicule
and abuse.! His great anatomical discoveries were derided, and,
when this was possible no longer, given falsely to his predecessors,
or contemporaries, or have been given even to later writers.
Some have been announced by others, lately, as new, and are even
contended for by different individuals. Few anatomists and phy-
siologists have any idea of the errors as to facts and of the poverty
of argument displayed by Cuvier, Tiedemann, Pinel, Esquirol,


EK ]. c. 8vo. t. iii. p. 137. sqq. 172, sq. 206. sq.

! Mr. (now Lord) Jeffrey, ina violent article in his Edinburgh Review for 1815,
after glancing at an English work by Dr. Spurzheim, wrote off-hand an article
against it, and declared ‘the whole doctrines, anatomical, physiological, and phy-
siognomical, to be a piece of thorough quackery from beginning to end,” — ‘‘there
being nothing so impossible but mountebanks will undertake, nothing so in-
credible but they will affirm,” — ‘‘that to enter on a particular refutation, would
be to insult the understanding of readers,” as Gall’s opinion “on the functions
in general of man, and on his intellectual faculties in particular, are a collection
of mere absurdities, without truth, connection, or consistency; an incoherent
rhapsody, which nothing could have induced any man to have presented to the
public under a pretence of instructing them, but absolute insanity, gross igno-
rance, or matchless assurance.’’ ‘‘ Such is the trash,” he continued, “ the des-
picable trumpery, which men, calling themselves scientific inquirers, have the
impudence gravely to present to physiologists of the nineteenth century as speci~
mens of reasoning and induction.” — A clergyman, afterwards chaplain to a
Royal Hospital, and now a dignitary, at the same time wrote an article in a
less violent strain in the Quarterly Review, in which he styled phrenology ‘‘ sheer
nonsense, and Dr. Spurzheim a fool.” (No. xxv.) A year before they had called
Gall'“‘ an ignorant and interested quack ;’’ and Blackwood’s Magazine, in April,
1817, foretold that “ phrenology would be forgotten as soon as Dr. Spurzheim
left Edinburgh :” just as, when Der Freischutz was first played in London, the
Literary Gazette, which, like so many other learned periodicals, has always spurned
phrenology, pronounced that, if the Germans were-delighted with such music,
they must be more easily satisfied than Englishmen; that it was “ extremely
ineffective ;” and they “much doubted if there be a single air in it likely to
become popular.” (July 24. 1824, No. 392.)


DD


384 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


Richerand, Carus, Rudolphi, Serres, &c., and would be amply re-
paid for the trouble of reading their exposure by Gall in various
parts of his works, especially in his sixth octavo volume. Who-
ever knew him must have admired his profundity and candour,
and the extent and variety of. his knowledge, and been delighted
with his perfect integrity and true philosophy of character, and
the gentleness and elegance of his manners. ™ ,


m Nothing could demonstrate more the unsuspecting and kind nature of Gall
than his affixing the name of Dr. Spurzheim with his own to his great work.
He was the discoverer, and first published on his discoveries in 1798. He first lec-
tured in 1796, when 40 years ofage; Dr. S. being but 20 and a student. He con-
tinued to lecture on his discoveries till 1802, when the absurdity of Austria forbade
all lectures in Vienna without permission. Gall knew the measure was levelled
at himself; and, scorning to ask permission, left Vienna. Dr. S., who was
tutor in the family of a nobleman attended by Gall, after having finished his
medical studies, had become one of Gall’s pupils, and was the only one among
them all who was willing to leave Vienna with him. Gall saw his good intel-
lectual development and his firmness, and engaged him as his secretary, dis-
sector, &c. Though we all know how beautifully Dr. S. dissected the brain,
Gall assured me that he was very long in teaching Dr. S. to dissect it; and
that Dr. S.’s clumsiness cost him no little in broken casts, models, &c. Dr. S.
thus worked hard at phrenology: but he worked under Gall’s direction, and
Gall smiled at the idea that two persons, the one twenty years older than
the other, and the entire discoverer of a subject on which he had laboured for
thirty years, and paying the other for his labour, could work at the same points,
unless the one were directed by the other, — not at different branches of the
same subject; and especially he smiled at Dr. S.’s having made discoveries,
except as far as he found things which he was directed by Gall to ascertain. The
whole work was Gall’s. Every line, he informed me, was his sole composition.
The very style shows this. The work is clear, flowing, full, at once rigidly phi-
losophical and rich with profound thoughts and glowing illustrations. I never
take it up without finding something fresh, and feeling that I am with one of that
band of mighty minds to which Bacon, Milton, Shakspeare, &c. belonged. It speaks
for itself and is totally different from Dr.S.’s ; and yet in the preface, p. xlii, he
was so good to Dr. S. as to mention the very composition and diction in the plural
number, though self-evidently referrible in all cases to no more than one person.
He conceived that all Europe knew him as the author of the discoveries ; and he
wished to be of serviceto Dr. S., who had shown good abilities and been in-
dustrious ; and who, being twenty years younger, would, he hoped, prosecute and
spread the science after his death. ‘They were coming shortly to England
together, when, one day, Dr. S. said he himself was going alone to England ;
and he actually left Gall in a week, it turning out that he had been learning
English with this view in Gall’s house, without Gall’s knowledge, for six months.
Gall, therefore, affixed Dr. S.’s name no longer with his own in the title-
page: but the work went on, as when Dr. S. was with Gall. The second,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 385


Whoever acquires sufficient knowledge of the subject to make
observations for himself will soon find the shape of the skull to


third, and fourth volumes were completed, in the same style, with the name of
Gall only; and what had been printed in the joint names of Gall and Dr. S.
was undistinguishable from the rest, was evidently the production of the same
genius, and remained the sole property of Gall, and the disappearance of Dr.
S.’s name from it proved that it was none of his. In the remaining parts with
only Gall’s name, was done all that had been promised in the first volume
which bore both names. Gall, in the rest of his work, always referred to the
former parts, which bore Dr. S.’s name also, as solely his own. — * Tout
ce que jai dit dans le premier volume,” &c. Dans le premier volume
de cet ouvrage, j'ai, exposé l’anatomie,” &c. Dans le second volume j'ai
abordé le but principal de mes recherches.” (4to. vol. ii. p. 251., iii. p. xv.)
In his preface to the 8vo edition he says, ‘ It is three years since the publication
of my great work on the anatomy and physiology of the brain was finished
(4 vols. fol. and 4 vols. 4to.), now to be had of the author, and at N. Maze’s,
bookseller, No. 4. Git-le-cceur Street. He then informs his readers, that, though
he had thought it necessary to publish a work worthy of the object, he had
been requested on all sides to publish an edition of it which might be within
the means of every body. At p. 73. he refers to the first volume “ de mon
grand ouvrage,” and so in numerous other parts (il. 432., v. 502., vi. 165.,
iii. 70.). He then recapitulates all the anatomy of the large work, and all the
physiology, as his own, without thinking of mentioning Dr. S.’s name any
more than Dr. Magendie’s. (I. c. t. vi. p. 497. sqq-) On this Dr. S. never
ventured to remark. Gall thenceforth generally used the words J and my,
except when Dr. S. had witnessed any thing with him. For Dr. S., being
engaged to travel with him, after he had brought his science to such

fulness that he determined to lecture upon it in various countries, neces-
sarily, he says, made ‘une grande partie de mes observations en commun
avec moi.” (8vo. t.i. p. vii.) Even in the preface to the first volume,
he spoke of all the discoveries, anatomical and physiological, as having long
been made; but that, rather than yield to a desire of fame, he had preferred
allowing others to publish them, and presenting a work to the public which should
be supported by “‘ more abundant observations and more positive results; — a
remark agreeing with his assertion to me, that, after he had engaged Dr. S., he
only collected more facts in illustration of his discoveries and made additions
which were mere shades of knowledge. Dr. Georget, in his book referred to
p- 371. supra, published in Paris soon after the appearance of the great work,
speaks of it as Gall’s, and addresses his remarks to Gall. (Gall, 8vo. t. v. p. 448.
sqq-) I formerly exhibited Dr. S.’s injustice to Gall in regard to anatomy ; he is
equally unjust in regard to physiology. While he is obliged to detail Gall’s
discoveries and acknowledge him the founder, he inconsistently says, “ Gall
has the great merit of having begun our phrenological discoveries.” ‘ He had
pointed out many relations which exist between various talents and characters of
man and instincts of animals, and certain cerebral parts, before I was so happy
as to become acquainted with him.”’ (Notes to the article in the Foreign Quar-

DD 2


386 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


be as various as character and countenance, and will have hourly
amusement both in remarking the relation between intellectual


terly, p. 60.) Gall had only begun! he had begun our researches! he had pointed
out many relations! Here is enough, again, to stamp Dr. S.’s character for
shortsightedness and effrontery, through his insane ambition. “ Plusiewrs relations!
vingt-sept facultés ! ” says Dr. Vimont: «« Ce mot quelques ne me paroit pas seule-
ment une injustice; c’est une maladresse ; car il resulte des faits avancés dans le
corps de l’ouvrage de Spurzheim que Gall avoit déja découvert, par la voie expé-
rimentale, le nombre de facultés que je viens de citer. La prétention done de
Spurzheim au titre de fondateur nous paroit. tout-a-fait injuste.” (1. c. vol. il.
p» 53.)

Although Madame Gall, being well acquainted with all the affair, freely; like
a good wife, bestowed upon Dr. S. the titles of jésuite, ingrat, perfide, vo-
leur, Gall was always dignified and calm, and. on these occasions usually
said to her, ‘aissons cela.’ He considered himself basely treated, but
trusted to posterity for justice. He always contented himself with saying,
if others mentioned S.’s conduct, ‘‘ C’est un mauvais homme!” even on
his death-bed, when, after much difficulty, he was prevailed upon to consent
to see Dr. S., though his wife prevented the interview. When he mentioned,
in the middle of the second volume, that he united Dr. S.’s name with his
own no longer, he entered into no particulars. He afterwards yielded to
the wish of his friends to take notice of Dr. S.’s publishing, like so many other
of his auditors, a very incomplete account of his doctrines (un traité trés-in-
complet de ma doctrine), and “ pretending in many places to have introduced
views much more philosophical than those of the original author, who, ac-
cording to the expressions. of Dr. S.’s friends in the journals, had left his child in
its cradle.’’ (4to. vol. iii. p. xvi.) He then accused Dr. S. of having copied
246 pages of his quarto work into his own 8vo of 361 pages. ‘‘ He will affirm,”
says Gall, “ that he had a right to do so, because he worked with me at the first
volume andthe sections on innate dispositions. But he knows that his occupation
was to furnish merely the literary notices. He should, at least, have mentioned
the sources of his riches. He had not the same right over my sections on the
organ of the soul and the plurality of organs. Others have already accused
him of plagiarism: it is, at any rate, very ingenious to make books with scissars.”
Yet such was Gall’s philosophy that he told me that, although Dr. S.’s con-
duct had been such as to determine him never to see Dr. S. again, he was far
more vexed at the speculative turn which Dr. S. gave to phrenology, — more vexed
that, while he himself had adhered closely to observation, Dr. S. had introduced
eonjecture and inference from too few observations. Gall lamented to me this
turn in the Edinburgh phrenologists ; and so, strange to say, did Dr. S. Having
once expressed his opinion of Dr. S.’s conduct, he was too dignified ever to re-
vert to the subject in the rest of the work, and merely refuted him here and there
on points in which Dr. S. had broached new and erroneous opinions. Dr. S. in
his Essai Philosophique, in 1820, attempted a defence, but with so much mis-
statement, sophistry, and rudeness, and withal weakness, that Gall, though he


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 387


and moral character, sexual, national, and individual, and cranial
ferm and size, and in tracing the resemblance of children to their


published his six 8vo volumes, one by one, afterwards, never condescended to
notice it, satisfied that his own writings rendered any specific refutation super-
fluous, and always convinced that such matters right themselves with posterity.
He spoke of all his own discoveries, as I mentioned in the last page, without
feeling it necessary to allude to Dr. Spurzheim’s absurd claims. I always felt
certain that Dr. S. was an unhappy man, though I could not tell why before I
studied the works of Gall and had the unspeakable happiness and advantage
of knowing him personally. Every sentence in Gall’s works is his own; and
every thing in Dr. S.’s writings, which is also in Gall’s, belongs to Gall.

I mention all this from my veneration for Dr. Gall, and my anxiety to see
justice done him. Very few in this country have studied Gall. I am not ac-
quainted with six persons whose native tongue is English, even among writers
and lecturers on phrenology, who have not learned phrenology second-hand
from Dr. S., or third-hand from Mr. Combe’s writings, since these are in
English, and comparatively short, while Gall’s are in French, and of great extent.
That the injustice done to Gall is such as to demand the pains I have taken, is
proved by the custom among phrenological writers in the English language of
speaking of the system of Gall and Spurzheim, of the founders of phrenology (for
instance, Ed. Phr. Journ. No. iv. p. 628., No. v. p. 98. 110., No. vi. p. 186.) and
the habit of such writers of quoting from Dr. S.’s works, passages which were
written by Gall and are taken from his works. (Mr. Combe, Phrenology, p. 100.,
also p. 3. 5. and 44.) Nay, many of Dr. S.’s friends used always to declare that
Gall had not given the philosophy of phrenology, but merely collected facts.
At a public dinner given to Dr. S., Mr. Combe unintentionally disparaged
Gall by declaring that Dr. Spurzheim had infused philosophy and system into the
facts brought to light by observation.* Oh! shade of Gall! Had Mr. Combe
studied every line of Gall’s two works again and again, and hung over them at
midnight as I have, and conversed with Gall as I did again and again, I am
sure he is so conscientious that he would not have written thus ! — that all the


’ * Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, vol. v. He then called Dr. Spurzheim Gall’s
“rival in genius.” In his Phrenology (p. 53.), he says that Dr. S. formed “ the
truths brought to light by their joint observations, into a beautiful and interesting
system of mental philosophy.” Gall’s works are said, in the Journal, No, vi.
p. 188., to be “ more like a collection of unconnected facts ;” while Dr. S. has given
them “more the character of a science”’ ** by a more systematic and philosophic ar-
rangement.” Mr. Carmichael’s feelings towards his friend Dr. Spurzheim do him
credit, but have rendered him, like Dr. S.’s other friend,— Mr. Chenevix, guilty of
great misstatement and great injustice towards Gall, in his Memoir ofthe Life and
Philosophy of Spurzheim. Dublin, 1833. See p. 4. sqq. 9. sq. 51. He says
that Gall examined the brain “according to the old school and with mere me-
chanical views” till Dr. S, joined him!!


pp 3


388 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


parents in the latter respect, as well as in talent and disposition ;
and he will not merely find incessant amusement, but feel himself


philosophy was Dr. Spurzheim’s! In one part (Phrenology, p. 666.) he says
that Dr. Spurzheim “is second in fortune rather than in merit to Dr. Gall!”
‘¢ that we owe much of its excellence and interest to this gifted individual; he
has enriched it with the most valuable anatomical discoveries; ascertained the
functions of several highly important organs ; shed over it the lights of a refined
and analytic philosophy, and pointed out the most important field of its appli-
cation:” ‘* with profound gratitude and respect, therefore, I acknowledge
myself indebted,” not to Gall, but “to Dr. Spurzheim, for the greatest gift which
it was possible for one individual to confer on another, — a knowledge of the true
philosophy of man.” In the Ed. Phr. Journ. No. vi. p. 186,, the editors ‘are
almost inclined to doubt whether they are right in assigning Dr. S. a place
second to any.” (l.c.p. 666.) M. Chenevix, in the Foreign Quarterly (p.9.), among
other incorrect statements, says that the old method of dissecting the brain appear-
ing faulty, “ Drs. Gall and Spurzheim were induced to invent some other mode.”
In America, where phrenology has been hitherto learned solely from Dr. S.’s
book, and from himself personally, they are still more extravagant. “The
labours of Dr. Spurzheim as an anatomist have produced a reform in the study
of the nervous system which will for ever sustain him in the first rank of his
profession. To be convinced of this, we have only to examine the state of
knowledge in relation to the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the brain
and spinal marrow, before he devoted himself to the investigation of those most
important branches of science.” (Gall had therefore done nothing!) That
Spurzheim was superior to Gall as an anatomist, we believe all admit!” They
then quote an assertion of Dr. S., that Gall once said to him, in 1805, “ let
us prosecute our original plan honestly ; you, Spurzheim, as an anatomist, and I
as a physiologist.” If there was any truth in this, it could only have amounted to
some kind encouragement of Gall to the young man; for Gall had then made all
his important discoveries, and Dr.S. had only just finished his studies, just begun
to learn to dissect the brain, and been engaged by Gall as his assistant. Hear the
same writer again. ‘To expressa preference is not to decide the question; and
when we evince our partiality for Spurzheim as a philosopher, we merely give
an individual opinion. His views, in our estimation, are more philosophic than
those of Gall; more consistent, and more practical. Spurzheim carefully studied
all the parts of the science with reference to each other, and aimed at a perfect
whole. Gall did not do so much.” (Phr. in connection with the Study of Phy-
siognomy, to whichis prefived a Biography of the Author, by Nahum Capen. 1833.
Nay, Dr. S.’s English friends at one time treated Gall’s name with contempt,
to elevate Dr. S. When Dr. S. lectured here, I heard his friends declare that
his doctrines were worth their weight in gold —that he was the philosopher :
whereas when I went to Paris, and conversed with Gall, I heard from his lips
all the philosophy for which Dr. S. had gained credit in England ; — I imme-
diately saw the difference between the great original and the pupil. Those who
are well acquainted with Gall’s writings, and knew both him and Dr. S. in


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 389


possessed of a power in his intercourse with men and books
relating to the human character, to which those unacquainted with
phrenology are perfect strangers.


Paris, enter into my feelings on this subject; and Dr. Fossati lately printed a
letter published by Gall to a M. Retzius, in 1798, in which he laid down the
plan of his work. Because Dr. Fossati complained that too many put Dr. S.
on a par with, or even above, Gall, the Edin. Phren. Journ. No. xlvi. p. 506.
reproved Dr. Fossati for this “twaddle.’ But Dr. Fossati spoke the truth.
Gall is, indeed, called the original; but, in the next breath, we hear of the
founders, or the system of Gall and Spurzheim. See Ed, Phr. Journ. as quoted
in the last page, and various other writings. Yet, although the Ed. Phr. Journ.
calls Dr. S. the founder of phrenology with Gall, Dr. S. does not venture such a
dangerous length, but on all occasions acknowledges, what all Europe knows,
— that Gall is the sole founder. He only reduces Gall’s discoveries as low as
possible. It tells very much against Dr. S., that all those who were intimate
with him have been more or less unjust towards Gall, and some have spoken
contemptuously of Gall, in regard to both his intellect and moral feelings, con-
trasting him with Dr. §. One London phrenologist declared that Gall’s
forehead was only for collecting facts, while Dr. S.’s was for philosophy. A
great Edinburgh phrenologist referred me to the inferiority of Gall’s organ of
conscientiousness. Now, in truth, Dr. S.’s forehead is far less full and square than
Gall’s, and his whole coronal surface together, indicating the high moral feelings,
equally inferior to that of Gall. The intellectual and high moral part of Gall’s
head are magnificent, and those of Dr. S. will bear no comparison with them. His
firmness, self-esteem, and courage also are so large that we see at once how he
was enabled to rear phrenology, and present it steadily to the world for so many
years, standing alone and braving the contempt and attacks of the learned and
unlearned. It is greatly to be lamented that Gall’s 8vo work. is not translated ;
and I am certain that the legacy left by a Scotch gentleman to aid phrenology
could not have been laid out to half the advantage in any other way than in pub-
lishing a cheap translation of it. Pure as were the motives of the gentlemen
intrusted to fulfil the wishes of the spirited bequeather, in publishing works
of their own, I am convinced that they would have done far better in publishing
the writings of the founder before any thing else,— writings so eloquent and
convincing, and so divested of speculation, so overwhelming in proofs, that their
translation would have formed the surest foundations for a universal conviction of
the truth of phrenology. The injustice I complain of in phrenologists arises, I
am certain, solely from their not having studied Gall as they have Dr. S., and from
many not having read a syllable of Gall. When my reading was confined to
Dr. S.’s books, and I was acquainted with him only, I committed the very same
injustice to Gall which I now most earnestly and respectfully entreat phrenolo-
gists to commit no longer.


Dp 4


$90 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


I shall here present some views of the organs according to
Gall. The references will be found supra, page 349. sq.


1 iri
| a eae
\ siete poninai 2
Pak Wy 2


Sea a
X


Sy!
i
il
1 | \


ey


My\\\!\ nes
\\\\ 7,
Ni 4 P
\" Nw. jposnPi dN
\\\ }


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


O


\ ‘at mG
aaa


391


/


anil


The following are from Dr. Vimont, and show all the organs
admitted by both Dr. Spurzheim and himself.


TIAAA WH


. Conservation.

. Alimentation.

. Destruction.

- Cunning.

. Courage.

. Choice of places.


Concentration.


. Attachment for life, or marriage.


Attachment.


. Reproduction.


Attachment to the produce of con
ception.


- Property.

. Circumspection.

- Perception of substance or objects.
. Configuration.

. Size.

. Distance.

. Geometrical sense.

. Resistance.

- Localities.

- Numbers.


. Order.

. Time.

. Language.

. Colouring.

. Eventuality.

. Talent of construction.
. Musical talent.

. Talent of imitation.

. Comparison.

. Causality.

. Discrimination.

. Vanity.

. Self-esteem.

. Firmness, perseverance.
. Conscience.

. Veneration.

. Hope.

. Benevolence.

. Sentiment of the marvellous.
. Poetical sentiment.

. Sentiment of the beautiful in arts,


MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


392


Cr)
fol
oI
5
=f
iar)
us “
oc) Ge)


: ey} po Pees
= “% ee See ae


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


(RUT
A my -
A


arr’
i wi


2 tt
\


tiff RY\
¥ yy | vw

\

\


G


(\


ANY
2
\


393


)


SS


394 MENTAL FUNCTIONS. OF


As an intellectual contrast, I present the head of Gall and of a
Dutch adult idiot, whose skull is delineated by him, and is in the
National Museum at Amsterdam, where I have seen it.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 395


Should any one doubt his acquaintance with the real talents
and character of those friends whose heads he can select for ob-


I must here subjoin some remarks from Gall on the reception which has been
given to phrenology.

“ The followers of the different schools of philosophy among the Greeks,
accused each other of impiety and perjury. The people, in their turn, detested
the philosophers, and accused those who investigated principles, with presump-
tuously encroaching upon the rights of the deity. The novelty of the opinions
of Pythagoras caused his banishment from Athens; those of Anaxagoras threw
him into prison; the Abderites treated Democritus as a madman, because he
dissected dead bodies to discover the cause of insanity ; and Socrates, for demon-
strating the unity of God, was condemned to drink hemlock.

‘¢ The same scandal had been renewed at all times and in all nations. Many of
those who distinguished themselves in the fourteenth century by their knowledge
of natural things, were put to death as magicians. Galileo, for proving the
earth’s motion, was imprisoned at the age of seventy. Those who first main-
tained the influence of climate upon the intellectual character of nations were
suspected of materialism.

“‘ Universally, nature treats new truths and their discoverers, in a singular, but
uniform manner. With what indignation and animosity have not the greatest
benefits been rejected? For instance, potatoes, Peruvian bark, vaccination, &c. As
soon as Varolius made his anatomical discoveries, he was decried by Sylvius as
the most infamous and ignorant madman. Vesanum, litterarwm imperitissimum,
arrogantissimum, calumniatorem maledicentissimum, rerum omnium ignarissimum,
transfugam, impium, ingratum, monstrum ignorantie, impietatis exemplar perni-
ciosissimum, quod pestilentialihalitu Europam venenat, &c. Varolius was reproached
with dazzling his auditor by a seductive eloquence, and artificially effecting the
prolongation of the optic nerves as far as the thalami. | Harvey, for maintaining
the circulation of the blood, was treated as a visionary; and depravity went so
far as to attempt his ruin with James and Charles the First. When it was no
longer possible to shorten the optic nerve, or arrest the course of the blood in its
vessels, the honour of these discoveries was all at once given to Hippocrates.
The physical truths announced by Linneus, Buffon, the pious philosopher Bon-
net, by George Le Roy, were represented as impieties likely to ruin religion
and morality. Even the virtuous and generous Lavater was treated as a fatalist
and materialist. Every where do fatalism and materialism, placed before the


sanctuary of truth, make the world retire. Every where do those, upon whose


judgment the public relies, not merely ascribe to the author of a discovery the
absurdities of their own prejudices, but even renounce established truths if con-
trary to their purposes, and revive ancient errors, if calculated to ruin the man
who is in their way.

‘¢ This is a faithful picture of what has happened to me, I have, therefore, some
reason to be proud of having experienced the same lot as men to whom the world
is indebted for so great a mass of knowledge. It seems that nature has subjected
all truths to persecution, in order to establish them the more firmly ; for he who
can snatch one from her, always presents a front of brass to the darts hurled


396 — MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


servation, he has only to study the heads of some celebrated men
now living, or the authentic casts of the departed, of whose talents


against him, and has always force enough to defend and establish it. History
shows us that all the efforts and sophisms which are directed against a truth once
drawn from darkness, fall like dust blown by the winds against a rock.

‘¢ The instance of Aristotle and Descartes should be particularly quoted, when
we wish to display the influence of prejudice upon the good or bad fortune of
new doctrines. The opponents of Aristotle burnt his books; afterwards, the
books of Ramus, who had written against Aristotle, were burnt, and the oppo-
nents of the philosopher of Stagira declared heretics ; and it was even forbidden
by law to dispute his doctrines, under pain of being sent to the galleys. Now
there is no longer any discussion about the philosophy of Aristotle. Descartes
was persecuted because he taught the innateness of ideas, and the University of
Paris burnt his books. He had written the most sublime thoughts upon the
existence of God; Voét, his enemy, accused him of atheism. Afterwards, this
same university declares itself in favour of innate ideas; and when Locke and
Condillac attacked innate ideas, the cry of materialism and fatalism resounded
on all sides.

‘«< Thus, the same opinions have at one time been regarded as dangerous because
they were new, and at another as useful because they were ancient. We must,
therefore, pity mankind, and conclude that the opinions of contemporaries as to
the truth or error, and dangerous or innocent tendencies, of a doctrine, are very
suspicious, and that the author of a discovery should be anxious only to ascertain
whether he has really discovered a truth or not. A truth once discovered, will
make its way, and not fail to produce good effects. ‘ Reason,’ says Ancillon,
after Bonnet, ‘knows no useless nor dangerous truths. What is, is.’ This is
indisputable, and is the only answer to be made to those who, putting all things
in subordination to men’s wants, ask, What is the use of that? and to those who,
always yielding to fear, ask, What may that lead to? Jesus, the son of Sirach,
had already said, ‘ we ought not to ask what is the use of that: for the use will
have its reward in time.’ ”’ *

When delivering the Lumleyan lectures, and asserting the importance of per-
cussion and auscultation, for the first time, before the College of Physicians, in
1829, I reminded the College, ‘that the greatest discoveries had generally been
at first ridiculed, and their authors, no less than all the truest benefactors of the
human race, despised and rejected of men.


—— ‘ Romulus, et Liber Pater, et cum Castore Pollux ;

Dum terras hominumque colunt genus, aspera bella

Componunt, agros assignant, oppida condunt,

Ploravére suis non respondere favorem, :
Speratum meritis.’”’ Hor. Lp. 1. lib. ii.


* 1. c. 8vo. t. i. p. 221. sqq., 4to. t. iv. p. 75. sqq., where alone the sentence
“a truth once discovered,” is found; but where the third and fourth paragraphs
are not.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 397


or disposition no one can have the slightest doubt, and he will
find the coincidence, within the limitations which I mentioned,
astonishing and invariable.


[nn nn ee UE UE eEEEEnSSIURIRIN EI EIR Sn REDE RRR RRS RE RRR ERR RRR ERR RR RRR RR ERROR ERR RERERERRREEEmEEREReEEET


I then mentioned the fate of Harvey (v. supra, p. 194. sq.)*, and the original
rejection of the discovery of the lacteals (v. suprd, p. 140. sqq.), and con-
tinued : —

“Let us remember that Sydenham, whose memory we also honour, was, by
many of his contemporaries, whose names, whatever bustle they made during
their existence, have never once been mentioned since their death, called a quack
and a murderer.+

«¢ Let us remember, that, if the illustrious father of modern philosophy was not
vilified and imprisoned, like Galileo, for announcing truth, he was represented by _
Cecil to Elizabeth, when she thought of making him her solicitor-general, ‘as a
man of mere speculation, — as one wholly given up to philosophical inquiries,
new indeed and amusing, but fanciful and unsound, and therefore more likely to
distract her affairs, than to serve her carefully and with proper judgment.’

«‘In ancient times, Horace saw his odes despised because they were new. The
public, he said,


‘ Nisi que terris semota, suisque

Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit et odit ;

Est vetus atque probus centum qui perficit annos.’
But, like the illustrious Gall, Laennec is no more.

‘ Extinctus amabitur idem.’
. In the words of Professor Playfair, notwithstanding the splendour of New-
ton’s discoveries ; the beauty, the simplicity, the grandeur of the system they un-
folded, and the demonstrative evidence by which that system was supported ;”
‘the Cartesian system of vortices kept its ground for more than thirty years after
the publication of these discoveries,” “and actually the Newtonian philosophy
first entered the University of Cambridge under the protection of the Cartesian,”
by a stratagem of Dr. Samuel Clark, who quietly explained: the views of New-
ton, without any appearance of argument or controversy, in the form of notes
to a new translation which he published of the French Cartesian work, long
established as the text-book by the tutors of the University.
«‘ Dr. Chalmers, speaking of the first reception of the Newtonian philosophy,

says, ‘ Authority scowled upon it, and taste was disgusted by it, and fashion was


* I might have added the words of the Edinburgh Review, No. xciv.: “ The
discoverer of the circulation of the blood suffers no diminution of his reputation
in our day, from the incredulity with which his doctrine was received by some,
the effrontery with which it was claimed by others, or the knavery with which it
was ascribed to former physiologists.”’

+ Here I might have added that, though Sydenham resided in Pall Mall, he
was never employed by the Court; yet the names of the Court physicians of his
day are now no more known than the names of the Court footmen.


398 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


If these are facts, all objections on the score of fatalism
and materialism are unworthy of attention. Because no rational


ashamed of it.’”? (My Lumleyan Lectures on the Diseases of the Heart, referred
to supra, p. 174.)

Father Pardies wrote against the experiments and what he was pleased to call the
hypotheses of Newton, —the very words of uninformed antiphrenologists. Such
great astronomers and mathematicians as Cassini and Maraldi were calculating
the paths of comets on the most imaginary and unfounded hypotheses, long after
Halley had constructed tables on the principles of Newton, in which the motions
of all comets that ever had appeared or could appear might be easily deduced ;
and Voltaire remarks that, though Newton lived nearly forty years after the pub-
lication of his Principia, he had not twenty followers out of England at the time
of his death. Some great philosophers died in perfect ignorance of them.

The introduction of Greek was originally opposed with violence at Oxford,
though now it is taught there as one of the most important things that a well
educated man can know.

The music of Gall’s countryman, Handel, though it has enraptured the English
for a century, is now only beginning to be appreciated in Germany.

Even I have lived long enough to see things at once rejected with scorn, which
are now all but universally adopted. When Laennec first published his great
work, I procured a stethoscope and investigated his statements. Although the
facts of percussion, as detailed by Avenbrugger above half a century ago, must of
physical necessity exist, I had always been taught, by the first teacher of medicine
in London, at Guy’s Hospital, Dr. James Curry, that they were fallacies, and
they were dismissed in three minutes as unworthy of the slightest attention.
Education, therefore, tended to make me sceptical. But I soon found that
Avenbrugger had been disgracefully neglected in this country ; and that Laennec;
like Avenbrugger, had opened to us a new and extensive scene in disease, to
which, though it had always existed, we were blind — that we had eyes and saw
not —or really, to drop metaphor, that we had ears and heard not. For a length
of time I found some at St. Thomas’s treat percussion and auscultation with
ridicule ; some with absolute indignation; and others, for years, treated it with
silent contempt; who all, I am happy to say, now practise both. I was there-
fore in the habit of studying them in the wards alone, and at hours when I |
expected to be unobserved. When I at length advocated and taught them in the
school, one of my colleagues, I heard, pronounced it nonsense or worse in his
lecture ; and at the College of Physicians I heard a senior fellow, in a Croonian
lecture, denounce the folly of .carrying a piece of wood (some called the
stethoscope inutile lignum) into sick chambers and making observations, to the
destruction of all philosophical and dignified views, such as become men whose
minds have been enlarged by the education which Oxford and Cambridge afford.
When another fellow of the College was asked his opinion of auscultation in the
wards of his hospital, he at once, as I was informed by the gentleman who
asked the question, condemned it as nonsense ; and when told ‘ that Elliotson
assured his friends that he had a high opinion of it and made his diagnosis of
affections of the chest with infinitely more accuracy by its means,” he replied, —


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 399


or religious person believes that one truth can contradict an-
other; or that a truth can lead to any thing but good. But,


* Oh! it’s just the thing for Elliotson to rave about! ” Yet good sense and truth
have prevailed. This physician is now addressed as one who had the candour
to examine auscultation at an early period, when others despised it, and who
materially assisted to spread its adoption. Even Dr. Spurzheim was as un-
philosophical on this point, as others were in regard to phrenology. On seeing a
stethoscope one day upon my table, he said— “Ah! do you use that hocus
pocus?”? And on my replying that it was highly important to employ the ear,
he added, “ You learn nothing by it; and if you do, you cannot treat diseases
the better.” Both which remarks were incorrect, and showed an unhappy state
of mind. An old physician, on seeing me use the stethoscope, began our con-
sultation by informing the practitioner, whom he had never seen before, and
myself, that he “ never made use of these French fooleries.”” Yet ignorance of
percussion and auscultation is now considered a sufficient proof that a man knows
but half his profession, and Laennec’s name has become imperishable ; and I am
happy in looking back upon the assistance I rendered to the establishment of
auscultation and percussion in this country by making the numerous physicians’
pupils of St. Thomas’s Hospital ear-witnesses of facts which others in vain at-
tempted to bring into contempt. : ‘
For years after I published my work on Prussic Acid, in 1820, referred to
supra, p. 223., very few persons would employ it; and I was not only ill spoken
of for recommending what was useless, but till very lately condemned for using
dangerous poisons. Not three years ago, a practitioner whom I had never
seen or even heard of, urged this in an argument with a nobleman to prevent me
from being consulted in the case of his lady. While the last edition of the
Pharmacopeeia was preparing, in 1824, the committee drew up a Latin formula
for its preparation: but when they presented their sketch of the new list to the
College, they begged to withdraw the forraula for prussic acid, because they had
received so many letters from fellows against its utility and safety. It was
consequently not admitted; and it was said in a medical journal, ten years ago,
to be no longer employed by the profession. Yet it is now employed universally
and daily by good practitioners of all ranks, for some pectoral complaints, for
which it had been recommended on the Continent, but chiefly for stomach affec-
tions, in which I had discovered its great utility ; and all my statements of its
properties are established. And, although for my knowledge of its properties in
regard to the stomach I was indebted to no one, I was compelled to show a
second time how accident first made me acquainted with its power over the
stomach, and how I was led on step by step to investigate and discover its great
virtues in affections of this organ. (See the Lancet, Feb. 24. 1827, p. 671. sqq.)
Three months after I had first published (in the Transactions of the Med. and
Chir. Society, for 1823, vol. xii.) a full report upon Quinine (the first that appeared
in this country), I heard, at a meeting of the College of Physicians, an hospital
fellow on one side of me, ask another hospital fellow, who is now in high practice,
what he thought of this Quinine. The reply across me was, ‘* Nothing; the very


EE


4.00 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


in reality, phrenology gives no additional support to such views.
It leaves all questions of fatalism and materialism where it found


name of it will not be known in a twelvemonth!” Yet Quinine is now as much
used as rhubarb, though neither it nor Prussic Acid is in the Pharmacopeeia ; and
all my statements are established. |

In 1824, I published my discovery of the almost specific power of carbonate
of iron in cases of general chorea before the adult period; and for pointing
out (l. c. vol. xiii. 1827.) that Carbonate of Iron, when it failed in ordinary
doses, might be given without the least unpleasant effect in doses ten times
larger, I was considered little less than a fool, and acquired a permanent reputa-
tion for giving all medicines under all circumstances in enormous doses; though
I am one of the most cautious practitioners, and always begin, in chronic cases;
with small doses of medicine, increasing them by slow degrees according to the
necessity; and never, from my earliest days of practice or teaching, have wished
to give one grain or one drop more than proves requisite. At the same time,
I certainly do not regard quantity as I proceed, but steadily augment my
doses till the complaint begins to yield, or some effect of the medicine begins
to appear. No practice is more irrational than to discontinue a medicine simply
because it does nothing, or before you have step by step augmented the dose till
some circumstance manifests that the medicine is not inactive. Difference of
quantity and difference of continuance must be demanded in different cases. I
did not feel myself justified in recommending large doses of iron as more efficient
than small. But farther experience proved to me the superior power of large
doses of carbonate of iron in obstinate cases; and in 1827 (I. ce. vol. xiii.), I
stated this, and have proved it to the crowds of students at the North London
Hospital again and again. The possibility of giving the large doses of the
medicine ordinarily is now no longer doubted. I next announced the power of
large quantities of Carbonate of Iron over Tetanus (l. c. vol. xv. 1829.), and this
has been confirmed. (Lond. Med. Gazette, Sept. 14. 1833.) A gentleman from the
West Indies told me he had great success with it. But no one else gives it a
trial, and old means which have failed again and again are absurdly repeated.

When I displayed the utility of sulphate of copper in chronic diarrhoea, in 1827
(1. c. vol. xiii. ), some contended that the opium combined with it effected all the
good, although I had so proceeded as to prove how much was owing to the salt.
I now possess heaps of letters expressing the realisation of my statements from
practitioners of various parts.

In 1830, I proved the occurrence of glanders in the human subject, not-
withstanding its possibility was denied. (1. c. vol. xvi.) I was smiled at for
my credulity. Yet extracts from my papers and copies of my engravings
have now a place in Dr. Rayer’s work upon the Diseases of the Skin, to
which no other is comparable; and, in noticing some foreign cases just
published, the editors of the Brit. and For. Med. Review, for July, say the occur-
rence is no longer a novelty. (p. 241.) After my first paper appeared, the
lecturer on veterinary medicine in the University of London, to whom I had
given a copy, did not condescend to notice it; and, making a passing ob-
ervation upon the belief of the occurrence of the disease in the human subject,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 401


them. Every thing in nature is subjected to laws which must be
obeyed. The nature of every thing is destined. A stone is des-


was perfectly silent in regard to my facts, and considered such an opinion
as the result of inaccurate observation, referring to some one else, not to me.
(Lancet, No. 436.) After my second paper was published, (1. ¢. vol. xviii. 1833.)
in which I gave another case, he could no longer profess a doubt; but, in ad-
mitting the fact, now said that it had “long been suspected, or rather painfully
known.” (Veterinarian, March, 1833.)

For having discovered the extraordinary power of Creosote in arresting vomit-
ing, unconnected with inflammatory or structural disease of the stomach, in an
immense majority of cases (Il. c. vol. xix. 1835.), 1 am now going through a
course of sneers and attacks. Some who cannot have, and others who evidently
have not, employed it according to my directions, nor to one twentieth of the
extent, assert that they have not found it so useful as I have, and put it on
a par with medicines as inferior to it as lettuce to morphine: and the reviewers,
who are lauded as respectable above all others, untruly say that I call it never
failing ; whereas I pointed out two forms of vomiting in which it is useless
and even injurious, and mention that where it seems proper it occasionally fails,
and that it so disgusts some persons that the stomach will not bear it; and,
though, after a laborious and rigid examination of its effects for a twelvemonth
in a large practice, I have pointed out various diseases and forms of disease in
which it is useful, I really have pronounced against it in a still greater number
of diseases and opposed writers who eulogised it absurdly. I shall always con-
gratulate myself upon my good fortune in discovering the extraordinary power
of creosote over nausea and vomiting and to enable the stomach to bear medicines
which disagree with it; and all I stated in regard to it is confirmed by still farther
hourly experience up to this very day, and will stand firmly, notwithstanding the
assertion of Drs. Forbes and Conolly, who untruly make me have “ unlimited
confidence” in creosote and call it ‘‘ never failing,” and who assert that “in other
and equally judicious hands it has fallen very far short of the virtues ascribed
to it”’ by me, “and that it more frequently fails” in cases in which I say I have
found it successful. To crown all, they make a lecturer, who confirms a
candid remark of mine, be confirmed by me. (July, p. 170. 200.) The tes-
timony of hundreds of my pupils and patients is happily against them. *


* Except the narrative of a case of rupture of the stomach (I. c. vol. xiii.),
and one of rupture of a pregnant Fallopian tube (Il. c. vol. xiii.), my only other
paper in the Transactions is on Fatty Discharges from the Alimentary Canal and
Urinary Passage (vol. xvii. 1833.). In it I collected a great many instances,
and deduced several general facts as to the disease. 1. That the fat might
be discharged solid or liquid, or both. 2. That the disease might be tem-
porary, or permanent, or even fatal. 3. That there might be organic, or merely
functional disease. 4. That the organic disease might be in the intestines, liver,
or pancreas. 5. That fatty discharge might take place from the alimentary and
urinary organs at the sametime, Yet this paper was called a mere collection
of cases.


EE 2


402 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


tined not to feel; a fish is destined to swim, and a vulture to be
a bird of prey ; man is destined to be —


What I experienced during many years for my humble and conscientious efforts
to propagate the advancement of whatever, by zealous and dispassicnate observ-
ation I knew, within my own experience, to be true and useful, distressed me
greatly, till I rose in spite of it in my profession. Iam aware of the injuries I still
suffer from the bad feeling of those who are not so devoted to the profession as
myself and yet envy me. But I now smile at it, and forgive all; and shall firmly
persevere, never withholding my aid to useful truths nor shrinking from conduct
which I consider my duty.—From this narration I trust that young men will neyer
be deterred from an industrious and conscientious course, but be prepared to
expect all that I have experienced, and remember the advice of the Sibyl to
Eneas, “Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.” We thus find the fate of
the little to be the same as of the great, if they humbly take these for their guide.

But the most notorious modern illustration of the aversion to improvement is
the history of lighting with gas. When I was a student, I recollect often going
from the Borough Hospitals in the evening to see Pall Mall, which only, of all the
streets of London, was so lighted. For many years a person named Winser,
and a company which he established, lighted that single street, I believe gratui-
tously. This wasa bright spot in London, for comparative darkness prevailed
in every other street. For many years, the general adoption of the plan was con-
sidered impracticable and therefore absurd. At length, another street was lighted
— and another — and another — and now that the poor man is dead, all London is
become Pall Mall, with one exception. Year after year have I amused myself with
watching the progress of illumination, and comparing it with the history of the
progress of great truths in physical, moral, and political science. Yet not even
is it at this moment universally adopted, any more than many obvious truths.
Darkness is still cherished in that very spot of London, where the greatest riches
and the highest rank, beth transmitted hereditarily in the longest succession,
ought to have secured, with Oxford and Cambridge education and every ad-
vantage of mental cultivation, from generation to generation, the highest know-
ledge and discernment. No house in Grosvenor Square has any other than
the greasy, dull oil lamps, notwithstanding ail the streets opening into it and even
the centre of the square which the parish lights, are brilliantly illuminated with
gas. Ihave taken foreigners into Grosvenor Square to exhibit this moral phe-
nomenon.

These are all remarkable facts in the history of human nature ; and make me
quite indifferent to the opinions of people, whether in my own profession or
not, upon the subject of phrenology. Yet its progress has of late been most
satisfactory. When I wrote advocating phrenology, in 1817 *, the year of my


* Annals of Medicine and Surgery, vol. ii. March 1817. I believe I was the
first reviewer who defended phrenology in Great Britain. I subsequently wrote
a review of the Ed, Phr. Trans. and of the first Number of the Ed. Phr. Journ.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 403


:


“* Not prone

And brute as other creatures, but endued
With sanctity of reason, and to erect

His stature, and upright, with front serene,
Govern the rest, self-knowing.” ®


The very expression “human nature” implies certain innate
faculties and dispositions, generally ; the circumstance of peculiar


appointment to St. Thomas’s Hospital, I did not know six phrenologists in
England ; and, when I founded the Phrenological Society of London there was
none in England or abroad. They now exist in many parts of Scotland, where
the first Phrenological Society was established; in many parts of England,
in Ireland, America, Denmark, and Paris, where, however, no one existed till
Gall’s career was finished, — 24 societies in all. In Paris the most distinguished
in our profession are phrenologists. To the everlasting honour of Edinburgh,
not only was the first Phrenological Society established there, but the first
Phrenological Journal ; and a treatise on the science by Mr. Combe has passed
through three editions, and made its hundreds of converts: 14,000 copies of
his phrenological works have been sold. (Statistics of Phrenology, by H. C.
Watson. London, 1836.) On the stand made by Mr. Combe and his circle
in Edinburgh, the seat of a hostile celebrated Review, of a University, and
of great religious bigotry, too much praise on the score of intellect and moral
principle cannot be bestowed. ‘Thousands of well-informed persons in this
country are now phrenologists, —a very large number in my own profession.
Though the Pope put Gall’s works into the Index Expurgatorius, phrenological
treatises have lately been permitted in the states of his Holiness, as well as by
Austria in Milan and Pavia. Phrenological language is of daily use with
our best writers and teachers; though they too often fear to declare their con-
viction. I have never known an individual write or speak against phrenology,


in Dr. Johnson’s Med. Chr. Review ; and have read in the London Phrenological
Society a paper on Imitation, reported in the Lancet, 1827, No. 190.—on an
Idiot, 1. c. 1826, No. 169.—on the Head of the Incendiary Smithers, 1. c. 1832,
No. 486.—ditto Thurtel, —- ditto Pallet, Hd. Phr. Journ. vol. ii—an Answer to
Mr. Jerdan and Dr. Ryan, Lancet, No. 430.—to Dr. Kidd, 1. c. 1834, No. 547.
—to the Rev. Mr. Taylor, 1. c. 1834, No. 548, —to Mr. Godwin, 1. c. 1834,
No. 432. —ditto to Dr. Pritchard, ditto to Dr. Burrows, but not reported, —
ditto to Dr. Bostock, — ditto to Dr. Magendie, Ed. Phr. Journ. vol. v. In the
Lancet for 1829, No. 304. and 1831, No. 400. will be found reported some
curious pathological illustrations of Phrenology from my patients in St. Thomas’s
Hospital. In the Ed. Phr. Journ. vol. iv. also will be found a phrenological ex-
periment, and in the Lancet, No. 642. another, both. communicated by me pre-
viously to the London Phrenological Society,
Buren: ry EO Pe et hes pene
4 Parad. Lost, vii.


EE 3


4.04: MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


degrees of disposition and talents being hereditary, and of each
age having its distinctive character, are quite as favourable as


without betraying a total misconception of it, or an ignorance of the facts of which
the spoke. Some opposers are both ignorant and malicious.

Let us all, therefore, follow Gall’s advice ; and when, by careful investigation,
we have satisfied ourselves of a truth, let us not be angry, but let us, remember-
ing the words of Locke, — that few people have any solid reasons for the ‘ doc-
trines they keep such a stir about” (Hwm. Underst. iv. 21.), pity mankind and
totally disregard the opinions of those who have not bestowed the same atten-
tion as ourselves or yield to malevolent passions, be they little, like the swarm,
or men of real distinction.

Till Gall established himself in Paris and rose into a very fine and high prac-
tice (he was physician to many ambassadors), he kept himself very poor from
spending upon his phrenological pursuits all he gained, after absolutely necessary
expenses. And although he lived then in the most private manner, with the com-
forts indeed of a handsome lodging, a carriage, and a garden with a small house
in the suburbs, he had saved so little, that, had his illness been protracted, his
friends in a few months must have supported him. In his combination of intellect
and moral sentiments, I doubt if any other human being surpassed him; and
the frontal and sincipital regions of his head were magnificent. His cerebellum
was very large, and he was twice married; and although, after separating from
his first wife he had a mistress, I believe he was a model of fidelity, and married
again immediately that his first wife died. His noble independence of mind
cannot be better shown than in his account of self-esteem in whieh he evidently
pourtrays himself, — a passage which I have ever in my thoughts. ‘“¢ There is a
certain number of men endowed with such strength of mind and nobleness of
soul, thoroughly sensible of their own worth, and so passionately fond of inde-
pendence, that they resist every external influence calculated to subject them.
They endeavour, as much as possible, to establish themselves in countries where
there is the most liberty ; they follow a pursuit which renders them independent,
which exempts them from the favours and the caprices of the great. Dominion
over their inferiors, which would lead on to slavery under an absolute master, to
them would be insupportable. Honours and distinctions intended for merit,
when lavished on men of no pretensions, are in their eyes only degradations, If
they prosper, it is through their own exertions. Like the oak, they sustain
themselves; and, for whatever they are, they consent to be indebted to no one.
This is a pride which has not degenerated into haughtiness ; which is often the
companion of great virtues, is the enemy of all baseness, and the support of
courage in adversity.” (l.c. 4to. vol. iii, p. 299., 8vo. t. iv. p. 254.) “TI
am the most modest, the most humble of men, when I behold around
me the immensity of things which I am condemned not to understand, and
which, nevertheless, are connected with the objects of a medical observer and
practitioner. But when the discovery of the structure and functions of
the brain is spoken of, I believe myself, with imperturbable confidence, ‘to
be above all my predecessors, above all my cotemporaries. Yes; I am the first-
who has established the physiological principles on which the structure and


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 405


phrenology to the belief of fatalism. But each has his own precise
talents and disposition by nature ; on some circumstances or other


functions of the brain must be studied; I am the first who has broken down the
barrier opposed by superstition and ignorance, for thousands of years, to the
progress of the physiology of the nervous system; the first who conceived the
idea of distinguishing the general attributes from the true qualities and funda-
mental faculties ; the first who determined the instincts, the inclinations, the sen-
timents, and the talents which are connected with certain cerebral parts. I am
the first who had the courage, the patience, and the perseverance to examine and
fix the relations which exist between the energy of the moral qualities and of
the intellectual faculties, and the various development of the parts of the brain.
I am the first who has extended these researches to the whole brute kingdom,
who has studied thousands of animals, as to their most striking instincts, inclin-
ations, and faculties, and the configuration of their brain, both in individuals and
species. I am the first who discovered and pointed out the means of discovering
the seat of each instinct, sentiment, and intellectual faculty. - I am the first who
discovered these seats, and demonstrated them by numerous physiological and
pathological facts, and by an infinity of researches into the comparative anatomy
and physiology of all species of animals.”

« Yes; once more, I am the first and the only one to whom the physiology of
the brain owes its existence ; I have discovered it without the assistance of any
man. This the history of each of my discoveries proves. It is the same with the
physiology of the brain as with its structure. To pick out what might by chance
be found dispersed in authors, would have required more cleverness than to
detect the mysteries of nature by observation. I began, continued, and com-
pleted all my discoveries, without any previous learning ; and if, at a later period,
I compiled quotations, it was rather to mark the point of my departure, than
to strengthen my ideas by those of my predecessors and cotemporaries.” (1. c. 8vo.
t. ¥. p. 519. sq. 522. sq.)

In his preface to the third quarto volume, published in 1818, and the sixth
octavo, published in 1825, he says, “ The foundation of this doctrine being laid, it
must be as immovable as the materials, — the facts, of which it is constructed.
But I am far from believing the edifice complete: neither the life nor the fortune
of one man would be sufficient for this vast project. Up to this present moment
I have been left to my own resources. An immense concourse of the most favour-
able circumstances would be required to raise this study to the height which
it is capable of attaining. There would be required a complete collection of the
crania of brutes, not only of different species, but also of individuals in which
qualities or faculties strongly pronounced had been observed. There would be
required a complete collection of the brains of brutes, modelled in wax after
nature, to multiply the means of comparison. There would be required a num-
ber of crania, or at least of casts, of men and women distinguished by some
quality or faculty: finally there would be required a more extensive knowledge
of natural history than we have at present, with respect to instances of industrious
aptitudes, qualities, and faculties ; in a word, with respect to the internal economy


of the brute creation.”
EE 4


4.06 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


they must depend; and, if these are discovered, the case does
but remain the same as before. Yet, whatever may,be our innate


Dr. Vimont of Caen has carried on the researches into the phrenology of
brutes with extraordinary perseverance, and produced a most magnificent, work,
Attracted, in 1818, by the prize offered by the French Institute to the author
of the best memoir upon the anatomy of the brain in the four classes of verte-
brated animals, he began researches into the subject, without any reference to
phrenology, for he had not read Gall, and had seen him spoken of in books
and heard of him only as a charlatan: however, he thought it incumbent upon
him to read Gall’s work among others. ‘ Hardly,” says he, ‘‘ had I begun to
read it, when I found that I had to do with one of those extraordinary men
whom dark envy endeavours to exclude from the rank to which their genius calls
them, and against whom it.employs the arms of the coward and the hypocrite.
High cerebral capacity, profound penetration, good sense, varied information,
were the qualities which struck me as distinguishing Gall. The indifference
which I first felt for his writings, therefore, soon gave way to the most profound
veneration.”? (Introduction, p. 14.) :

In 1827, Dr. Vimont presented to the Institute a memoir containing a frag-
ment of the researches on which he had then spent so many years, together with
2500 heads of brutes of various classes, orders, genera, and species. Among
these, 1500 had belonged to brutes with whose habits he had been individually
well acquainted before they died, or were killed: 400 wax representations of
the brain, modelled after nature, and an atlas of more than 300 figures of the
brain and cranium, executed with the strictest accuracy of dimensions, also ac-
companied the memoir. . The work in which he now sets forth his observations
has an atlas of 120 exquisite plates, containing above 600 figures. The accuracy
of dimensions is said to surpass any thing before attempted in anatomy; and, if
the immense mass of proofs of phrenology from the human head, and the facts
pointed out by Gall, in brutes, were not sufficieht to convince the most preju-
diced, the additional multitude amassed by Dr. Vimont will overwhelm them.

These are the great merits of the work : I would willingly pass over its faults ;
but antiphrenologists will point them out, and, therefore, it is as well at once to
express my regret at the self-conceit which pervades it. The author has given
what he terms English as well as French explanations of the plates, but,
from not availing himself of the assistance of some one possessing a better
knowledge of our language, his blunders are irresistibly ludicrous. He -
brings Gall’s knowledge and labours as low as posible, in order to elevate
his own, and commits greatinjustice. (Vol.i. p.15. (Not aware that Gall had


cat dt ae AOL Ne Pe ees ST ee ee ee a a ee ee


© All know that sexual desires are so connected with the genital organs as
generally to commence when these become mature, and be prevented by their
removal during childhood; but the world does not, therefore, decline to punish
ravishers and adulterers. The circumstances are precisely the same with all the.
cerebral organs of propensity.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.07


propensities and powers, we know how much various circum-
stances influence the development of faculties and the strength


ee eee eee


answered Tiedemann, in l.c. 8vo. t.iv. p. 42.) 36. sq. 165. 212. 219, 220.,
vol. ii. p. 247.) Heis unjust towards Dr. A. Combeand Mr. W. Scott, in vol. ii.
p- 165. 196. sq. He stands at an immeasurable distance below Gall in intellect :
and, though I believe him to have collected far more facts and contributed far
more to the solidity of the science than Dr. Spurzheim, his intellectual powers
have not Dr. S.’s strength. Nothing can be weaker than some of his remarks
on vitativeness (vol. ii. p. 160. sqq.), concentrativeness (vol. ii. p. 212. sqq.
also compared with p. 407.), and on alimentativeness (p. 173. sq.), on material-
ism (vol. i. p. 32. sq. compare with p. 223. and vol. ii. p. 50.), and on mar-
vellousness (vol. ii. p. 427. sqq.). There are instances of bad taste, incorrect
information, and carelessness, which vex me in so important a work. Heagrees
with Dr. S., in considering Gall’s sense of persons as a sense of form, and yet
all his facts and reasoning relate to persons. He adopts all the faculties alleged
to be discovered by Dr. S. and others, and even adds three of his own — the
sense of distance, of beauty in the arts, and the disposition of flocks or swarms
to arrange themselves in regular figures. His remarks against Dr. S.’s views
on acquisitiveness, secretiveness, cautiousness, eventuality, mirthfulness, and
ideality, to use Dr. S.’s terms, are really good, and such as I have always
made. He, in several instances, is just towards Gall, where others have
been unjust. (See vol. ii. p. 393. 459.) And, although he rectifies Gall’s lo-
calisation of most of the organs in brutes, and this with rude remarks, he
once does him ample justice. (Vol.ii. p. 262.) If Gall has not treated the
phrenology of brutes as he might have done, he will always have the merit of
having put his successors in the right road. This celebrated man, in developing
his philosophical ideas by the aid of comparative anatomy and physiology, has
left an immense distance between himself and Spurzheim, and all phrenologists
who have not, like the latter, followed in his path. Time, which gives every man
his proper place, while it will show us the imperfections of his works, will in-
evitably do justice to the extent of his views.” He makes a few rectifications
of the situations of organs in man; but his merit is that of having given to
phrenology an immense mass of additional proofs from brutes, and observed and
communicated his facts with, as it would appear, the minutest accuracy. No one
can pretend to a perfect knowledge of comparative anatomy and physiology,
without a knowledge of his labours, and to impress their importance upon my
readers, I shall quote a long passage.

* Tn animals of the lower classes, to begin with fish and reptiles, the number
of cerebral faculties is small]; their acts generally of short duration: all have a
spinal chord. In the apparatus of the senses they have, externally, a multitude
of shades of form and structure calculated to facilitate their actions. The
most prominent cerebral faculties are conservation, alimentation, and reproduc-
tion. If there are any perceptive faculties, they are, except in some species,
very limited. |

“‘ What a difference, in this respect, between them and birds! How must


408 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


of dispositions, and we feel as if we were free agents: we seem
to move our right hand or our left, and to sit still or walk, exactly
as we choose; and we possess reason and conscience to guide
our conduct.

Yet, notwithstanding this feeling of freedom, “ all theory is,”
certainly, as Dr. Johnson said, “against the freedom of the
will.” P

The truth is, that we act necessarily according to the strongest
motive; our liberty consisting, as Voltaire says in his charming
article on Liberty 4, in the power of doing what our will requires
of absolute necessity. Johnson, therefore, added correctly,


we be struck with admiration on observing that, with the more energetic and
complicated actions of birds, the cerebral system becomes more ample! Is it
not still more surprising to see the combination and energy of the faculties
perfectly coincide with the wants of the species? How can we, on the cther
hand, refuse to be convinced of phrenology, when it proves to us, by the in-
. spection of many thousands of skulls, that if birds, whatever be their class, order,
genus, or species, or even their peculiar habits, have a faculty in common, for
example that of migration or recognising places, their skulls will always re-
semble one another at one point; and, as this truth applies to all the faculties
discovered by observation, to deny the existence of these facts is to deny that the
eye is the external apparatus of sight, the ear of hearing, the nose of smelling,
&c.

«Tn quadrupeds and quadrumana, in which the cerebral operations, generally
considered, are more numerous and present a more continued action than in birds,
we find the cerebral system more developed. Some organs, which were but
rudimentary in the two first classes, are very prominent; and the aets dependent
upon them, being more energetic, confirm the general law of nature, — the re-
lation between the extent and force of the acts of the nervous system with its
volume or development.’’ ‘ Full and perfect reliance may be placed on my
observations; for they are the result of a scrupulous and conscientious examin-
ation of many thousand skulls of brutes, and the dissection of their brains, sub-
sequent to the study of their most striking manners and habits.”

P Boswell’s Life of Johnson, vol. ili, p. 294.

Consult Gall on Materialism, Fatalism, and Moral Liberty, |.c. 4to. vol.iie from
p. 79. to 132. ; and on Reason, Will, and Free Will, vol.iv. p.340. sqq. ; and on
Free Will and Liberty, 8vo. t. i. p. 228. sqq., and t. vi. p. 427. sqq., especially
on Illusory Liberty and Moral Liberty. All these writers, however, were antici-
pated in “*.4 Philosophical Enquiry concerning Human Liberty, by Anthony
Collins. London.” Collins again owes his views to “‘.4 Treatise of Libertie and
Necessitie, wherein all Controversie concerning Predestination, Election, Free Will,
Grace, Mercy, Reprobation, Sc. is fully decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobs,


London, 1654.”
1 Dictionnaire Philosophique.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.09


«« All experience is for it.” And on another occasion said, “ We
know that we are free, and there is an end on'’t.”’?

Motives depend upon original organisation, sometimes modified
by physical influence, internal or external; and upon external
moral influence upon our mental organs.

The being who has the most faculties, the greatest equipoise
of his faculties, and the most knowledge, has the greatest range
of liberty.s If a person acts wickedly or absurdly from hearing
necessity advocated, it is because certain motives become extin-
guished in him and his range contracted. It results that we should
educate, and give as many and as good motives as possible ; and,
when we punish, we should punish, not from presuming we have
a right to condemn, but for the purpose of giving additional mo-
tives to good conduct, where there has clearly not been enough
of them As the strength of individual inclinations and the faci-
lity of yielding to them are greatly increased by habit, in order
that those of a lower class should not acquire undue force, nor

“ Upstart passions catch the government
From reason, and to servitude reduce
Man, till then free,” *
the necessity for education to consist not of mere precepts and
sermons, but of good actions, is apparent. One good act may be
more improving than the precept read or heard twenty times.


SebnGe COL. She Ds 74.

* Voltaire, in the article referred to, makes B., the person who is ignorant of
the subject, say, ‘‘ Mon chien de chasse est aussi libre que moi; il a nécessaire-
ment la volonté de courir quand il voit un liévre, et le pouvoir de courir s’il
n’a pas mal aux jambes. Je n’ai donc rien au-dessus de mon chien: vous me
réduisez a l’état des bétes. \

To which his better informed friend, 4., replies, ‘* Voila les pauvres sophismes
des pauvres sophistes qui vous ont instruit. Vous voila bien malade d’étre libre
comme votre chien. Ne mangez-vous pas, ne propagez-vous pas comme lui, a
Vattitude pres? Voudriez-vous ayoir l’odorat autrement que par lenez? Pour-
quoi voudriez-vous avoir la liberté autrement que votre chien ?

B, “ Mais jai une ame qui raisonne beaucoup, et mon chien ne raisonne
gueres. Il n’a presque que des idées simples; et moi, j’ai mille idées méta-
physiques.

A. Eh bien, vous étes mille fois plus libre que lui; c’est-d-dire, vous avez mille
fois plus de pouvoir de penser que lui; mais vous n’étes pas libre autrement
que lui.”

* See Bishop Butler’s remarks on the mischief of the doctrine, Analogy, p. 1.
chap. vi.

" Gall, ]. c. 4to. vol. ii, p. 100. ; Svo. t. i. p. 289., t. vii p. 438.

* Parad. Lost, xii.


410 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


The objections on the ground of materialism are not more
applicable to phrenology than to the doctrine now universally
admitted, — that the brain is the organ of the mind; and they
have been answered.

Those who have so little soul as always to ask what is the good
of any discovery in nature, may be told that phrenology may be
of much service in confirming some moral views which good
sense may previously have suggested. Humility and benevolence
are two leading duties. If we detect the signs of intellectual
deficiency and vice in our own heads, we may learn to think
humbly of ourselves; and, being put in possession of true self-
knowledge, endeavour to strengthen what is too weak and repress
what is too strong. If we detect the signs of great talents and
virtues in the heads of others, we may love them the more as
superior and highly favoured beings: whereas, if we detect the
signs of great virtues and talents in our own heads, we may learn
to give no praise to ourselves, but be thankful for the gift ; and, if
we detect the signs of vice and intellectual deficiency in others, we
may learn to pity rather than to censure. Not revenge, but ex-
ample, is the professed, and should be the sole, object of our legal
punishments ;— example to the culprit himself and others, or, if the
punishment is capital, to others only ; and therefore frauds, which,
from being very easily committed, may become very detrimental
to society, are punished more severely than those which, ceeteris
paribus, from being difficult of perpetration, can scarcely from their
frequency become dangerous. Were moral demerit regarded,
the fraud easily committed would, ceteris paribus, be punished
the most lightly. A vicious man must be restrained, as a wild
beasty, for the good of others, though, for aught we know, his
faults may, like the acts of the beast of prey, be chargeable rather
on his nature ; and, while we feel justified in confining, and the
culprit is perhaps conscious how richly he deserves his fate, we
may pity in our hearts and acknowledge that we ourselves have
often been less excusable.

** Teach me to love and to forgive,


Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and own myself a man.” ” .


y A man of determined bad principle may in like manner be shunned by the
most benevolent, on account of being odious and dangerous; though they wish
him so well as ardently to long for his reformation, and pity his organisation, his
education, and the circumstances under which he has been placed.

* Gray, Ode to Adversity.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 41]


Morality is inculcated by phrenology in the most striking
manner. ‘The faculties common to us and brutes are placed
the lowest; the superior faculties above: as though the former
should be subjected to the latter. We learn from phrenology
what several faculties do certainly exist: and, as nothing exists
but for a good purpose, each should be allowed to act. But
they should be allowed to act harmoniously, — not one in oppos-
ition to another: the love of property not be allowed to oppose
benevolence or justice, nor any one intellectual faculty to su-
persede the employment of the others. The greater the culti-
vation of all the intellectual faculties, the more abundant will be
the motives of thought and action, — the freer the will: and the
more the moral faculties situated superiorly are cultivated, and
the fewer provocations are applied to the inferior, the more will
the former guide the individual to his own happiness and that
of others.

Phrenology, too, may be of the highest use when in criminals
there is suspicion of idiotism or insanity. Idiotism often de-
pends on deficiency of cerebral development, and many idiots
have been executed for crimes when it was not exactly proved
that they were idiotic enough to be unfit for punishment, but
whose cranial development might have settled the point at
once. Many persons also have been executed who should have
been considered madmien, but were not because the fact of illu-
sion was not made out: yet the extreme preponderance of the
development of the organs of the propensities over that of the
moral sentiments and intellect would have proved that they were
deserving of coercion rather than punishment. Such does the
skull of Bellingham, the murderer of Mr. Percival, prove him to
have been.

In placing confidence in others and forming connections, phre-
nology may be of the greatest use. We might often be at once
certain of an intellectual deficiency or a oo objection, Many
heads have the development of their various parts so moderate
and nearly balanced, that the character will depend chiefly upon
external circumstances; and such will never become remark-
able. Although fulness of development does not, like deficiency,
give a certainty of the internal force, because it may not depend
upon brain or upon good brain; yet, when the person is known
to be of sound body and mind, and not torpid, the force within
will, in an immense majority of cases, be correspondent with


412 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


the fulness without.2 Like many other phrenologists, and, in-
deed, like Gall himself, I have suffered from having yielded to:


@ Gall divides men into six distinct classes in regard to the moral and intellec-
tual faculties : —

<¢ In the first class, the qualities and faculties which are the most elevated and
are peculiar to man are completely developed, while the organs of the animal
qualities and faculties have but a feeble degree of development and activity.

“In the second class, the organs of the animal faculties and qualities have at-
tained a high degree of activity, while the organs of the qualities and faculties’
peculiar to man are but little developed and but little active.

‘¢ In the third class, the qualities and faculties common to animals and those
peculiar to man have considerable development and activity.

‘‘ In the fourth class only one or some of the inclinations or talents is de-
veloped in an extraordinary degree, while the rest have only a moderate develop-
ment and activity, and are perhaps below mediocrity.

‘‘ In the fifth class, one or some of the organs are but little developed and re
main inactive, while the others are more favourably developed and active.

‘¢ Finally, in the sixth class, the organs common to animals and those peculiar
to man are almost equally moderate.”

«© When the superior qualities and faculties more peculiar to the human species
much exceed the inferior, the man will prevail over the animal. The internal
movements and all the conduct of these men are conformable to reason, justice,
and morality. To judge equitably of the weaknesses of others, to generously
pardon otfences, to tolerate with indulgence the errors of their minds, to act
with integrity, always to labour for the general good, sacrificing their own in-
terests, always to render homage to truth with a wise intrepidity, always to be
above ingratitude and persecution, always to ascend from effect to cause, and
thus always to shelter themselves from prejudice and superstition, &c. &c.— this
is the natural tendency of these men, these models, these benefactors of our race,

“« The contrary is the case with those whose organs of the animal qualities and
faculties have a very considerable development and activity, while the organs of
the superior faculties have but little development and activity. In these, all is
subjected to sensuality and error, The animal impulses are numerous and
violent ; and defeat is the more to be apprehended in proportion as the superior
faculties and external aid are the weaker. If unhappily the prevailing inclin-
ations are of the number of those the excessive activity of which destroys social
order, will the philosophic judge be astonished at those men too frequently be-
coming the yictims of their organisation ?

‘¢ When the qualities and faculties common to animals ay at the same time
those peculiar to man are equally active, men result who are placed between the
man and the brute. They are stimulated by the one and warned by the other ;
often humiliated by the one and often exalted by the other; great in vice and
great in virtue; in many points, they are excellence and wisdom itself; in many
others, they are subject to the most deplorable weaknesses and vices. The most
opposite qualities frequently render them the most problematical beings; such as


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 413


social impulses and neglected to pay proper attention to the
organisation. But the phrenologist, and not phrenology, was in
fault.

We learn how a person may lose his memory of names, and
of nothing else; and how any one or a certain number of the
intellectual faculties or moral feelings may be over-excited, di-
minished, or otherwise damaged : just as one part supplied by one
nerve or set of nerves may be palsied, convulsed, or pained; and


Louis XI., Charles V., Philip II., James II., Catherine de’ Medicis, who were
superstitiously devout, and at the same time the scourge of their subjects. These
are the persons who most acutely feel the struggle of the two beings within
them. It is Socrates, St. Paul, St. Augustin, who, having the severest battles to
fight, may pretend to the most glorious victory of virtue.

«¢ When one or some qualities or faculties, whether animal or human, are
endowed with an extraordinary energy, while the others are only moderate, the
result is great geniuses, great talents in a limited career, or certain inclinations,
whether bad or good, predominant over the others. These talents and inclin-
ations constitute the character of the individual, who will have the more difficulty
to withstand their impulses in proportion as the other moral and intellectual
powers are less active. You have the mere musician, mechanician, and impas-
sioned poet ; but you have also the libidinous, the quarrelsome, the thievish, who
even, in certain cases, are so impassioned that the excessive activity of such inclin-
ations degenerates into rea] madness, and deprives the individual of the power of
controlling them.

* You see on the contrary, partial apathies, imbecilities, when, by the side of
' other qualities and faculties sufficiently developed, one or more organs are but
little developed. With such an organisation, Lessing and Tichsbein detest music,
Newton and Kant dislike women.

“‘ Lastly, in the sixth class, is found the crowd of ordinary men. But, as the
organs common to animals occupy the greatest part of the brain, these men re-
main limited to the sphere of the animal qualities ; their pleasures are those of
sense, and they produce nothing remarkable in any respect.

‘¢ These six divisions are mixed in a thousand modifications, as happens with all
the great divisions of nature. We rarely find the organisation happy enough to
bestow upon the faculties of a superior order an absolute power of impressing
a favourable direction upon the inferior. We may, therefore, admit it as a truth
established by the laws of organisation, that, among men, a very small number
find in themselves alone sufficient force or motive to be a law unto themselves, —
always to resolve upon acts conformable to the dignity of the most noble inclin-
ations, sentiments, faculties of men.” (8vo. t. i. p. 320. sqq. See also 4to, vol.
ii. p. 133. sqq. )

Gall required Dr. Spurzheim to infuse order, tae and philosophy into his
discoveries and views !

He belonged to the small and noble class. God grant that increased cul-
tivation of man’s higher cerebral faculties may enlarge it!


A 4 MENTAL FUNCTIONS OF


indications of treatment will arise from the fact, just as in the
latter cases.

We learn how absurd in education it would be to attempt the
production of great excellence of a particular kind, on the sup-
position that he who can excel in one thing can excel in another,
as though it were true, in Dr. Johnson’s words, that “ Genius is
general powers applied to a particular subject ;” or that, as Mr.
Dugald Stewart said, “‘ particular excellence is the result of par-
ticular habits of study or of business.” We know by phrenology
that all cannot do all; that the most unfit for one thing may be
the most fit for another ; and the organisation will indicate from
whom we can expect nothing, and when we may hope for success.
Punishment will not be inflicted, nor irksome studies enforced,
where nature is at fault and the faculty is not strong enough
from deficiency of organ. We are enabled to decide when the
pupil is anxious for excellence through good feeling or conceit,
and yet cannot by nature succeed in the particular branch which
attracts him. We are enabled to adapt our moral management
accurately to the moral qualities of each child.

In short, in every thing human, by knowing that various intel-
lectual and moral faculties exist, by knowing what these are, by
knowing accurately in general in what positive and relative
strength they are supplied to particular individuals, we are en-
abled to act like philosophers, and not with that ignorant bru-
tality which has hitherto so much disfigured the education and
legislation of the world, as well as private conduct in society.

Gall made this noble and philosophical application from the
first, as will be seen in both his works.» Others make them
daily.¢

By phrenology the true mental faculties have principally been
discovered ; and, as it shows the true nature of man, its importance
in medicine, education, jurisprudence, and every thing relating
to society and conduct, must be at once apparent.4


> 1. c. 4to. vol. ii. p. 133 —212., 8vo. t. i. p. 319—457., and both works
passim.

© See Dr. Spurzheim’s writings; Mr. Combe’s System of Phrenology, and his
Essay on the Constitution of Man; Dr. Combe’s work on Insanity; Mr. Simpson
on Education; and the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, passim.

4 JT shall end the subject of Phrenology with one of those beautiful passages
with which Gall’s works abound. ’

‘*‘ T have always been conscious of the dignity of my researches, and of the


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 415


While the brain is evidently the organ of mind, the nerves
united with it, and the spinal chord, together with its nerves,
are as evidently the instruments by which it affects, and is affected
by the other parts of the body, to which these nerves are dis-
tributed. By their instrumentality, the brain contracts the volun-
tary muscles, influences the functions of every other part when
under the operation of the different passions, and receives im-
pressions made upon every other part.e The consequences of
divisions of the nerves or spinal chord, fully substantiate these
points.

If a nerve supplying an organ of sense, as the olfactory, optic,
acoustic, or gustatory, is compressed or divided, the organ be-
comes insensible to odours, light, sounds, or tastes. If one exciting
muscles only, as the common motor oculi, — the internal — or the
external motor,—the facial—or the hypoglossal, the will loses
power over such muscles ;—over the inferior, superior, and internal


extensive influence which my doctrine will one day exert upon human know-
ledge ; for which reason I have remained indifferent to all the good or evil which
might be said of my labours. They were too far removed from received opinions
to be relished and approved at first. A knowledge of them required profound
and continued study: every one wished to pronounce upon them, and every one
came with opinions and views according to his means of intelligence. All
the doctrine is now consecrated to the public. Judgment cannot Jong remain
doubtful. Personal feeling will disappear: the passions will calm, and criticism
will have only its due weight. Posterity will not fail to contrast the point
from which I started with that at which I stopped. My adversaries have but too
distinctly displayed the state in which the various objects of my labours were,
for it to be difficult to know what improvement these have derived and will de-
rive from my discoveries. What progress in the comparative anatomy, physio-
logy, and pathology of the nervous system! What a fruitful source of irre-
fragable principles for philosophical studies ; for the art of learning the disposition
of individuals to the best advantage; for the art of directing the education of
youth! What valuable materials for criminal legislation, based upon a complete
knowledge of the motives of human action! How history will change in the
eyes of those who will know how to value it according to the predominant inclin-
ations and faculties of the personages who have played the chief parts in it,” &¢.
(I. c. 4to. vol. iii. p. xii. sq., 8vo. t. vi. p. viii. sq.)

© In strict language, no part of the body but the encephalon, or what corre-
sponds to it in lower animals, can have sensation. The different parts may be so
affected, that, by the intervention of nerves between them and the encephalon,
the-latter perceives the impression made upon them ; but the sensation is in the
encephalon, although instinctively referred to the spot which is its source.

FF


416 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


straight muscles of the eyes, the inferior oblique, and the levator
palpebre superioris,—the superior oblique,—-the abductor straight
muscle, — many muscles of the face, viz. the orbicularis, levator
anguli oris, &c. &c.— or the muscular fibres of the tongue. If
the spinal chord, or nerves conveying both volition from the
brain and impressions to the brain, the supplied parts lose both
sense and motion.f. For when nerves both convey volition and
supply common sensibility, as the fifth and the spinal nerves, they
are compound, one portion performing but one function, as is
proved by separately dividing the anterior and posterior part
of the. trigeminum, or the nervous bands, proceeding from the
anterior and posterior parts of the spinal chord, before their
conjunction; when the division of the former deprives the parts
supplied of the influence of volition, and that of the latter de-
prives them of sensation. In the case of either these com-
pound or the simply motor nerves, if the divided surface, now un-
connected with the brain, is irritated (or if, indeed, the parts
are not divided, but at once irritated by pinching), contractions
occur in the muscles supplied by them; and, if a sedative is
applied to them, some say that the muscles become inert. In
the case of the compound nerves too, and in the case also of the
division of those nerves which have common sensibility or touch
and constitute a part of compound nerves, if the divided sur-
face connected with the brain is irritated, acute pain is felt,
as if in the part on which the nerve originally terminated §;
and, after the removal of a limb, it is common for uneasy sens-
ations to be experienced by the patient as if he still possessed
his hand or his foot. The nerves which convey volition only, and


f These facts are too frequently proved to be doubted; and, consequently,
four cases, in which the spinal chord is said to have been divided without the
effect of paralysis, must be suspected of error. (See Metzer’s Principes de Mé-
decine légale, translated, with notes, by Ballard, p. 357. sq.) Another has been
quoted from Dr. Magendie’s Jowrnal de Physiologie, t. iii., in which the arms
were paralysed as to motion, and the lower cervical and upper dorsal chord was
a colourless pulp, except two bands between the anterior fissure and the sides ;
so that the anterior portion of the chord was continuous (p.184.), though
the posterior was destroyed at one part. But the description is imperfect. Dr.
Magendie suggests that the membranes carried on sensation !

& Thus, after the loss of the glans penis, the extremities of the nerves are sens-
ible to venereal pleasure, as noticed by John Hunter and Dr. Marshall ; and I
once had an out-patient at St. Thomas’s Hospital with gonorrhcea, and only an
inch of a remnant of penis.


FUNCTIONS OF NERVES. 417


those of the other four senses than touch,—the nerves of the
specific senses,—feel little or no pain when mechanical stimulus
is applied ; and these generally have not, like those which furnish
and possess common touch or common sensibility, and perhaps all
those of the specific senses, a ganglion at a certain distance from
their origin.» There is Gasser’s ganglion for the trigeminum, the
posterior and larger part of which, including the ophthalmic and
superior and inferior maxillary, gives sensibility to the face, and
even what common sensibility they possess to the nerves of the
specific senses and of motion ; while the anterior and smaller part
is not united with Gasser’s ganglion, and is a nerve of motion to the
muscles of the lower jaw, and some others of the face. There isa
ganglion for each posterior nerve of the spinal chord,i The anterior


h See Dr. Magendie’s Précis de Physiol. t. i. p. 200. sq. ed. 3.

iThe branch of the trigeminum unconnected with the ganglion was de-
clared to be a nerve of motion only, and to belong to the various muscles
of the lower jaw, by Dr. Paletta in 1784: and was, therefore, called nervus
masticatorius by Dr. Bellingeri in 1818. (Dissert. inaug. Taurini, 1818.) Dr.
O’ Beirne has shown that the motor portion is more extensively distributed
in the muscles of the face; that, after uniting with the inferior maxillary of
the ganglionic portion, so that the two are intimately mixed and all the sub-
sequent branches are compound nerves one of which becomes attached to the
superior branch of the facial, it is distributed to many muscles of the face besides
those of the lower jaw. He hence explains some instances of a certain loss of mo-
tion after injury of the ganglionic portion of the fifth, and of continuance of motion
after injury of the facial ; — paralysis of the motor branch of the fifth being at-
tended by distortion of the face while the patient is at rest, and less when he
speaks, laughs, &c. and thus puts in action the muscles supplied by the facial
nerve; paralysis of the facial being attended by distortion only when he puts
these in action ; and paralysis of both being attended by constant distortion and
an increase of it during these actions. He shows with great acuteness how
unsatisfactory and erroneous are many of Sir C. Bell’s views and statements
respecting paralysis of the face. (New Views of the Process of Defecation, p. 227.
sqq:) Dr. Bellingeni appears to have had some vague notion of the functions
of the anterior part of the trigeminus and of the facial nerve; but, since he
says that the facial nerve gives animal sensibility as well as motion to the muscles
and integuments of the face (p. 124.), and speaks of the upper branch of the
trigeminus as exciting involuntary motion (p. 177. sqq.), I cannot believe that
he anticipated Sir C, Bell, who certainly appears to have discovered step by
step the office of the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum, and proved that
this was a double pair for sensation and motion — the portion devoted to sensation
having a ganglionic enlargement, the other none, exactly like the spinal nerves ;
although its similarity in structure to the spinal nerves he candidly states to have
been pointed out by Prochaska half a century ago, and by Sommerring. (The


FEF 2


418 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


portion of the spinal chord is nearly insensible, while its posterior
portion, and all the ganglionic branches of the trigeminum, are


Nerv. Syst. of the Hum. Body, 1830, p. viiii In this work are various papers
presented by him to the Royal Society during the preceding nine years.) Sir C.
Bell also discovered the facial to be a nerve of motion only, though, besides
speaking of it as a nerve of voluntary motion, he gave it some properties of ex-
pression which are common to all nerves of voluntary motion, and strangely called
it a respiratory nerve. Our knowledge of the functions of the anterior and the
posterior or ganglicnic portion of the spinal nerves, we owe first to Sir C. Bell,
and next to Dr. Magendie. In a tract privately circulated by Sir C. Bell in
1811, he stated that, on dividing the posterior spinal nerves, no motion ensued ;
but that, on touching the anterior, the muscles of the back were instantly con-
vulsed. (p. xvii. sq.) He concluded that the anterior and posterior portions
had different functions, and that the anterior gave motion; but he went no far-
ther: and even fancied that the anterior gave sensibility also, and that the pos-
terior might have other functions altogether. Dr. Magendie, many years later,
proved that the anterior nerves gave motion only, and the posterior sensation.
(Journal de Physiologie, t. ii.) Had Sir C. Bell been aware of these, — the true
functions, —he would not have neglected to set forth a discovery which he views
in his later writings as so great.

While a branch of the trigeminum was supposed to be a nerve of taste—a
special sense, — there was a great want of uniformity in our views of its offices,
It resembled the spinal nerves, in having a ganglionic and an aganglioniec root.
The aganglionic had been.shown by Paletta to be for motion only. Every
body knew that the ganglionic portion was for sensation. For example, Blu-
menbach said, when treating of smell, that the first pair was for this sense, but the
trigeminum for the common sensibility of the nostrils. Still the ganglionic
portion was thought to be a nerve of motion also, and this was Sir C. Bell’s
opinion ; for his first experiment seemed merely to corroborate the common belief,
that the ganglionic portion was for sensation and motion. After he had made
many experiments he concluded it was for sensation only, and, although he is right
in regarding it as a nerve of sensation only, he and others appear incorrectly to
ascribe anumber of facts regarding paralysis of motion in the face to the seventh,
that really depend upon the trigeminum, though not upon the ganglionic portion
but upon the aganglionic portion, as Dr. O’ Beirne has so well shown. In fact, the
truth of the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum being for sensation only was in
some measure incorrectly inferred by Sir C. Bell from bis experiments and cases,
exceptions being passed qver or unsatisfactorily explained. They all admit,
however, of easy explanation, by referring impairments of motion on dividing
the ganglionic branches to the extensive ramifications of the aganglionic por-
tion in conjunction with those of the inferior maxillary branch ; and, where any
paralysis of motion appeared on dividing the superior maxillary branch, to the
necessary injury of one head of the levator labii superioris aleque nasi. From
reviewing every circumstance, there can be no question that Sir C. Bell’s
view,.of the ganglionic portion being for sensation only, is true. Still he has left


FUNCTIONS OF NERVES, 419


acutely sensible: the division of the former portion has the same
effect as the division of the anterior nerves; of the latter, as the
division of the posterior nerves. ‘Ghe destruction of the centre
of the spinal chord by a wire impairs neither sensation nor
motionk, nor is pain felt by the experiment: and I may remark
that, in experiments on the healthy cerebrum and cerebellum, no


_ the matter confused and anomalous, by assuming the general belief of a branch
of this nerve of common sensation or touch serving for a special sense, — for
taste. The perfect analogy of the trigeminum to the spinal nerves in having
one of its two divisions for common sensation only and one for motion is now
established by Professor Panizza, through his demonstration of the glosso-pharyn-
geal being the nerve of the special sense of taste, while the branches of the tri-
geminum going to the tongue are for its ordinary sensibility, just as those which
go to the mucous membrane of the nose endow it with the same common sensi-
bility, while the olfactory endow it with its special sense of smell. (See infra,
Chapter XXI. Own Taste.)

Dr. Magendie, finding that the division of the trigeminum deprived the nose,
eyes, &c. of the sense of touch, so that acrid substances no longer irritated, con-
cluded that it gave smell, sight, and taste, and threatened to overthrow the doctrine
of the optic nerve being for sight, the olfactory for smell, and soon. He mis-
took the loss of common feeling for the loss of the specific sensibility of the
eye, nose, &c., and his conclusions have long fallen to the ground.

The opinion that there are distinct nerves for sensation and for motion had
been entertained ever since the time of Erasistratus by many writers, from the fact
of paralytic limbs being sometimes deprived of sensation only, sometimes of
motion only, or eyen, in the latter case, becoming more sensible than previously.
In Pouteau’s @uvres Posthumes, published in 1783, vol. ii. p. 532., it was main-
tained, but the author remarked that it had long been abandoned by anatomists,
He erred in supposing that the nerves of sensation came from the cerebrum, and
those of volition from the cerebellum: as Galen erred in saying that the nerves
of sensation arose from the brain, and those of voluntary motion from the spinal
chord. Certain nerves were known to be for sensation only, as the olfactory,
optic, and acoustic; some for motion only, as the common motor of the eye, the
external and internal motor. Sommerring had pointed out that one nerve gave
motion to the tongue, another sensation; whence a man might lose his taste
and yet move his tongue as before (Hirn und Nerven, p. 255.) ; and Gall, in
1810, urged that his adversaries would find it difficult to prove that the same
nervous filament possessed the power of both feeling and motion; and that
the trigeminum pair, which supplies both sense and motion, has three distinct
roots. (Anatomie et Physiologie, t. i. p. 129. sqq.) The morbid sensibility to warmth
occasionally observed in paralysis, although the sense of touch be not morbidly
acute or be actually impaired, induced Dr. Darwin to fancy there were distinct
nerves even for the sensation of temperature. (Zoonomia, Sect, xiv. 6.)

* Dr. Magendie, Journal de Physiol. t. iii. p. 153. sq. ‘ig

EF 3


420 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


sign of sensibility appears on cutting the former to a great depth,
or the latter superficially. But the division of the trigeminum,
on the sides of the fourth ventricle, has all the effects of its di-
vision without, and severe pain attends injury of the interior and
sides of the fourth ventricle}, except as you approach the anterior
part of the spinal chord ; and there is little sensibility at the cor-
pora quadrigemina. The effects of the division of the spinal chord
are of course more extensive in proportion as the division is made
higher up; and, if made above the origin of the phrenic nerves,
which are the chief agents in causing the contraction of the in-
spiratory muscles, and consequently above the origin of all the
nerves of inspiration, death immediately ensues.™ Yet, in brutes,
after removing the head or dividing the spinal chord, if any
limb is irritated, its muscles are thrown into action: thus Sir
Gilbert Blane, after such operations in kittens a few days old,
found the hind legs to shrink from the touch of a hot wire applied
to the hind paws; and the tail to move when irritated, after the
division of the chord below the last lumbar vertebra.» More
divisions than one do not prevent this effect. Ifthe head ofa
pigeon is cut off, and the whole brain removed except a portion
to which the third pair is attached, and the optic nerve is divided,
the iris instantly contracts when the extremity of the optic nerve
is pinched.© Dr. Maeartney says that contraction of the iris
occurs from light suddenly admitted to the retina after the head
is cut off or the eye taken out.p Dr. Magendie also remarks
that, when the posterior roots of the spinal chord are irritated,
besides signs of extreme pain, the muscles below the part irritated
are thrown into action, but only on the same side of the body.
All these facts show a peculiar relation between the nerves of


1 Dr. Magendie, Précis, t.i. p. 237. 3d edit.

™ It. is thus that animals are every day killed by pithing ; in Germany I have
never seen oxen killed in any other way: a blow on the back of the neck is
sufficient to destroy rabbits. Livy informs us that, at the suggestion of As-
drubal, in the battle in which he was slain, when the Carthaginian forces were
routed, and their elephants became unmanageable, the drivers destroyed them
in a moment by one blow of a hammer upon a knife fixed between the junction
of the head and spine. (Histor. 1. xxvii. c. 49.) The division of the phrenic nerve
only does not put astop to respiration. See for instance, Bichat, Recherches
Physiol. p. 327.

" Select Dissertations on several Subjects of Medical Science. By Sir Gilbert
Blane, Bart. M.D. London, 1822. p. 262.

© Mr. Mayo, |.c. p. 231. . :

P Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association, 1834, p. 53.


FUNCTION OF THE OBLONG CHORD. 421


sensation and motion that originate at the same portions of the
nervous system.4 |

If the chorda oblongata exists, consciousness and volition be-
come evident. Mr. Lawrence saw a child with no more ence-
phalon than a bulb, which was a continuation for about an inch
above the foramen occipitale from the chorda spinalis, and to
which all the nerves inclusively from the fifth to the ninth pair
were connected.t The child’s breathing and temperature were
natural; it discharged urine and feces and took food, and at first
moved very briskly, and lived four days. M. Lallemand saw such
another which lived three days, and cried loudly.s M. Ollivier
one which not only cried and sucked, but squeezed strongly what
was put into its hand.t Unfeeling vivisectors, however, have
not been contented with such facts supplied by nature, but have
repeated them by the knife, and found that, if the cerebrum and
- cerebellum are removed in a living mammiferous brute, and the
same portion of the chorda oblongata left, the poor thing cries
on attempts being made to give it pain by pulling its whiskers or
applying pungent things to its nose or mouth, and it moves its
extremities, in order to escape from its annoyances, sometimes
for two hours. An adult hedgehog gratified Dr. Magendie by
doing all this for two hours. Cold-blooded animals live much
longer; and, the lower we descend in the scale of brutes, the
more diffused appear the powers of the nervous system: in-
deed, in the lowest there is, strictly speaking, no brain nor spinal
chord, but nervous granules, or distinct ganglions and nerves,


1 Journal de Physiologie, t. iii. p. 154.

Dr. Magendie, with Desmoulins, asserted that the spinal nerves of the python
thus sprang from but one root. But Mr. Mayo found them arise from two, asin
all the vertebrated animals. (Outlines, p. 254.)

* Medico-Chirurgical Trans. vol. v. p. 166. sqq.

* Obs. Path. p. 86. * Traité de la Moelle Epiniére, p. 155.

" Anatomie du Syst. Nerv., par MM. Magendie et Desmoulins, p. 560. Dr.
Magendie, for whose head the dogs, cats, and rabbits of France would in his active
days have offered a reward, if they had known their own interest, says, “ It is droll
to see animals skip and jump about of their own accord, after you have taken out
all their brains a little before the optic tubercles,’’ And as to “ new-born kittens,”’
he says, ‘‘ they tumble over in all directions, and walk so nimbly, if you cut out
their hemispheres, that it is quite astonishing.’’ (Journal de Physiologie, t. iii.
p- 155.) Above a century and a half ago, — in 1673, M. Duverney remoyed the
cerebrum and cerebellum from a pigeon, and found the animal “ live for some
time, search for aliment, &c.”’ (Phil. Trans. vol. xix.)

FF 4


4.22 PROGRESSION OF


which, no doubt, perform the same functions as far as required in
those animals, and are, in fact, some at least, brains also to them,
but of a different form and accommodated to their structure.* In the
same way the heart is not one mass in the cuttle-fish but three, and in
the lowest none exists,— vessels carrying on the circulation. It was,
not many years ago, customary to assert that many animals have
no nervous system. “It was reserved for the modern spirit of ob-
servation, says Professor Tiedemann, “‘to establish the presence of
nerves in many of the most inferior animals — the star-fish, actinia,
pyrosoma, ascidia, and some entozoa, in which their existence was
denied in Haller’s time.”y Professor Ehrenberg has lately shown
that the infusory animalcules possess nerves and even ganglia, as
well as eyes, muscles, and sexual and digestive organs, and pro-
bably vessels, though myriads can exist in a dot: the verticella
rotatoria being only from ;4, to ;4, of an inch in dimension.2 In
regard to brutes in which nerves are not yet found, Dr. Tiede- -
mann allows that, ‘as we perceive in these animals phenomena
which take place by the medium of nerves in animals of a more
elevated order — that is to say, sensibility and voluntary motion
— it is not improbable that, in them, the nervous substance is
mixed with the gelatinous or iit eomemirog: without shies ‘demon-
strable as a particular tissue.” . |

The higher we ascend, the more ae exist above the chorda
oblongata, till, rising from fish and reptiles, through the numerous
warm-blooded brutes, all distinguished by the relative magnitude
of each cerebral part, according to their several mental characters,
and seeing the successive additions of cerebral structure and
cerebral mass, and of intelligence, we arrive at man, in whom the
successive impositions of cerebral matter has reached its maximum,
so that the summit of the nervous system, which corresponds
with the forehead and vertex, is much larger in him than in any
brute, and his intellect and moral feelings are proportionally


* Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. i. p. 25. sqq.

Y Systematic Treatise on Comparative Physiology, by F. Tiedemann, M.D. Prof.
of Anat. and Phys. in the Univer. of Heidelberg, translated by G. J. M. Gully,
M.D., and J. H. Lane, M.D. 1834, p. 64. See my remarks, supra °, p. 4.

2 See accounts of Prof. Ehrenberg’s discoveries by Dr. Gairdner, and my
colleague Prof. Sharpey, in the Edin. New Philos. Journal, 1831, 1833.

* See Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. il. p. 252. 364. sqq.; Svo. tii. p. 153. sqq. 365.
sqq:, t. vie p. 298. sqq.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.93


gaeater.» According to the smallness of the anterior and anterior-
superior portions of the brain, will individual mental superiority
to the brute creation be small. Human idiotism may arise from
faultiness of texture, or want of power °¢, but most congenital cases
depend upon deficiency of anterior development ; and such idiots,
as well as the whole brute creation, may be regarded as examples
of cerebral mutilations, made by nature, illustrating the use of the
cerebral parts. Attempts to mutilate artificially are not calculated
to afford much information. Brutes can generally give no oppor-
tunity of minutely observing what mental change has been pro-
duced by the removal. For instance, when a writer says that the
removal of the cerebellum causes no other effect than sluggishness
in the animal, — how does he know that sexual desire is not ex-
tinguished? When various portions of brain are removed, how
can any inference be drawn, during the short existence of the
poor animal, as to the state of its various faculties and inclin-
ations? And when another asserts that, after the removal of the
hemispheres and cerebellum, we may make observations whether
the animal will copulate or not, how can he ascribe the disin-
clination that may occur to the removal, when any circumstances
of suffering, —a wound, confinement, or want of food, — will make
it very difficult to induce an animal to indulge itself with sexual
intercourse ?4 It is, besides, difficult, if not generally impossible,


> In the words of the 94th Number (already quoted above at p. 329.) of the
Edinburgh Review, now retracting its assertions : ‘ In the nervous system alone
we can trace a gradual progress in the provision for the subordination of one
animal to another, and of all to man; and are enabled to associate every faculty
which gives superiority with some addition to the nervous mass, even from the small-
est indication of sensation and will up to the highest degree of sensibility, judg-
ment, and expression. The brain is observed to be progressively improved in its
structure, and, with reference to the spinal marrow and nerves, augmented in
volume more and more, until we reach the human brain, each addition being
marked by some addition to, or amplification of, the powers of the animal, until
in man we behold it possessing some parts of which animals are destitute, and
wanting none which they possess.”

© Gall, 8vo. t. ii. p. 377.

4 See Gall, l. c. Svo. t. vi. p. 210. From page 178. to 288. are excellent re-
marks upon the unsatisfactory nature of such experiments as have been made by
Fleurens, Rolando, &c. &c. See also 4to. vol. iii. p.56., and 8vo. t. ili. p. 379. sqq.
The first three quarters of the sixth volume should be, read by all who are ac-
quainted with the writings of these experimenters, or of Tiedemann, Rudolphi,
Serres, &c. upon the brain. They will find those writers less meritorious than
they imagined.


424, INJURIES OF


to remove one cerebral organ entirely and alone. Other parts of
the encephalon, &c., are almost certain to be injured¢: and, if


e « Where is the anatomist or physiologist who precisely knows all the origins,
the whole extent, all the ramifications, all the connections of an organ? You
remove the cerebellum, at the same moment you severely injure the medulla
oblongata and spinalis, you injure the tuber annulare, you injure the tubercula
quadrigemina; consequently, your results relate not merely to all these parts, but
to all those which communicate with them, either directly or indirectly. You
think you have insulated the tubercles, but these tubercles have connections with
the corpora olivaria, the medulla oblongata, the cerebellum, the sense of vision,
and many convolutions; the thalami, optici, the corpora striata, are connected
below with the crura cerebri, the tuber annulare, the medulla oblongata, the
pyramids, and the spinal marrow ; above, with all the cerebral membrane, all
the convolutions, the non-fibrous, grey, substance of their surface, with the dif-
ferent commissures, as the anterior commissure, the great commissure or corpus
callosum ; with the fornix, the septum lucidum. Thus there does not exist a
cerebral part which we do not know to have numerous connections with other
parts. I do not except even the corpora mammilaria, the pineal gland, the in-
fundibulum, &c. The connections yet unknown are unquestionably still more
numerous.” (Gall, I. c. p. 240. sqq.) Sir C. Bell has lately imitated Gall in ob-
jecting to vivisections as a means of discovery.* Gall’s nature was most tender.
He had a horror of inflicting pain upon poor brutes, and would allow Dr. Ma-
gendie to be little more than a canicide. He always kept birds and dogs in his
house at Paris; and I have seen him kiss his horses on alighting from his carriage
at. his country house, and then stand to receive the caresses of several immense
bloodhounds which put their fore legs upon his shoulders. (See his glowing
remarks on cruelty to brutes, 1. c. 4to. vol. iv. p. 196., 8vo. t. v. p. 259. sq.)


* Phr. Trans. 1834. No doubt in complete ignorance of Gall’s writings, be-
cause he says that ‘* not. one of the great divisions of the brain has yet been dis-
tinguished by its function,” and alludes evidently to Gall’s physiological disco-
veries as the * weakest fancies that ever obscured any science.” He had said before
that Gall’s strictly inductive method “is the most extravagant departure from 4ll
the legitimate modes of reasoning ;’’ that Gall, without comprehending the grand
divisions of the nervous system, without a notion of the distinct properties of in-
dividual nerves, or having made any distinction of the columns of the spinal mar-
row, Without having ascertained the difference of cerebrum and cerebellum, &c.
(Ph. Tr. 1823.) Sir C. Bell must be in total ignorance of Gall’s works, more espe-
cially as he adopts some of Gall’s facts without mentioning his name. His folly

as been exposed by Dr. Spurzheim (Appendix to the Anatomy of the Brain.
1830. p. 23. sqq.) It is delightful to find that, even in 1823, Sir C. Bell was
harassed by the popularity of Gall’s discoveries and the difficulty of keeping
his pupils from being converts to phrenology. (Nervous System, p. 122.) We
phrenologists, however, must console ourselves with reflecting that his ignorance
is not confined to Gall’s labours, as he disfigures the Philosophical Transactions
(1834, p. 471.) by speaking of “ a minute spicula.”


THE ENCEPHALON. 425


others should not be injured, they may be influenced by the
extension of the irritation from the injury‘, and by sympathy
with the injured parts; just, for example, as we see epilepsy
from exciting causes in every part of the encephalon and from
exciting causes even in distant organs; amaurosis is frequently
induced by wounds of the supra-orbital nerve, sometimes by
wounds of the infra-orbital nerve, and of the portio duras; M.
Fleurens declares that, in cutting the semicircular canals in which
the acoustic nerves only are spread, peculiar motions occurred.
If the horizontal canal on each side was divided, horizontal
movement of the head took place from side to side, and rotation
of the whole body. Division of the inferior vertical canals on
each side produced vertical movements of the head, and caused
the animal to lie on its back. Division of the superior vertical
canals caused vertical movements of the head, but the animal lay
forwards. The direction of the inferior vertical canal is back-
wards, and of the superior forwards. If all the canals were
divided, all sorts of violent motions took place." Some parts
which have distinct names are only portions of organs, so that
injury of several parts may have the same effect;— we may
have blindness from wounding the optic nerves, the tractus
optici, or the corpora quadrigemina. Some parts which have
distinct names are compound, so that the immediate and obvious
effect of injuring them is not the only consequence which would
be observed if the others had an opportunity of becoming appa-
rent. The chorda oblongata is an instance of thisi, and all the
double nerves of sensation and motion. *


f See Gall, l. c. 8vo. t, iii. p. 409. sqq., where examples are given.

& See many cases in Mr. Wardrop’s work, On the Morbid Anatomy of the Eye,
vol, ii. p. 179. sqq. The fact is even mentioned by Hippocrates; and, what is
singular, the blindness generally arises from an imperfect division of the nerve,
and has been cured by making the division complete. The blindness has some-
times taken place instantly, sometimes come on very gradually.

h Mém. del Acad. des Sc. t. ix. p. 454. sqq.

i« The tubercula quadrigemina are a continuation of the bands of the me-
dulla oblongata and medulla spinalis. They are also formed by ganglia, one
portion of which gives origin to the fibres of the optic nerve.

“ In the same manner, the medulla oblongata is in a great measure a continu-
ation of the spinal marrow, besides containing many collections of non-tibrous
substances, which, like so many ganglions, are the origins of many nerves of
the highest importance, and relating to very different functions.


4926 INJURIES OF


Hence the contradictory and strange observations and infer-
ences of most experimenters on the brain of living brutes.! The


«« The tuber annulare is not only composed of the nervous bundles of the two
hemispheres of the cerebellum, or of the commissure of the cerebellum, but is
also a continuation of several bundles of the medulla oblongata and spinalis, of
the anterior and posterior, or inferior and superior, pyramids, and contains a
considerable quantity of non-fibrous substance interposed between the transverse
and longitudinal bundles, and giving rise to fresh filaments for the crura cerebri,
the tubercles,” &c. (Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 243. sq.)

k « You cannot insulate even the nerves of sensation before they are com-
plete. The origin of the nerves of taste is confused with the masses of the
origin of many other nerves ; the auditory is confused with the nervous and
non-fibrous masses of tle fourth ventricle; the optic nerves at first with all the
mass of the tubercles, with the corpora geniculata and their attachments, with
the crura cerebri, with the grey layer situated immediately behind their junction.
The olfactory nerves are at first intimately connected with the grey substance
placed upon the interior and inferior convolutions of the middle lobes, with the
anterior cerebral cavities,” &c. (1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 245.)

1 Fontana says that, after removing the brain of a turtle and entirely empty-
ing the cranium, the animal lived six months, and walked as before. M. Rolando
attempted the experiment repeatedly, but the animal always died as soon as a
cut was made behind the cerebellum.

M. Rolando says that he ‘‘ made innumerable experiments upon goats, lambs,
pigs, deer, dogs, cats, and guinea-pigs, to ascertain the results of lesion of the
tubercles, and parts near the optic thalami, but rarely obtained the same results.”
M. Rolando says that lesion of the thalam optici causes convulsions; M.
Fleurens denies it. (Gall, 1. c. t. vi. p. 191.) M. Rolando found an unsteadi-
ness like that of intoxication follow the removal of two thirds of the lobes of
the cerebrum from a chicken. M. Fleurens declares that he must have wounded
the cerebellum. M. Fleurens protests that the results of the experiments of M.
Rolando are contradictory to each other (p. 215.): and, after finding a chicken
walk, fly, and swallow, shake its wings, and clean them withits beak, subsequently
to losing the hemispheres of its brain, infers that these are the residence of the
understanding and feelings, and that the cerebellumis destined to balance, to regu-
late motion ; yet birds, after losing these parts, pecked and clawed their enemies,
and perched. (p. 266.) M. Rolando considers muscular action to depend upon
the cerebellnm; yet Dr. Magendie found animals perform regular motions after
losing it.

In the Report of the Physiology of the Nervous System, read at the British As-
sociation in 1833, in which Gall’s name is not once mentioned, the compiler,
after saying, ‘“‘ But there does appear sufficient evidence to prove that those
volitions, which have motion for an effect, whatever be their origin, whether in
the cerebrum, cerebellum, or medulla oblongata, require for their accomplishment
the co-operation of the cerebellum,” declares further on, that ‘‘a duck, whose cere-


THE ENCEPHALON. 4.2°7


same effects moreover do not occur in the same experiments upon
different species of animals. The observation of nature’s own
mutilations in brutes which have little or no development of parts
that are large in others, or in man, is therefore preferable ; and
next to this comes the observation of morbid changes of different
parts,—a subject, however, incapable of affording information till
the faculties had been ascertained by Gall. (See supra, p.349.sqq-)
Still some results of mutilating the living brain appear generally
allowed, and are not at all in contradiction to phrenology. The ex-
periments of M. Fleurens are allowed by Gall to be very ingenious,
and sometimes satisfactory™; and, with respect to injuring the
cerebellum, Gall remarks, “we must never forget that the same
part may have its general vital function and its particular animal
function. If it is true that the lesion of the tubercles in birds
always causes convulsions, it is not less true that the tuber-
cles are destined to vision; and in the same way the cerebellum
(connected as it is with the medulla oblongata, &c.) may partici-
pate in the vital function of the medulla oblongata and spinalis,
may give rise to disturbed motion when injured, and yet have its


bellum had been destroyed,” by Dr. Magendie, “swam backwards,—could swim
only backwards” (p. 69.): and Dr. Magendie shows that it is requisite to neither
sensation nor motion; for, when, after having robbed hedgehogs and guinea-pigs
of their cerebrum and cerebellum, he kindly held a bottle of refreshing vinegar
under their nostrils, they rubbed their little noses with their paws! And he says
that he has over and over again seen animals performing very regular movements
after he had disburthened them of the whole of their cerebellum. (Précis, t. i.
p- 408.) In opposition to M. Fleurens, MM. Foville and Pinel Grand-Champs
ascribe to the cerebellum the function of sensation.

M. Fleurens, after removing the cerebrum, declared all sensation and vo-
lition to be lost. M. Bouillaud found animals so deprived give signs of pain
and exert will in endeavouring to escape. (Dr. Magendie’s Journal, t. x. p. 36.
sqq-) M. Fleurens infers that the lobes of the cerebrum concur as a whole in
their functions, and that, when one sense is lost, all are lost. But M. Bouil-
laud, on remoying the anterior lobes, found that dogs, rabbits, pigeons, hens,
saw, smelt, and moved voluntarily; but were indifferent to familiar sounds,
persons, places, or things. In fact, he found Gall’s assertion true, — that, though
sensation was independent of the anterior part of the brain, the faculty called by
Gall sense of things (objects as wholes), and those of language, places, and per-
sons, were altogether dependent upon the anterior part. The result of M. Bouil-
laud’s experiments made him a strenuous phrenologist.

™ I]. ¢c, t. vi. p. 249.


428 INJURIES OF


own particular animal functions.”" That animals should skip and
jump, and eat, after losing their hemispheres, is not surprising, if
these parts perform the phrenological functions assigned to them
and are not necessary to motion. The chorda oblongata and other
lower parts of the encephalon have, no doubt, much to do with
motion as well as the chorda spinalis. Accordingly, when the
oblongata was pressed in the child mentioned by Mr. Lawrence
convulsions eccurred ; and the same effect ensued on irritating it,
in Gall’s experiments and those of Lorry.° Pressure of it, how-
ever, is also said by vivisectors to occasion stupor.

Dr. Magendie, who cut living animals here and there with no
definite object, but just to see what would happen, informs us,
that, ;

1. Deep cuts of the hemispheres do not affect motion in mam-
malia, reptiles, fish, and many birds, any more than their entire
removal: but the latter is said to occasion blindness in mammalia
and birds, though not in fish or frogs, probably from the arrange-
ment of the cerebral parts being different, so that a similar wound
affects different organs. Neither a longitudinal section of the
mesolobe, nor its removal, has any more effect on motion.

2. If the whzte substance of both corpora striata is cut away
with the hemispheres, the animal darts forward against all objects
in its way, and retains the attitude of progression, if prevented.P
If the injury is to the grey portion, or to the white of one corpus
striatum only, motion is not interfered with. When a thalamus
was removed from a poor animal moving forwards after this mu-
tilation, it ceased to attempt advancing, but began to turn to
the corresponding side; and, when the other thalamus was next
cut away, it became still, with its head inclined backwards. M.
Fodéra had found that the removal of a part of the cerebellum


"], c. t. iii. p. 385. sq. Dr. Vimont also conceives that the cerebellum is not
simple. Finding its processus vermiformis very large in climbing and remark-
ably sure-footed animals, he imagines that it will be found somehow connected
with motion. (Il. c. t. ii. p. 242.) 1835. Mr. S. Solly lately stated to the
Royal Society that he has traced a superficial and a deep-seated layer of fibres
from the anterior columns of the spinal chord into the cerebellum.

© Gall, 8vo. 1. c. t. iil, p. 392.

P Yet Drs. Foville and Pinel Grand-Champs fancied that the anterior lobes
and corpora striata presided over the motions of the inferior extremities ; and
the posterior lobes and thalami over those of the superior.

1 Report of Brit, Assoc, 1833.


THE ENCEPHALON. 4.29


always caused motion backwards, or a corresponding attitude.
Injuries of one side of it paralysed the same side of the body,
as the fibres of the restiform bodies do not decussate like the
anterior pyramids.‘ But Dr. Hertwig asserts that injuries of the
cerebellum affect the opposite side, just as Gall found removal
of the testis affect the opposite lobe of the cerebellum. Dr.
Magendie often found animals perform very regular movements
after the removal of the cerebellum; yet he observed that the
removal and wounds of it to a certain depth, and of the chorda
oblongata §, gave mammalia and birds a tendency to move back-
wards, though the same effect does not occur in fish, which, after
the loss of their cerebellum, swim as usual.

3. In a vertical section of a crus of the cerebellum, or of the
mesocephalon from before backwards, the animal immediately
rolled forcibly towards the same side, making sometimes sixty
revolutions in a minute; and the corresponding eye was directed
forwards and downwards, the other backwards and upwards. After
the division of a crus, animals continued rolling, and with their
eyes thus directed, for eight days. If both crura were divided,
all motion ceased, and the eyes resumed their natural state.t. A
similar vertical section downwards of the cerebellum from before
backwards half way on one side of the central line, through the
whole substance of the arch over the fourth ventricle, or of the
mesocephalon upwards, had the same effects, and the motion was
the more rapid as the section was nearer to the mesocephalon.
When an incision of one half of the cerebellum had set an
animal rolling to that side, an incision of the opposite crus arrested
the rolling and caused the eyes to resume their natural position.
A vertical incision downwards in the median line of the cere-
bellum caused the animal to attempt motion, but deprived it of
the power of balancing itself. Its eyes rolled and started, and its
fore legs were rigid and extended forwards. ¥

4, If the fourth ventricle is exposed and the cerebellum re-
moved, a perpendicular incision in the chorda oblongata on one side


T Journal de Physique, July, 1823.

® If ever he amused himself by sticking pins in the chorda oblongata of pigeons,
the birds thus ornamented by him would walk and fly backwards for above a
month ! (Précis, t.i. p. 409.)

t Journal, t. iv. p. 403.

" Journal de Physiol. t.iv. All these points were ascertained on noticing the
effect of a wound made unintentionally in a crus.


430 INJURIES OF


of the median line, near the outside of the anterior pyramid, will
cause a rabbit four months old to turn to the right, if made on the
right side; and to the left, if made on the left.

5. Notwithstanding the decussation of the anterior pyramids, a
division of one or both had no sensible effect, except, perhaps,
that of retarding motion a little; the section of the corpora
restiformia does not seem to affect general motion; and a com-
plete division of one half of the chorda oblongata neither affects
sensibility nor prevents irregular motions, though the power of
volition appears lost on the same side.

The same phenomena occur in disease. Persons labouring
under hysteria or chorea sometimes reel violently or spin round.*
Persons have been known to feel an impulse to move forwards
or backwards.y An infinite variety, however, of extraordinary
and regular movements also occur, and frequently vertigo attends
them, whatever their variety. Vertigo cannot be their cause, as
they are so various in different cases, and they or it frequently
exist alone.

From these experiments I draw no inference. The consider-
ations already mentioned prevent me from concluding that the
parts which are cut are the sole organs concerned in giving origin
to the peculiar motions, that their sole purpose is for such mo-
tions, or even that peculiar motions depend originally upon them.
We can only say, as in the undoubted and numerous cases of
amaurosis following an injury of the supra-orbital or infra-
orbital nerve, and as in regard to the peculiar motion said by


x See Med. Chir. Trans. vol. v. p. 1. sqq., also vol. vii. p. 237. sqq-

M. Serres mentions a drunken shoemaker who spun round till he died, and
in whom the only morbid appearance was disease of a crus cerebelli, (Dr. Ma-
gendie’s Journ. t. iv. p. 405. sq.) .

y Inaman who had an irresistible desire to move forwards, tubercles were found
particularly at the anterior part of the hemispheres. (Dr. Magendie, Journal de
Physiol. t. iii.) I have seen several epileptic youths with this propensity. They
would walk away toa very considerable distance, without knowing why ; and this
repeatedly. A hemiplegic young man would walk upwards of 50 miles from
home, and be lost for a considerable time. I frequently see persons with a pro-
pensity to precipitate themselves forwards. In some there is desire merely to
leave their abode, and they walk to gratify this, or travel by some conveyance.
Dr. Laurent exhibited a girl at the Académie Royal de Médecine, who, in irre-
gular hysteric attacks, rushed rapidly backwards, (Dr. Magendie, Précis de Phys.
p- 409. sq.)


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4:31


M. Fleurens to occur on division of the branches of the acoustic
nerve, that such effects ensue. In hemiplegia, disease is frequently
found in a corpus striatum; and some have endeavoured to prove
that paralysis of an upper or lower extremity is attended by dis-
ease in this part or that, but the coincidences are not such as to
warrant any conclusion.


In foetuses full grown, without. encephalon or spinal chord 4, the
circulation, nutrition, secretion, &c. proceed equally as in others,
which, besides spinal chord, nerves, and ganglia, possess a brain.@
These mutilations by nature are conclusive, and render all vivi-
sections on the points unnecessary. Further, the heart and arteries
are formed in the foetus before the encephalon and spinal chord,
and therefore cannot depend on them for power and excitement.
Vegetables absorb, assimilate, circulate, secrete, and in many in-
stances contract on the application of stimuli, and yet are not


2 See Morgagni, Ep. 48. No. 50.; Van Horne, Curios. Miscell. Dec. 1. an. 3.
obs. 129.: Kerkring, Spic. Anat. obs. 23.; Littre, Hist. de ? Acad. des Sciences,
170L.7p. 24..; Mery, 1. c.. 1712, p. 38.3. Fauvel,. le,.c. 1711) p. 26.:;...Sue,
l. c. 1746;, M. Roux, Mém. sur ’ Anencéphalie, 1825; all quoted by Dr.
Brachet, Recherches Expérimentales sur le Systeme Ganglionaire. Paris, 1830, p. 83.
sqq- p- 69. sqq., for instances of the absence of the spinal chord.

Also, Phil. Trans. 1775. * ‘

Brainless foetuses are not uncommon.

A foetus attached to another has been minutely described by Dr. Mayer of
Berlin, in Graefe’s Journal, t. x., without brain, spinal chord, or encephalo-
spinal nerves. There was one nervous twig accompanying the renal artery, and
arising apparently from the renal plexus, which, with the mesenteric, existed
and had ganglia. }

Imperfect foetuses have been seen, with some organs evolved, though not
even nerves could be discovered. See Phil. Trans. 1793. See on this subject
the excellent remarks of Dr. Marshall, in his works edited by Mr. Sawrey in
1814, and already quoted.

a «¢ A girl lived to the age of eleven years, with the use of her senses, and with
voluntary motion, weak it is true, but sufficient for her wants, and even for pro-
gression.” ‘ After death no cerebellum nor mesocephalon could be found.” (Dr.
Magendie, Précis, t.i. p. 414., and Journal, t. xi.) Here was one of Nature’s
own mutilations, without mechanical injury or disturbance of other parts; and,
with patience till it occurred, a multitude of innocent animals would have escaped
cruel and disgusting vivisections, and an attempt would not have been made to
prove that the cerebellum was necessary to motion or secretion, or to prevent
involuntary motions backwards.—The girl had prurigo pudendi, and frequently
scratched herself. Some antiphrenologists therefore inferred that she mastur-
bated and showed sexual desires, although she had no cerebellum !


GG


432 FANCIED FUNCTIONS’ OF


thought to possess nerves. I cannot but believe the blood pos-
sessed of vitality ; and, if it be not, still a clot of fibrine sponta-
neously becomes vascular without the aid of nerves, though
they may be subsequently produced. Muscles, after the division
of the nerves which connect them with the encephalon or spinal
chord, contract equally as before, when irritated ; nay, if they
are over-excited by any means and exhausted, and are then allowed
repose, they absolutely recover themselves and obey the stimulus
again, In animals liable to torpor, the season of torpidity pro-
duces its effects equally upon those muscles whose encephalo-
spinal nerves have been divided, and equally if the encephalon
and spinal chord, &c. are destroyed. In sleep and even coma, the
action of the heart, &c. continues ; and, even after the removal or
gradual destruction of the encephalon, spinal chord, or encephalo-
spinal nerves, the heart still continues to act and the blood to
circulate, provided respiration is artificially supported >, — for
respiration depends upon the excitement of the muscles by
means of nerves of motion springing from the cervical portion
of the spinal chord, and these nerves are excited through the
sensation of the want of respiration, conveyed to the chorda
oblongata, as Dr. Brachet makes probable, by the pneumono-
gastric pair, which appears to give sensibility to the pha-
rynx, larynx, cesophagus, stomach, and lungs*,—parts in all


b Duverney, whose experiments on a pigeon in 1673 I mentioned at page 421.,
also removed the cerebrum from a dog, without a fatal result for some time: the
removal of the cerebellum was instantly fatal. Yet, by instituting artificial re-
spiration, he sustained life for-an hour after the removal of the cerebellum. In
one experiment, the dog “ lived twenty-four hours, and his heart beat well.”
The instantly fatal result of the division of the spinal chord he prevented also by
artificial respiration, and found that the motion of the heart continued and the
animal could move his body. “(Phil. Trans. vol. xix.)

Spallanzani removed the brain, without injury to the organic functions. (Ezxr-
périences sur la Circulation: ouvrage traduit de |’ Italien, p. 377. Généve, 1783.)
Fontana injured the brain and spinal chord with no more effect. (Sur le Vénin
dela Vipére. Florence, 1781, t. ii. p. 169.)

Experiments, &c., by A. P. Wilson Philip, M.D., and Wm. Clift, Philos.
Trans. 1815.

Also, Experimental Inquiry, by the former. London, 1826. 3d edit. Dr.
Brachet has lately repeated these experiments. upon warm and cold blooded
animals. (Rech. Expér. p. 73. sq.)

And lastly, Fleurens, Mémoires de ? Acad. des Sc. t.X. 1830.-

¢ Dr. Le Gallois ( ELxpériences sur le Principe de la Vie, p. 247. sqq- 1812)
first pointed out that a perfectly anencephalous foetus cannot live after birth,


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 433


which sensation is most important. All the organic or nutri-
tive functions proceed: nails grow, wounds heal, vesicatories


— that respiration will not take place without the portion of the chorda oblon-
gata connected with the pneumono-gastric. The pneumono-gastric are also
nerves of motion to the larynx and trachea; and are distributed to the liver,
spleen, kidneys, and duodenum, — probably to convey impressions to them from
the brain under emotion, and to give them sensibility enough for sensation under
causes of great irritation.

The pneumono-gastric on each side gives off, 1. The superior laryngeal, which
runs to the membrane of the glottis (see Mr. Swan, On the Nerves, plate xvi.,
Expl. of Plates, p. xlviii.), and therefore gives it sensibility, and to the arytenoid
museles which close it, as well as the crico-thyroid muscle which raises the
cricoid cartilage. (Dr. Magendie, Mém. sur l’ Usage de V Epiglotte dans la Déglu-
tition, &c.)

2. Twigs to numerous parts in the neck, to the facial, lingual, and three upper
cervical nerves, to the cardiac plexuses, the pulmonary plexuses, and the sym-
pathetic nerve.

3. The inferior laryngeal or recurrent nerves (see Mr. Swan, 1. c.), which
supply ‘‘ the membrane of the trachea as high as the membrane covering the
posterior part of the cricoid cartilage,” and the transverse fibres at the back of
the trachea, “* and ultimately divide into branches which terminate in the lateral
crico-arytenoid and thyro-arytenoid muscles,’’ (see papers by Dr. H. Ley, Lond.
Med. Gazette, June 20. 1835,) besides giving branches of communication with
many other nerves. On account of their supplying the membrane of the glottis,
Dr. Brachet found that, after removing a portion of the pneumono-gastric nerves
from which they spring, a ball of orris-root or a few drops of muriatic or acetic
acid might be admitted into the trachea of a dog without uneasiness; whereas,
while the nerves were entire, a drop of blood in the trachea induced cough, and
the balls and acids most violent cough, which instantly ceased on the division of
the nerve, and was succeeded by mucous rattle without expectoration, the mucus
no longer exciting sensation, nor the muscles possessing power for its expulsion 5
and death ensued in less than an hour. (Rech, Expér. p167.) As the recurrents
supply the opening muscles of the glottis, the division of those nerves causes the
death of young animals, since in them the rima glottidis is narrow; in the older,
or in animals whose rima glottidis is of such a form that its sides cannot touch,
dyspnoea and a croaking sound of the voice instantly follow from their approxi-
mation. *


* Dr. Le Gallois, Hxpériences sur le Principe de la Vie.

Some think that filaments go from the recurrents to the closing muscles also ;
but Dr. H. Ley conjectures, with probability, “that these, together with the ana-
stomosing branches of the superior laryngeal and the recurrent, are intended for
those rapid and delicate associated actions connected with the voice by which
the chords vocales are rendered more or less tense, and their vibrating portions
longer or shorter; whilst the main branches, described by Mr. Swan as termi-


GG g


434 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


produce blisters, fractured bones and soft parts unite, in limbs.
which are perfectly paralysed. But the involuntary functions
are- closely connected with the encephalon and spinal chord;
for the sudden destruction of these parts, or of a certain ex-
tent of them, puts a stop to the circulation. This, however,


The pneumono-gastric next supply the membrane of the bronchiz and air-
cells, so that, after their division, an animal may be plunged into water without
any uneasiness or effort at respiration, although previously violent struggles
ensued ; or the animal may be kept in confined air or nitrogen, and, although
it still breathes and laboriously; it gradually dies, we are told, without any suf-
fering. We breathe from an uneasy sensation; but, ‘after the division of these
nerves, the want. is little felt. Respiration continues for a time, probably from
some nervous connection ; for, if the origin of the nerves in the chorda oblongata
is destroyed, respiration ceases at once.* Dr. Brachet believes that all ex-
citement of .the heart by the brain, even though the cause be pain induced any
where, is communicated by the pneumono-gastric ; for excitement of the heart
from causes of pain ceased on the division of these nerves, and did not occur if they
were divided before their application ; nor would irritation of the upper extremity
of the divided nerve, or of the brain, excite the heart.

They give sensation, we have seen, and also, according to some, motion, to
the stomach. -According to Dr. Brachet, the stomach still acts but antiperistal-

_ tically, so that its muscular excitability does not depend upon the nerve, though
it may be acted upon through the nerve. On irritating its oesophageal plexus, the
cesophagus and stomach contract, and, after its division, their peristaltic action
ceases. T

4 Dr. Le Gallois, Sur le Principe dela Vie ; and Dr, Wilson Philip, Exper.
Inquiry. Probably by excessive stimulus, as the voluntary muscles are after-
wards insensible to stimuli, although, .after a mere division of their nerves, they
retain their excitability.


nating in the opening muscles of the glottis, are for the purpose of those grosser
movements of the rima glottidis connected with respiration and deglutition.”

* In considering the continuance of respiration after division of these nerves,
and the occasional occurrence of rattling and apparently laborious breathing
without any suffering for even a long time before the death of some persons, we
must reflect how faint an uneasy sensation causes us almost unconsciously to
will an action, — how we wink all day, and hem, without thinking of the sens-
ations which excite our will, or thinking of the exertion of our will. A person
may have sensation enough in the lungs to make him breathe, and yet not enough
to make him suffer. When dogs plunged in water after the division are said to
have made no effort to breathe, I presume that the faint sensation induced them
to make a faint effort, but was not sufficient to induce them to contend for re-
spiration, as they must have done, from the absence of air.

~ + Drs. Tiedemann and Gmelin, Recherches sur la Digestion. Drs. Breschet and
Edwards, Arch. Génér. de Médecine, 1821.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 435


is no more than happens if any important part of the body re-
ceives an injury, or if any unimportant part is extensively in-
jured ;—if a leg is crushed or falls into gangrene, the whole
system suffers, though a leg may be removed and the system be
none the worse.e The application of stimuli to the encephalon
or spinal chord excites the action of the heart, and, even after
its removal, of the capillaries: but stimulus to any important
part will stimulate others; and even to an unimportant part, if
the stimulus. is strong. The passions do the same: but they
influence all parts ; and, though a due excitement of the passions
is necessary to the health of all parts, it is only because the
body thrives best as a whole when each part fully performs its
functions. Compression of the brain causes slowness of the pulse
and constipation; but this is only such a sympathetic influence
as may exist between any parts. It appears, from Dr. Brachet’s
experiments, that irritation of the brain affects other parts by
means of the pneumono-gastric; for its division prevented all
effects of the brain upon the heart.f

The removal of a piece of the pneumono-gastric, or the de-
struction of that part of the chorda oblongata with which it is
connected or of a considerable portion of the chorda spinalis,
heavily impairs the functions of the lungs and of the stomachs,
putting a stop, some say to the muscular action of the stomach,
others to the secretion of gastric juice and to digestion. The


© The hearts of six decapitated robbers beat strongly and regularly for nearly
half an hour; and after a man’s cerebrum and cerebellum were blown off by an
explosion of fire-arms, the respiration and circulation continued above half an
hour. (Dr. Brachet, 1. c., p. 80. sq.)

f Rech. Expér. p. 118.

& Le Gallois, 1. c., and many former writers.

Dr. Philip conceives this influence of the brain and spinal chord to be gal-
vanic, as he prevented the ill effects of the removal of a piece of the pneumono-
gastric nerve upon the lungs and stomach, by supplying these organs with gal-
vanic influence. (I. c. p. 210. sqq.) Dr. Brachet, however, equally succeeded by
mechanically irritating the end of the portion of the divided nerve running to the
stomach.

Division of the nerve had no effect if the divided ends lay opposite each other,
although a quarter of an inch intervened. (Dr. W. Philip, 1. c. p. 226. sqq.)

A mechanical stimulus, or a substance in its nature stimulating, applied to
the brain about the origin of the nerves, excites contractions in the voluntary
muscles ; a substance in its own nature stimulating excites the heart and capil-
laries, when applied to any part of the brain or spinal chord, but requires to
be applied to a considerable portion. (Dr. Philip, 1. c.)

GG 3


436 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


animal may continue quietly to eat till the stomach is enormously
distended; and this, no doubt, because the stomach is deprived
of its sensibility so that its distension is no longer felt, and the
animal, though it must at the same time be insensible to the pangs
of hunger in it, continues to eat from habit or the pleasure of
masticating.2 We need not suppose its muscular power to be
destroyed by the injury of the nervous system, because continued
eating must produce over-distension, though the power of con-
traction be, before the over-distension, unimpaired, Dr. Philip
maintains that the injury suppresses the secretion of gastric juice
and digestion; but Drs. Leuret and Lassaigne assert that di-
gestion proceeds as before, though even:six inches of each nerve
be removed in the horse; and Sir B. Brodie and Dr. Magendie
found digestion uninfluenced, if the division was made, not in
the neck, but close to the stomach; and, again, Dr. Magendie
found digestion proceed in brutes after the removal of the cere-
brum and cerebellum. (See supra, p. 87.)

The division or ligature of the pneumono-gastric nerve has
been a favourite experiment with endless vivisectors from the
time of Galen himself; but I believe that Dr. Le Gallois was the
first to point out that the blood experiences no longer the
chemical changes in the lungs, but their air-cells become filled
with frothy mucus, their substance gorged with blood, and their
surface marked with dark patches. The engorgement and black
patches result, however, merely from the want of changes in the
blood; and this partly from’ the animal scarcely feeling the want
of respiration; so that in a rabbit the respirations instantly become
very slow, —an instance analogous to the slow breathing of sleep
and the much slower of apoplexy, in which states the want of
respiration is less perfectly felt; and partly from the stay of all
the mucus in the air-cells and tubes, which, like the stomach,
have lost their sensibility, so that, the quantity of mucus not being


» Dr. Le Gallois found that, after this division, a guinea-pig would eat, from
habit or the pleasure of the mouth, till its belly was as long as its body ;, and the
cesophagus would also become distended, sensation being lost and muscular
power paralysed. Dr. Brachet kept animals without food, and they showed all
the signs of hunger. He divided the pneumono-gastric, and then offered them
food. But they were now indifferent to it; and, on being enticed to eat it, they
ate on till the stomach would hold no more and the esophagus was filled.
The cessation of muscular action might be the result of merely the loss of sen
sibility.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.37


felt, none is expectorated, and mucous rattle occurs in the trachea.
The blood, consequently, is no longer exposed properly to the air.
These changes are declared to happen even after death, if the ex-
periment is made as soon as the animal is killed; but I really
doubt this. |

Every point of the body communicates with the brain by
means of nerves: since, on the one hand, every point of the
organisation either is sensible or may by disease acquire sensi-
bility and communicate painful sensation to the braini; and, on
the other, menta! emotions, continued or violent, may affect any
point. We cannot, therefore, be surprised to see nerves pass
between the encephalon or spinal chord and parts which ordi-
narily have no sensation and are never under the influence of
volition. Indeed, many parts considered insensible are at all times
destined to give some variety of sensation, under certain circum-
stances, without any morbid sensibility. The want of chemical
change in the lungs for less than a minute so impedes the passage
of blood through them, that we have an uneasy sensation: the
stomach feels hunger, and it, and the intestines, and urinary
bladder, feel distension every day in health: the ligaments, un-
doubtedly, give a peculiar sensation if a joint is over distended :
and the testis or coats of the testis when compressed.k The func-
tions of the lungs and stomach could not easily proceed without
sensation. Inthe one we feel the want of air, if we interrupt
the function, as we continually do when talking and eating and
performing many other acts, in all which we are compelled to
attend to respiration by an uneasy feeling : without sensation in the
stomach, supplies of food would not be given to it and regulated.
The necessity for almost continual sensation in the lungs and
stomach explains why a nerve goes directly from the brain to these
organs,— the pneumono-gastric. The end of the intestines and
the bladder require habitual sensation for their functions, and they
are well supplied from the spinal chord. The functions of the rest


* In nervous disturbance, the parts which carry on the organic functions
without sensation sometimes acquire such sensibility that the ordinary silent
processes appear attended with sensations: at any rate, unusual sensations are
felt in such parts.

® I have compressed the tunica vaginalis and the albuginea when the testis
was atrophied after mumps, and great pain was felt. Still, although nothing but
membranes appeared left, there probably was a portion of the gland, as pressure
of the vas deferens is equally painful.


GG 4


438 . FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


of the intestinal tube, of the liver, kidneys, and absorbents, &c. of
the abdomen require no sensation in health ; and sensation, there-
fore, occurs in them only under unhealthy influences, and they
neither require nor have communication with the brain beyond
such an amount as all parts possess for occasional sensation and the
sympathetic influence of the mental affections of the brain, and
that influence which it, like all other organs, exerts at all times on
all parts. There is thus a sufficient reason for the presence of
encephalo-spinal nerves where there is no volition, and where
ordinarily no sensation occurs, without ascribing nutritive or
functional influence to them.
Although the division of the spinal chord or of its nerves, or
compression or disorganisation of these or of parts of the brain,
prevents voluntary power over the corresponding muscles, without
suspending the circulation, &c. in them, and does not impede the
functions of the lungs or stomach; yet circulation, and, what are
dependent upon it, — nutrition and frequently animal heat, — are
evidently impaired. Sir Everard Home found that, by dividing
the nerves running to the horn of a buck, the temperature of the
horn fell about 6° below that of the other, and, as the divided
ends advanced in the process of re-union, the temperature rose
again towards a level.!_ Palsied limbs are often colder than others,
or,as Dr. Abercrombie enounces the fact more accurately, are more
easily cooled and heated, — follow variation of external tempera-
ture more, — than others. Palsied limbs waste, and the ends of the
palsied fingers are very pale, and the nails blue from time to time, for
want of use. Division of the trigeminum pair of nerves close to the
brain causes inflammation of the eye and cloudiness of the cornea;
and its division at its ganglion Gasseri produces opacity of the
cornea and ulceration and destruction of the eye.™ The at-
tempt to cure morbid sensibility of the horse’s foot by dividing
its nerves has been relinquished on account of the frequent
separation of the hoof after the operation. Injury of the lumbar
spine frequently occasions alcaline urine. In hectic fever,
sweat breaks forth generally as soon as the patient falls asleep,
— as soon as the brain becomes inactive. Some persons have
large quantities of acid rise into the mouth, and suffer other
dyspeptic symptoms, if they fall asleep after dinner. It is indeed
maintained that in paralytic parts the muscles only waste, and


1 Phil. Trans. 1826.
™ Dr. Magendie, Journal de Physiologie, t. iv.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. A39


their atrophy is ascribed to want of use. The loss of the hoof
after division of the nerves is said by Mr. Youat to occur only
when considerable inflammation is present at the time; that the
horse, having no sensation in the part, knocks it about, and in-
creases the inflammation to such a point, according to him, that
the hoof is detached: he assures me that, if no severe inflam-
mation is present at the time of the operation, the hoof is not
lost.

Now, such among these effects of division or incapacitation in
any way of parts of the nervous system as cannot be attributed
to indirect circumstances, do not, in my opinion, militate against
the numerous general facts already mentioned of the independence
of the organic properties and functions upon the nervous system.
I do not see that we are justified in considering these results as
more than instances of the sympathetic influence of one part
upon another. All parts influence each other and the whole sys-
tem exclusively of their peculiar functions. The encephalo-spinal
nervous system must be like all other parts in this respect: and
yet every result of their injury on other parts is strangely re-
garded as a proof of dependency upon them. Besides its functional
powers and influences, its condition, even as to its structure and
organic functions, must sympathetically affect other parts, —a
fact too often overlooked, and thus power has been presumed for
it without reason. When the kidneys are in such a state that they
produce sugar, a mental impulse is destroyed, and the power of the
genitals is lost. Under diabetes a man usually has no sexual im-
pulse and is impotent, yet no one supposes that the faculty of the
brain known as sexual desire, or the vigour of the genitals, depends
upon thekidneys. The brainis besides especially connected with
every other part of the body, and is one of the most important or-
gans which exist. The effect, therefore, which any injury of it must
have over other parts must be very great. But children live and
eat and preserve their temperature for many days, though born
without brains; and we have seen what was borne by brutes in
the experiments of Duverney and his imitators. Nay, we have
seen that injury of nerves not supplying a part will injure it ; just
as the extremities may be absent or removed without injury to
the functions at large, and yet diseased states or severe injuries
of them may destroy the system. Injury of nerves, just as of
any other organs in proportion to their importance, may affect
parts, not which they supply, but with which they are connected :


44.0 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


amaurosis and even cataract may follow wounds of the nerves
belonging, not to the eye, but to the face; and convulsions may
follow wounds of the acoustic nerve. Although disease of the
spine injures the renal secretion of urine and causes inflammatory
excitement of the mucous membrane of the bladder, disease of
the kidney frequently produces such an affection of the corre-
sponding part of the spinal chord, and consequent paraplegia»,
that both are ascribable to sympathy only; for no person would
consider the spinal chord as depending on the kidney for its
power. Castration prevents the horns of the buck from coming,
or from growing longer and being shed; and the removal of the
boar’s tusks destroys his violent sexual propensity °: yet these
effects are not thought to show dependence, but merely con-
nection.

Although the involuntary and unconscious functions do not ap-
pear to depend upon the encephalo-spinal system, an argument in
favour of their dependence upon the ganglions and ganglionic
nefves; properly so called, is the fact,— that the ganglionic system
of nerves is formed before the encephalon and spinal chord; in-
deed, the nervous system of the chest and abdomen are fully
formed, while the brain appears still a pulpy mass.p These
ganglia and nerves, it may be urged, would hardly be formed
before the encephalon and spinal chord but for the sake of the
organs which they supply, and the functions of which (with the
exception of the genitals) are as perfect at birth as at adult age ;
while the brain and its mental powers are slowly perfected.
Although the encephalon and spinal chord may be absent in
monsters 4, the ganglionic system is, perhaps, always perfect, un-
less in extreme deviation, where the nervous system may be
diffused invisibly, as in some lower animals. But I do not know


. See a paper by Mr. Stanly, full of interesting facts, in the Med. Chir. Trans.
vol. xviii.

° Lisle On Husbandry, quoted by the Rev. Gilb. Me Nat. Hist. and
Antiq. of Selborne, 1837. p. 304. sq.

P Gall, l.c. 8vo.t. i. p. 191. See also 4to. vol. iii. p.239. sq.

9 Lobstein, p. 52. sqq. De Nervo Sympathetico, 1823, relates six cases of ab-
sent brain and other organs, where the ganglionic system was perfect or even
remarkably large; and Dr. Cayre relates the dissection of nine idiots, in whom
the encephalo-spinal system was diseased and wasted, the ganglionic healthy.
Nowveau Journ. de Méd. t.iv. In Gall’s 4to edit. vol. i. p. 37. sqq. will be
found a history of the hypotheses respecting the use of the ganglia, as well as in
Lobstein’s more recent work.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 44]


that it has ever been absent. The heart never exists without its
ganglion; so that the cardiac ganglion, as the heart is the first
organ that comes into action, is the commencement of the nervous
system. |

A striking difference is observed in the structure of ganglionic
nerves and the effect of injuries upon them. Bichat asks, ‘* What
anatomist has not been struck with the difference between the
cerebral and ganglionic nerves? Those of the brain are larger,
more numerous, whiter, denser, subject to fewer variations. On
the other hand, extreme tenuity, considerable number, especially.
at the plexuses, a grey colour, remarkable softness, and very
frequent varieties, are the characters of the ganglionic nerves,
if you except those which communicate with the ee and
some of those which unite” the ganglia. *

If these nerves are cut, or their ganglia torn, some assert that
no pain is produced. Dr. Brachet declares that he found the spinal
nerves running to the sympathetic ganglia to be very sensible:
the nerves running from and between ganglia to be insensible,
unless inflamed, and, when inflamed, to become sensible, but at the
inflamed point only, and to lose their sensibility again if the twigs
of communication with the spine were divided: a ganglion to
be sensible or insensible accordingly as a point in it was touched
or not in which a spinal nerve ran, and to lose all sensibility on
the division of the nerve connecting it with the spine; to be very
sensible if inflamed, but insensible again on the division of the
spinal nerve.s If all the ganglia of the neck are removed, and
even the first thoracic, Dr. Magendie says that no sensible or im-
mediate derangement of the functions is observable, even in parts
to which the filaments united with them may be traced. Bichat
long since remarked no disturbance of the’ heart’s motion on at-
tempting to irritate, or on dividing, the cardiac filaments of the
sympathetic; nor of the stomach, bladder, &c. by applying vio-
lence or stimuli to their ganglionic nerves. Neither did he suc-
ceed with galvanism™: but Humboldt and Dr. Fowler, Home and


* Recherches Physiologiques, p. 72. sq. 1805. See also Anat. Générale, t. i.
p- 222.

See also Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol.i. p. 40. sqq., 8vo. t. vi. p. 312.

Dr. Magendie, Précis Elément. t. i. p. 171. sq:

* 1. c. pe 304. sqq.

* Dr. Magendie, |. c., says he has made these experiments repeatedly.

" 1. c. 334. sqq., 360. sqq.


4.4.2 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


Weinhold, say that they succeeded with galvanism in the case of
the heart*; and Dr. Bartels declares that, when he opened the chest
of six robbers in 1826, immediately after decapitation near Mar-
bourg, he found the heart beat regularly for half an hour, and,
when languishing, to be momentarily excited by irritating the
great sympathetic, though irritation of the spinal chord had no
effect on it, but on the muscles of the trunk.y Dr. Brachet as-
serts that, on dividing the cardiac plexus, the action of the heart
instantly ceased for ever; probably, however, from the shock,
since the hearts of brutes taken out of the body will beat.

But let us examine this hypothesis a little farther. Besides the
mental faculties of the encephalon, and the transmission of the
will from it, and of impressions for sensation to it, by-the spinal
chord and the nerves of motion and of sense, two other kinds
of phenomena remain, one of which possibly, and the other
certainly, depends upon the nervous system. The former is the
excitability, irritability, vitality, life, or whatever else it is termed,
possessed by every part: the other is the various degrees and kinds
of sympathy which exist among the different parts of the system,
and the influence of the mental feelings upon the body at large,
the susceptibility of which influence is but that of sympathy
with the encephalon. Now the ganglions and ganglionic nerves
must have some function, and, as they are not the organs of the
mind, nor concerned in sensation, or volition, the only func-
tions which remain are the supply of excitability, the trans-
mission of sympathy, and the effects of mental emotions, and the
affording a passage to encephalo-spinal filaments of sensation
to those parts which do not otherwise receive any; for every
part is capable of sensation in inflammation, and therefore must
always have nerves connecting it with the brain, however indi-
rectly. The rise and progress of the opinion which gives them
the first office are detailed by Dr. Fletcher, who advocates it
strongly, and, in addition to the fact of the earlier development
of the ganglionic than of the encephalo-spinal system, urges the
following arguments.2— It is more strongly developed in children
and females than in the less irritable adult and male. They appear
universally distributed. The arteries of the brain and all the


x Dr. Le Gallois, Expériences sur la Vie. Dr. Brachet, 1. c. p. 127.
Y Dr. Hufeland’s Journal, quoted by Dr. Brachet.
See Dr. Fletcher’s Rudiments of Physiology. Edinb. 1836. P. ii. a p. 64,


Sqq-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.4.3


larger blood-vessels are supplied by them, and these may convey
them throughout the frame. There is no reason to say that the
ganglionic nerves merely arise from the encephalo-spinal: they
give branches evidently to the encephalo-spinal *, and conse-
quently we may presume that they are as extensively distributed;
and the ganglionic nerves are very fine and at length must be in-
visible. The property they give must be supposed similar to that
of sensibility: and we see, therefore, why they have ganglia
exactly like those of nerves of sensation, inasmuch as they consist
of grey and white substance inextricably mixed, and their white
matter is exceedingly soft like those nerves, whereas in nerves of
motion it is hard; and we are not surprised to find them convey
galvanism badly, like nerves of sense, while nerves of volition
conduct it well; nor to find that, as narcotics applied to nerves
of sensation destroy the sensibility of the parts which these
supply, so, when applied to ganglionic nerves, narcotics destroy
the excitability of the parts supplied by them. The filaments of
ganglia are declared by Lobstein» to be different according to
the organs which they supply, just as we know the vital properties
or excitability of every organ to differ. Hence we cannot wonder
at the continuance of the organic functions during inactive states
of the encephalo-spinal system,— in sleep and coma; nor even
when the brain is removed, or the muscle itself is detached from
the body : we cannot wonder at the division of the principal trunks
belonging to a muscle not preventing its irritability from being re-
newed after exhausting stimulation has been intermitted. Lastly,
when the encephalon, or both it and the spinal chord, are wanting
in monsters, the ganglionic system almost always, if not always,
exists; and is said never to be absent, if a monster is not far


* This is shown by Mr. Mayo, |. c. p. 265.; and Mr. Swan conceives that
there is no doubt of the branches of the sympathetic proceeding to the sixth,
instead of arising from it. (On the Nerves.) But, above a century ago, Petit
demonstrated the error of those who derived the sympathetic from the fifth and
sixth pairs (Mém. del’ Acad. Roy. des Sc. 1727); and Fontana, according to
Girardi, argued against the origin of the sympathetic from the third or fifth pair,
because the twigs were not detached from these pairs, but ran to them ; so that
they should be called the end and not the origin of the sympathetic. Professor
Panizza declares that the branches of the sympathetic which ascend with the
carotid artery merely entwine around the sixth pair, and may be detached with-
out injury to their continuity. (Ricerche Sperimentali, p. 6.)

> De Nervo Sympathetico. 1835.


AAA FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


removed from the human form: and in idiots, with a want of
quantity and quality of encephalo-spinal substance, the ganglionic
system is usually well developed and sound. No wonder, there-
fore, that, by irritating these nerves, the parts to which they run
are not pained or moved; for they are not nerves of sense or motion,
but, instead of stimulating, give the property of being capable of
stimulation. Again, the division of the ganglionic nerves is not
followed by aloss of excitability, as the nerves in the parts them-
selves appear calculated to produce excitability, since the gan-
glionic nerves contain, like their ganglia, grey and white substance,
not white substance only, like the nerves of sensation and the
nerves of motion, both which are merely transmitters, and not
producers, of the respective qualities with which they are con-
cerned. . ne

A powerful argument against this hypothesis is the circumstance
of no nerves existing in vegetables, although they are nourished
and secrete great varieties of substances, — perform organic func-
tions similar to those of animals. Another is the account of
foetuses having existed without nerves; imperfect foetuses indeed,
but still animal organised active substances.© Another is the cir-
cumstance of a clot of blood becoming organised-before it is con-
nected with surrounding nerves or vessels. Another is the fact
that, while some parts are abundantly supplied with ganglia and
their nerves, other parts of great size, of great vital properties, of
great secretion, have no more supply than is communicated along
all arteries, and which is very far short of what parts supplied. with
ganglia and plexuses must possess. I allude to the extremities,
in which are a great extent of superficial and cellular secreting
structure, as well as the synovial membranes of the joints, great
masses of muscle, &c. that would require ganglia for their
nourishment and powers as much as the stomach, liver, and other
viscera; and yet they have no ganglia and receive no more gan-
glionic nerves than what pass insensibly along the arterial coats,
while the viscera have copious supplies to their blood-vessels, amidst
which numerous plexuses and ganglia are found. The various
experiments made to prove the importance of nerves to secretion
are considered unsatisfactory by Dr. Brachet —a great supporter
of the necessity of the nerves to all the organic functions ; and his
own appear to me equally unsatisfactory. Finding that he could


© Dr. John Clark, Phil. Trans. 1775.


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4ADB


not prevent the secretion of urine by dividing all the nerves of the
kidney, he divided the renal artery, and passed a canula between
the two portions, so that no nerves could run to the organ along
the arterial coats. Secretion ceased. But the functions of the
small vessels were unlikely to continue when the trunk was so
severely injured: just as we shall find the functions of the ovaria
or of the testis often to be arrested by dividing the Fallopian
tube or vas deferens. For what purpose of nutrition or supply
of properties can a ganglion be particularly required just in the
situation of the ophthalmic or the otic? But, if we reflect that
the motions of the iris and muscles of the internal ear must
be regulated by the condition of certain other parts, we can under-
stand why those ganglia exist in their respective places. For the
ganglionic system, no doubt, communicates important influences.
The functions of each of the complicated and numerous organs of
all but the lowest animals, require constantly to vary according
to the condition of others. Not only, for instance, does every
organ of digestion, assimilation, and excretion, require to be in
nice adjustment with another and with all, but is each affected by
organs not forming a part of the group nor necessary to their
powers. The nutritive functions do not require the brain; yet
if the brain is harassed by a disagreeable state of feeling —
sorrow, vexation, anxiety, &c. — whatever be its intensity, that
group suffers, and dyspepsia, diarrhcea or costiveness, pale or
morbidly coloured stools, a morbid colour of the urine and the skin,
in some degree or other result. Whereas, in a happier state of
mind, the functions, ceteris paribus, go on well; and, in a truly
happy state, persons are often struck with the excellence of their
condition. The converse operation of all these upon the brain is
as certain. Now, if such is the mutual influence of organs not
necessary, except indirectly, to each other, but bound up, where
they all exist, into a common whole, so that the well-being of each
is essential to the well-being of the whole, we may well conceive
the important influence of organs upon each other which co-
operate in function. I conceive the influence of organs upon each
other to be incessant, and to be ever varying accordingly as the
state of each influencing organ varies: and that they are all at
all times influenced and influencing. This constant mutual in-
fluence is indispensable to perfect function, though it frequently
disturbs function: and, as all seem thus bound together into a
common whole, the removal of this general and particular influ-


446 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


ence by the division of the nerves of an organ must affect it; and
the more readily shall we believe this, when we consider that the
nerves are so minutely and universally distributed throughout
each organ. But the dependence of all parts for their vital pro-
perties upon nerves is a very different matter, and appears to
me far from having been proved or even rendered probable. If
the vitality or irritability, &c. of all parts is given by the nerves,
what gives it to the nerves? If one mass of matter can become
by combination and organisation and suitable circumstances en-
dowed directly with it, why cannot another? To suppose nerves
indispensable to vitality is to ascribe to nature circuitous and
complicated means when unnecessary. The action of voluntary
nerves is merely to excite the irritable muscular fibre ; the oper-
ation of nerves of sensation is not to endow the constituent parts
of organs with sensibility, but to be present in the organs, and
with their sensibility feel impressions made upon them. But this
hypothesis does not make the nerves excite, as in the former case,
nor be the residence of the peculiar properties of the part, as in
the latter. It makes the nerves give powers of contraction, se-
cretion, &c. none of which they themselves possess. When per-
sons suppose vitality to be given by nerves, they do not suppose
the nerves to be the organ, but to communicate to the constituent
parts properties which they themselves or their system have en-
gendered, and which properties they themselves do not possess,
except that they have vitality in common with all parts. If all
organs were nerves, I could understand how nerves might be de-
clared necessary to all parts for their vitality: but, as nerves are
not supposed to perform the functions of the organ, I cannot see
why the organ should not by its composition and organisation be
sufficient, without another composition and organisation to give it
the powers it possesses: and besides, there are the facts re-
specting vegetables, nerveless foetuses, and clots of blood, already
mentioned, which show that vital properties may exist without
nerves. ‘The various specific properties of the various parts. of
the system are totally different from those of the encephalon,
spinal chord, ganglia, and nerves, and must depend upon the
specific composition and organisation of each part, or each part
would not require and have a specific composition and organis-
ation. If a part runs to another and pervades this, as in
the case of the nerves of sensation, that part, having its own
properties wheresoever it goes, will have them in the part


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 44:7


which it pervades; but it cannot give them to this, and far
less can I believe that it gives to this properties which it
itself does not possess: and, as to its performing the offices
of the part which it pervades, the thought is not entertained ;
and yet, except by admitting such an absurdity, I cannot see
how the power of secretion, nutrition, &c. can be ascribed to
_ nerves. The hypothesis is usually confined to the ganglionic
system: and the encephalon, spinal chord, and encephalo-spinal
nerves are considered to be appropriated to the intellectual and
moral functions, sensation, volition, and the mutual influence of the
brain and rest of the body. That the ganglia and ganglionic
nerves are developed in proportion to the activity and force of
the circulation, and to the development and activity of the functions
of organs, is no more an argument for the dependence of the vital
properties of these upon them, than the simultaneous development
of the ganglia and of the various viscera in early life. The sooner
the viscera are formed, the sooner must the ganglia and nerves
which convey influence to and from each of them be also formed ;
and, the more bulky and active an organ, the more nerves will it
require to influence and be influenced by other organs. All
must allow that the ganglia and ganglionic nerves cannot be for
the purpose of vitality alone, since branches from both anterior
and posterior encephalo-spinal nerves join them and form part of
them.

I should consider the functions of all nerves to be analogous
to each other. The spinal chord and encephalo-spinal nerves do
not give properties ; they communicate only between the brain and
the rest of the body. They convey to the brain an impression of the
state in the form of sensation ; and they convey an influence from
the brain in the way of emotion or volition. They do not bestow
the qualities of the brain, much less convey qualities which it has
not. They convey volition, and the influences of the moral feel-
ings, from the brain, and carry back the impressions of sensation
to the brain. Analogy would incline us to suppose that nerves
running between other parts would convey to those parts, in either
direction, the impressions of the state of the communicating parts,
— this impression, like the impressions of sensation when followed
by volition, being sometimes followed by an influence to some
third organ or some other portion of the first organ.

Dr. Brachet concludes from his experiments that the encephalic
nerve, called pneumono-gastric, gives moving power to the air-

HH


448 FANCIED FUNCTIONS OF


cells of the lungs, the stomach, and the upper part of the small
intestines: and that the motion of the lower part of the small
intestines, of the large intestines, the bladder, and uterus, is de-
pendent upon the spinal chord. That the action of the bladder
and the lower part of the large intestine depends upon the spinal
chord cannot be doubted; because the functions of the bladder
and rectum are carried on with sensation and volition. If these
parts are paralysed, the rest of the large intestines and the ad-
joining portion of the small will suffer accumulation, from which
he drew his inference, though they themselves be not paralysed.
The regular contraction of the stomach ceased indeed after the divi-
sion of the pneumono-gastric; but the stomach was not paralysed,
for it acted antiperistaltically after the division. This he ascribes
to irritation of the divided end of the nerve. But such an irritation
ought as readily to have excited the regular contraction of the
stomach. Dr. Wilson Philip denies that the division paralyses
the muscular coat of the stomach; and Drs. Leuret and Lassaigne
say the paralysis is confined to the cardia. If Dr. Brachet is
right in his fact, still some might say it was through the division
of the ganglionic nerves united with the pneumono-gastric that
the paralysis was occasioned. ‘The instant cessation of the motion
of the heart on the removal of the cardiac ganglion may be
ascribed, I have already said, to the shock as probably as to the
absence of the ganglion.4


4 J will not presume to doubt Dr. Brachet’s fidelity, but his results all square
so wonderfully, except where he is not aware they do not, that confirmation
would be desirable, were it not for the torture necessary. Some points, however,
in his experiments I do not comprehend. In one experiment (lxxxiv.) we saw
that, after the division of the pneumono-gastric, a puppy might have its head
plunged in water without making any effort to raise it and to breathe; yet in other
instances (xl. and xli.) puppies made violent efforts to inspire. He does not explain
the difference, but explains the efforts to breathe on the score of habit. The ex-
planation I attempted of the difference (supra, p. 434.) may not be satisfactory to all.
When wishing to show that the secretion and discharge of semen are independent
of the encephalo-spinal nerves, he mentions the case of a man completely para-
plegic, and as high as all the lower fourth of the abdomen, without any sensibility
of the external parts, or the interior of the rectum or urethra: and yet the man
had two children in the time. How the necessary movements were performed,
without voluntary power of the lower parts, and how ejaculation could occur
without sensation of the external parts or urethra, Icannotimagine. He reduced

poor tom cat to the same situation by dividing the spine in the lumbar region.
Here he allow hat the necessary movements were impossible. However, he sup-


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 4.49


When I consider that every part must have nerves for feeling,
because every part may become sensible — capable of experiencing


plied their place by “ une sorte de masturbation,” which was neither more nor less,
I suppose, than Ja masturbation. It required more time, he says, but at length
he made the cat emit. This was what some bluff John Bulls would call French
taste. Now, as the cat had lost all sensation, I cannot see how it could be alive
to the pleasures of masturbation, — how emission, which in coition results only
when sensation arrives at a certain height, could be excited; nor how the presence
of semen in the urethra could be felt and ejaculation effected. Whatever might
have been the effect of imagination on the man, the cat must have been a stranger
to the pleasures of imagination as much as of Dr. Brachet’s masturbation.
Dr. Brachet, on the other hand, seemed delighted; for, as if he had not proved
what he wished, he masturbated the cat again the next day (je fis répéter
la méme manceuvre (literally), et une nouvelle éjaculation eut lieu); and,
not yet satisfied, he did it again the day after. There, I am thankful to say, he
stopped. ‘“ Je m’en tins la, et l’animal me servit pour d’autres expériences.”’
Not only were these repetitions superfluous, but the experiment was altogether
superfluous, as the man’s case was perfectly similar. I do not think a phy-
siologist would have ventured to divulge such a disgusting experiment in this
country; and I cannot refrain from expressing my horror at the amount of
torture which Dr. Brachet inflicted upon so many unoffending brutes. Nearly
or quite two hundred must have suffered under his hands. I hardly think that
knowledge is worth having at such a purchase; or that it was ordained that
we should obtain knowledge by cruelty. I care nothing for killing a brute
outright, without pain: it is then but as before it was born, feels no loss, and
escapes all further chance of suffering. Vivisection may be justifiable in some
instances. But before an inquirer commences an experiment of torture, he ought
to be satisfied of its absolute necessity, — that the investigation is important and the
means indispensable ; and also that he is master of the existing knowledge on the
subject, and qualified to operate and to philosophise upon the results. He should
proceed to the task with the deepest feelings of regret. I do not wish to make
a parade of feeling: but to torture animals unnecessarily is a most cowardly and
cold-blooded act, and in my opinion one of the utmost depravity and sin. A
course of experimental physiology, in which brutes are agonised to exhibit facts
already established, is a disgrace to the country which permits it. My esteemed
French friends will pardon me, but I fear that in France there is among many
too little repugnance to vivisection *: and I am sure that the following expe-
riment would have caused Dr. Brachet to be blackballed in any respectable


* In his youthful days the tone of feeling among French medical students
must have been bad, unless the following brutality was followed by immediate
expulsion from the hospital. He says that one of his colleagues, when he was
interne of the H0tel Dieu, regaled the rest of them with a dinner of cats, which
he had experimented upon in their lifetime; and the next day sent the skins, bowels,
&c. to the party in order to let them know what they had eaten. (p. 338.)

HH 2


4.50 USE OF


impressions and transmitting them for sensation to the brain,
and must have nerves for incessantly influencing and being in-
fluenced by the rest of the frame, and in many instances for
influencing or being influenced by some other organ in par-
ticular, the existence and the amount of nerves called the gan-
glionic system, in addition to those which convey volition and
possess sensibility, is explicable ; and I conceive it unnecessary
to invent.any other use of them. These purposes of the gan-
glionic nerves are certain. ‘To ascribe others is an hypothesis;
and in my opinion a very improbable and inconsistent hypothesis.
The old name of sympathetic system appears to me highly proper,
because it expresses the use of the system, as far as is known to
us. The especial use of ganglia is unknown. If Gall’s opinion
of the use of the pulpy substance is right, and I think it is, they,
as they contain pulpy substance, may be, like ganglia in the brain
and chord, destined for the origin and reinforcement of the nerves,
as well as for their mingling. The encephalo-spinal nerves ori-
ginate in pulpy substance ; and the ganglia of the spinal nerves
of sensation are probably to give them the greater bulk and num-


society in England, for a physiologist was blackballed at the Royal Society from
the horror excited by an account read just before of experiments in which rabbits’
heads were crushed, though, on reflection, it was found that these experiments
were unattended with pain, and he was honourably elected on an early occasion.—
Expt. clxi. “ I inspired,” says Dr. Brachet, “‘a dog with the greatest aversion for
me by plaguing and inflicting some pain or other upon it, as often as I saw it. When
this feeling was carried to its height, so that the animal became furious as soon
as it saw or heard me, I put out its eyes: I could then appear before it, without
its manifesting any aversion. I spoke, and immediately its barkings and furious
movements proved the passion which animated it. I destroyed the drum of its
ears, and disorganised the internal ear as much as I could: when an intense
inflammation which was excited had rendered him deaf, I filled up its ears with
wax. He could no longer hear at all. Then I went to its side, spoke aloud, and
even caressed it, without its falling into a rage,— it seemed even sensible to my
caresses.” Nay, Dr. Brachet repeated the same experiment on another dog, and
begs to assure us that the result was the same. And what was all this to prove ?
Simply, that if one brute has an aversion to another, it does not feel or show that
aversion when it has no means of knowing that the other brute is present. If he
had stood near the dog on the other side of a wall, he might equally have proved
what common sense required not to be proved. After all, I do not understand
iow it happened that the poor dog did not scent him. I blush for human nature
et detailing this experiment ; and shall finish by informing my readers that the
Memoir containing this, and all the other horrors, obtained the physiological
drize from the French Institute in 1826. aan


GANGLIA. 451


bers which they have cbove these of motion. The ganglionic
nerves establish a communication between all parts without par-
ticular reference to the encephalo-spinal mass, and therefore do
not originate in it: they would seem to require origin in pulpy
substance somewhere, and therefore I should have imagined 2
priori that masses of pulpy substance would exist here and there
for the origin aud reinforcement of the nerves of general organic
communication. Of course the ganglia must contain. fibrous
matter also; and, while they may serve for origin, or reinforce-
ment, they appear to serve for mingling the filaments which
enter and leave them. It is also possible that the ganglia are
analogous to the encephalon and spinal chord,— that they act
like certain portions of the encephalon and spinal chord in this,
that, as soon as an impression is conveyed to them from one part,
they may send forth an influence ; just as, in the case of the ence-
phalo-spinal mass, a sensation is felt and a muscular action may
ensue.

- We see encephalo- inal nerves run to these ganglia, and
some run in great abundance to parts not voluntary. They appa-
rently mingle in ganglia with all the other filaments in the gan-
glia, as much as these do together ; but they are not imagined to
convey life, or the power of nutrition, secretion, &c. Why then
should the others? ‘They appear, like those which do not run to
the ganglia, to convey impressions of sensation to the brain and of
emotion or will from it: as well as such mutual influence as
exists among all parts.. Both the posterior and anterior root of
the spinal nerves run to the ganglia of the sympathetic, as Scarpa
showed above fifty years ago ¢, and Sommerring £, whose remarks
are now confirmed by Pantezaié

When sensibility is constantly wanted, as in nah case of the
lungs and stomach, and of the pelvic intestinal and urinary organs,
a large supply of encephalic or spinal nerves is seen, and is given
directly, without the intervention of ganglia :—the pneumono-gas-
tric nerves, besides forming abundant communications with gan-
glionic nerves, run directly to the lungs and stomach, and certain
sacral nerves to the rectum and pelvic urinary organs. The
evident purpose of the encephalo-spinal nerves which run to
ganglia being to convey impressions in both directions, I shall not


© Anat. Annot. lib. 1. § xi. p. 18.

* Dec. h. fabrica, t.iv. § clviii.

8 Recerche Sperimentale. Pavia, 1834. &c.
HH 3


4.52 SYMPATHY.


ascribe other purposes to them any more than to those nerves of
the same class that do not run to ganglia. They take this course
probably for convenience and complete mingling; just as the
spinal nerves of sense and motion run together in one trunk, and
these mingle by means of plexuses.

I may remark that it is even requisite not only for different
organs but for different structures in the same organ to sympa-
thise: a-stimulus applied to the inner surface of the alimentary
canal, heart, or urinary bladder, causes the muscular fibres to
contract.

This mutual influence is sympathy; and it exists universally
throughout the system, although the more palpable and striking
instances of it only pass usually under that name.


We will now consider sympathy more minutely.

By sympathy® is meant the affection of one part of the wots
directly by the affection of another, through vital agency alone,
independently of physical. When the sun shines into our eyes,
or something irritates the nostrils, the expiratory muscles con-
tract violently and we sneeze by sympathy. If the fauces are
tickled, we vomit by sympathy. If cold is suddenly applied to
the surface, the bladder endeavours to expel its contents by
sympathy. This property of sympathising is indispensable to
the functions of the body. Unless the operation of one part
is varied according to the condition of another, the harmony
of our functions would be destroyed. When the uterus has been
gravid its full time, the breasts secrete milk: perhaps before this
period, or whenever it may expel its burden. The presence of
food in the mouth produces a flow of saliva from all the salivary
ducts; and when semen touches the inner surface of the urethra
the levatores ani and ejaculatores seminis are thrown into con-
vulsions. When the skin perspires but little, the kidneys secrete
more urine. The extreme importance of sympathy will appear
when we consider that it occurs not only between different
organs, but different parts of the same organ. The blood, the
chyme, the feces, are not applied to the muscular portions of the
vascular and alimentary systems, but totheir lining membrane;


hc J, H. Rahn, De causis physicis Sympathie, Exerc. i.—vii. Tigur. from
1786. 4to.  Sylloge select. eorwm opuscul. de mirabili sympathia que partes inter
diversas ¢. hk. intercedit, Edited by J. C. Tr. Schlegel, Lips. 1787. 8yvo.”


SYMPATHY. 453°


yet the irritation of this, independently of distension, excites the ac-
tion of the muscular tissue. In disease these sympathies are some-
times more striking; because there may be an undue excitement
of the part influencing, or undue excitability of the part influ-
enced. An exquisitely sensible growth at the end of the rectum may
produce tenesmus of the expelling muscles. On the other hand,
in morbid excitability of the intestines, although the stomach be per-
fectly healthy, the ingurgitation of warm fluid into it will often cause
immediate defecation; in neuralgia, at a distance from the sto-
mach, oppositely, I have seen an instant aggravation of pain when
any thing was swallowed ; and I have attended two cases of violent
cough in young men from the slightest touch of one half of the
chest i, though this was not in the least tender ; indeed we have the
skin exquisitely tender in some cases of hysteria, and when it is in-
flamed, without such effect. Sometimes natural sympathy may lan-
guish from the want of excitement in the influencing part or of
excitability in the influenced. The iris will not contract by light
if the retina becomes insensible ; and, on the other hand, if the.
nerves of the iris are paralysed, the* stimulation of the retina by
light will fail to excite the iris to contraction.

Sympathies occur in disease between parts which are “not
observed to sympathise at all in health; and the disease may be in
the affecting or affected part. When the liver is inflamed, the
right shoulder often aches; when the hip joint is diseased, the
knee is often the seat of severe pain: on the other hand, pain
in an extremity often increases the very instant that stimulating
articles are swallowed which in health scarcely caused a glow
even in the stomach, and which still do no more than this in the
stomach while they aggravate the pain. In disease new sym-
pathies occur between parts which naturally sympathise, as when
constipation of the intestines produces vomiting; and the breasts


ae presume that, as the sensibility of both halves of the surface was the same,
the reason of such effects from touching the one only was, that the morbid ex-
citability existed in that half only of the expiratory part of the spinal chord with
which the nerves of sensation of that side were connected, and with which the
expiratory portion of the other side sympathised. _ In hydrophobia, a slight blast
of air, or the settling of a fly upon the surface, causes the inspiratory muscles to
act suddenly and violently, though the skin is not tender tothe touch. Yet I will
not adduce this to illustrate the second cause of morbid sympathy, because a
strong flash of light has the same effect ; and light, noise, and the application of
cold to the surface, or any slight and sudden eause of sensation, are very un-
pleasant, and show a morbid sensibility of all the external senses,


HH 4


4 54 SYMPATHY.


may become painful, and even secrete-milk, when the uterus or
the ovaria are only diseased.

The influence of mental emotions is an example of sympathy.
The affection of the nutritive functions of the brain —such
affections as are common to it and all other organs — the state of
its circulation, the degree of its general excitement and of its
strength, the state of its structure, all may sympathetically
influence other parts, and may be influenced sympathetically in
turn. But, besides these, the condition of the peculiar functions
of certain parts of the brain exercises very powerful influence
upon every part of the body. When grief, fear, anxiety, despair,
terror, or contentment, hope, enthusiasm, joy, love or hatred,
sexual passion, &c. &c. — occur in the brain, certain sympathetic
effects take place in certain other parts of the body, as in the cir-
culating organs at large, in the genitals, &c. ; and the effect may
be violent, even to destruction of life and perhaps laceration of
structure, or continued so as, if agreeable, to remove disease,
or, if unpleasant, to occasion functional or structural derangement
in any part that may be the most predisposed. Now blushing
under anger or shame, paleness, polyuria, and diarrhoea, under fear,
erections under desire, all called effects of the passions, can be
but so many changes occurring sympathetically from certain states
of certain parts of the brain, as peculiar states of other functions
of other organs affect different organs sympathetically.

It must be obvious that the sympathising part is not always
that which appears to sympathise. When a voluntary muscle
contracts sympathetically, it is not the muscle but the nerves
moving the muscles, and indeed generally the ultimate fibres in
the encephalon or chord, that are sympathetically excited; and the
contraction of the muscle is the result of their excitement, just
as it would be if their excitement occurred in any other way.
The sympathy is not between the excited part and the muscles, but
between it andthe nerves of the muscles: wherefore, if the nerves
of the muscle are divided, the sympathy still exists, but ceases to
be manifest, because the muscles are no longer influenced by the
sympathising nerves. Hence Bichat *,— who divided sympathy


k Anatomie Générale, t. i. p. 183. sq.

John Hunter divides sympathy into general and partial; such as pyrexia
from a wound, and vomiting from irritation of the fauces. Partial sympathy he
subdivides into remote, contiguous, and continuous, — Where there is no evident
connection between the sympathising parts sufficient to account for the circum-


SYMPATHY. 455


as it affects animal contractility or sensibility, tetanus from a
wound in the extremities being an instance of the former and
pain of the knee in hip disease an instance of the latter ; and as
it affects organic contractility or sensibility, of which palpitation
from disorder of the stomach is an example ,— states that sym-
pathy of animal contractility occurs only when the nerves con-
necting the affected muscles with the encephalon or spinal chord
are entire. When he divided them, the convulsions in the cor-
responding muscles ceased: and the iris ceases to contract when
the third pair is divided, though light glares on the retina.
Neither, where sympathetic muscular action arises from a sens-
ation, will it occur, if the nerves communicating impressions from
the affected part to the sensible part of the nervous centre are
compressed or divided, or if the brain itself is unable to receive
the impression. If the optic nerve is divided, the sun’s rays will
not excite contraction of the iris. Although the stomach in an
animal newly dead may be thrown into contraction by mecha-
nical irritation, no sympathetic action of the diaphragm and ab-
dominal muscles,— no vomiting, occurs!; in perfect coma neither
sneezing nor contraction of the iris can be induced by applying
stimulants to the nostrils or letting the sun’s rays into the eye.
The sympathies of the organic functions are not all ascribable,
as many might imagine, to continuity of surface; for, after di-
viding the cesophagus of a dog, Bichat produced vomiting equally
as before, on irritating the fauces ™, and Dr. Brachet sneezing on
irritating the nasal membrane after having divided the trachea.»
Sympathy depends on the peculiarity of the impression as well
as upon the part. ‘* When the sides or soles of the feet are
tickled,” says Dr. Whytt, “‘ the body is often thrown into convulsive
motions; but nothing of this kind happens when those parts are
either inflamed or wounded: neither an acrid injection of a so-
lution of corrosive sublimate, nor the introduction of a catheter
into the urethra, occasions any alternate convulsive motions of the


stance ; as vomiting from the pregnant state : — Where there is proximity of the
sympathising parts; as tenesmus when a stone exists in the urinary bladder:
—and Where, as most commonly, the sympathising parts are continuous; as
itching of the nose and verge of the anus from worms in the intestine. T'reatise
on the Blood, &c. Introduction.

' Dr. Whytt,. On the Vital and Involuntary Motions.

™ Anat, Générale, t. i. p. 192. ® L.ce pe 298)


456 Siaitas SYMPATHY. ©


acceleratores uring, although the semen, which stimulates the
nerves of the urethra much more gently, has this effect.”

The same cause, too, may produce the same sympathetic effect,
though applied to different parts. Convulsions arise from tickling
any part of the skin capable of the sensation of tickling; nausea
from a disgusting smell, taste, or sight: for the sympathetic effect
results from the peculiarity of the impressions in the nervous
centre.

The same sympathetic effect, lastly, may arise from many dif-
ferent causes in different parts: vomiting may arise from injuries
of the head, a stone in the kidney, pregnancy, disgust, sailing,
&c.0

Now, although it is evident that nerves are necessary to sym-
pathetic contractions of muscles which are never moved but by
the stimulus of nerves, viz. the voluntary, because it is the roots
of these nerves in the brain or chord that sympathise, and the
chords convey the sympathetic excitement; and that nerves are
necessary to convey those impressions which occur in any parts
and must be transmitted to the encephalon or spinal chord in
order that the roots of nerves in these may be excited to stimu-
late the voluntary muscles ultimately affected; and although we
must conceive that the influence of the passions must be trans-
mitted to the various sympathising parts by means of nerves:
still some deny that other examples of sympathy arise from nerv-
‘ous connection, because it frequently happens that no particular
nervous communications of sympathising parts are discoverable,
as between the nose or eye and diaphragm, although sneezing fol-
lows from a pinch of snuff in the nose or the sun’s glare upon
the eyes, while remarkable connections exist between other parts
not particularly disposed tosympathise. P Vegetables, it is urged,
which are not known to have nerves, show what has been termed
sympathy: ifa leaflet of the sensitive plant is stimulated by a
burning-glass the whole leaf contracts and the foot-stalk drops ;
when the branches of trees feel the warmth of summer, the sap
ascends from the roots, and even in a frost it will ascend from
the roots through the stem, if a single branch is introduced into
a hothouse.4 But the former phenomenon is probably the result


© See Dr. Alison, 1. c. 4
P Consult Dr. Whytt, Observations on Nervous Diseases, ch. i.
1 Sir Gilbert Blane, Medical Logic, 3d edit. p. 154. In the Times for


SYMPATHY. 457


of mere continuity of surface, which sort of extension of effect
occurs in animals; and the sap is thought to rise from the roots
in consequence of the mere expansion of the branches: but all
true sympathy is no doubt effected by nerves, though mere nerv-
ous connection without peculiar disposition, or property, will not
explain it.

The smaller number of organs and the continuity of most parts
of vegetables produce sufficient connection of all spots without
the necessity for distinct intervening bodies like nerves, which
are absolutely required to connect the numerous, separate, and
frequently quite uncontinuous and very distinct, organs of compli-
cated animals.

Although the sympathies of animal systems, not explicable by
continuity of surface, but true sympathies, must, I conceive, de-
pend upon zervous communication, even where the sympathising
part is not naturally stimulated by volition nor known to be stimu-
lated to its functions by any thing but its contents, and although
nervous communication can always be shown ; still the intervention


October 23. 1834, when I read it daily, was an account from the Berlin State
Gazette, of a branch of a vine introduced into a hothouse, bearing flowers and
fruit when the rest had none. Some, as M. Dutrochet, have imagined vegetables
to have a nervous system, but never shown it. Dr. Brachet has lately contended
for it, but the best botanists consider that this part of his book should not have
been printed. The opinion has been thought proved by the action of certain poisons
upon them. We know that they are poisoned like animals; arsenic, mercury,
copper, lead, and tin, destroy them, and are found to be taken up by their ves-
sels. Carbonic acid, azote, nitric oxide, hydrogen, when applied to the roots, are
equally fatal. Opium, prussic acid, belladonna, nux vomica, menispermis
coculus, hemlock, digitalis, alcohol, and oxalic acid, are no less so; and, because
these destroy the life of animals without leaving chemical traces, and affect the
nervous system, Dr. Marcet, jun., whose experiments will be found in the
Annales de Chimie, June 1825, and are confirmed by many others, concludes
that they must destroy vegetables by acting on a nervous system in them. But,
although no trace be discoverable, this may be on account of their chemical
peculiarities, (and, in fact, prussic acid and alcohol have been found absorbed,
Annales de Chimie, Oct. 1814, and Dr. Cooke on--dpoplexy,) and they, as well
as other poisons, affect the nervous system of animals only as one part of the
living body, — arsenic, besides its general deleterious agency, causing particularly
gastritis, even if applied to a sore of the leg, digitalis exciting the kidneys
(indeed their action on vegetables might, on the other hand, be urged as a
proof of their general hostility to life) ; and the mineral ones, which often leave
chemical traces, also produce: peculiar effects on the nervous system, and often
destroy life without being detected beyond the alimentary canal.


458 SYMPATHY.


of the brain or spinal chord of course cannot be requisite, if
there is no motion in the sympathy, nor any influence trans-
mitted by nerves of voluntary movement. To the individual
sympathy between the brain or chord these and their nerves
must be indispensable, as in this respect they stand exactly
in the condition of all other sympathising parts. When sym-
pathetic pain is felt, brain and encephalo-spinal nerves must be
required, the latter to communicate and the former to take
cognizance of the sympathetic condition of the part in which the
sympathetic pain is felt. But this is not an agency of the brain,
chord, or encephalo-spinal nerves in sympathy: a sympathetic
change first occurs in the part, and this is then felt by the en-
cephalo-spinal system. If the ganglionic nerves have the
office, assigned to them by so many writers, of giving vital pro-
perties to all parts, and not this, authors can hardly suppose
that peculiar nerves for sympathy exist, seeing that all the
other than the ganglionic are nerves for sense or motion or
convey the influence of emotions from the brain: and, should dis-
tinct nerves for sympathy exist, I still cannot believe that the
ganglionic system is for vitality on account of the reasons given
above; and much less when I consider that its ganglia and nerves
contain a large quantity of fibrils from the encephalo-spinal nerves
of both sensation and motion; which very circumstance, I may re-
mark, prevents me from believing that the anterior spinal nerves
serve for motion only,—have no other function. I can conceive that
the posterior are for transmission to the brain and chord only,— for
sensation and for insensible influence, as when something unfelt inthe
stomach produces hiccup from the irritation being conveyed to the
roots of the phrenic nerves: that the posterior are for transmission
from the brain and chord ; not however for the transmission of vo-
lition only, but of the influence of emotion and of excitement of
their roots however induced. If we cannot always explain the oc-
currence or absence of sympathy by nervous distribution, we must
remember that we are imperfectly acquainted with this.’ Fibrils
often seem to unite which afterwards prove to run side by side only:
and, the more knowledge we have, the more distinct do we find the
office of individual fibrils. “ Often,” says Gall, “the different
filaments of the same nerve are very visibly different: not only
different nerves but also the threads of the same nerve proceed
from different ganglia placed in different situations. All the pe-
culiarities are the same in the same nerves; they must therefore


SYMPATHY. 4.59


depend upon a primitive difference of inner structure, and be
essentially necessary for difference of structure: whence Baron
Cuvier naturally concluded that ‘nerves are not all entirely alike,
and do not all convey one fluid, like the arteries, for example ;
but that there are in the structure and mode of action of each,
some peculiarity relative to the functions and nature of the organ
which they animate.’ I should say not animate, but influence.” *
Sir C. Bell teaches that certain nerves are destined for Respir-
ation and the Expression of the passions. These he terms. re-
spiratory nerves ; and says they are the pathetic or internal motor
of the eye, the portio dura of the seventh or facial, the glosso-
pharyngeal, the eighth or pneumono-gastric, the accessory, the
phrenic, and the long subclavicular or, as he terms it, external
respiratory. These all arise, he says, in a tract, by him called
respiratory, beginning at the mesocephalon, and descending on
each side between the anterior or motor, and the posterior or
sensitive, portion of the spinal chord, and terminating about the
middle of the back. Chaussiers had previously pointed out the
lateral tract, as suggested by Le Gallois , especially the portion
contained in the skull, and suspected respiration to depend much
upon it.
It is undoubted that several of these nerves are concerned in
respiration and actions in which respiration is affected, —in sneez-
ing, coughing, &c., as well as in the expression of the passions,
in laughing, crying, and the expression of rage, terror, &c. But
why the nerves of voluntary motion which are concerned in these
actions should be regarded as different from other nerves of vo-
luntary motion, I cannot imagine. Respiration is accomplished
by muscles as voluntary as any voluntary muscles, and moved by
nerves as voluntary as any other nerves of voluntary motion.
We inspire because prompted to do so by uneasy sensation, just
as we move from an uneasy posture. The pathetic, facial, ac-
cessory, phrenic, and long subclavicular, differ in no point from
other nerves of motion; by their means we contract at pleasure
the muscles to which they are distributed: in truth, the superior
oblique muscle of the eye supplied by the pathetic, and some, as
the orbicularis palpebrarum, supplied by the facial, have no con-


* Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. i. p, 128. sq., and 8vo. t. vi. p. 312. sq., where he quotes
this part of the first 4to. volume under the name of Mon Traité sur la Différence
des Nerves.


* Exp, Sommaire, &c. 1807. t Sur le Principe de la Vie, 1812,


:


a


460 SYMPATHY.


néction whatever with respiration. The motor nerves of respir-

ation conspire in operation for a particular end. But so do the
nerves of all other muscles: those of the lower extremity in
walking, those of the upper and lower end of the trunk in rising from
the recumbent posture. For any particular action whatever, instinc-
tive or arbitrary, association of the action of the nerves of sets of
muscles takes place. As to their action being instinctive and in-
voluntary, the action of every voluntary muscle may be instinctive
and involuntary; and is always involuntary if a motive of great
strength exists. We breathe or wink unconsciously or involun-
tarily ; so also may we run, withdraw an arm, leg, or whole body;
unconsciously or involuntarily. It is true that respiration con-
tinues during sleep and a certain degree of coma; but other
associated actions do the same which are voluntary. . Patients
will move any part unconsciously, if you make it uneasy during
sleep: they will swallow in apoplexy till near death. Poor chil-
dren, when fast asleep through fatigue, will continue to move their
hands.and fingers as if at work, even after the machines of their
unprincipled employers have stopped." .Having begun any mus-
cular actions, we continue them often unconsciously if our at-
tention is directed to something else, and, on its ceasing to be so
directed, we may be surprised to find what we are doing. Then as
to the muscles supplied by these nerves being respiratory, there
is hardly a muscle in the body which may not be respiratory. In
dyspnoea, more and more muscles are employed in proportion to
the difficulty, till at length almost every muscle of the four ex-
tremities may be called in to give assistance.— With respect to
expression, every other voluntary muscle may give expression as
well as those which are moved by the voluntary nerves above
enumerated. In despair, we as instinctively wring our hands as
we lengthen our features and bewail; in rage, we as instinctively
clench our hands and toss our arms as we knit. our brows and
project our lips and vociferate; in joy, we as instinctively move
briskly as we laugh; in surprise, we instinctively depress our
lower jaw: — motions in none of which respiratory nerves have
any share. I see no difference in the agency of these nerves and
of all other nerves of voluntary motion. — Lastly, the glosso-
pharyngeal appears now to be a pair not of motion, but of sense,


4 Report of the Factory Commissioners, 1833. The inhuman facts detailed
' in this report cover our Christian country with shame, and may be retorted by
Continental vivisectors with triumph against us. ‘


~


SYMPATHY. 46]


and of a specific sense, — a deadly blow to the respiratory set of
nerves; and the pneumono-gastric to be a pair both of sense and
motion. The peculiarity of the improperly called respiratory nerves
arising from a peculiar tract amounts to nothing, if these two nerves
of sense also arise from it: and, if the other nerves do arise from a
peculiar tract, still nothing can be inferred from the circumstance,
since they are all voluntary nerves, and we have seen that their
operations differ in nothing from those of all other voluntary
nerves, when combinations of actions are required for particular
voluntary or instinctive motions, or for the instinctive expression of
the passions. The accessory, subclavicular, and phrenic, however,
only are in general allowed to have the origin assigned to them by
Sir C. Bell; and even the accessory is declared by Gall * to arisé
from the posterior (sensitive) roots of some spinal nerves. The re-
spiratory tract, or column, is ratheran anatomical fancy, for it is not
always to be found, and the best anatomists deny its existence.y
It thus appears to me that Sir Charles Bell’s doctrine respecting
the respiratory nerves is merely an untenable whim; and that his
discoveries of the function of the ganglionic portion of the tri-
geminum pair, (its other portion having long before been assigned
to motion by Paletta,) and of the facial, and of the excitement of
motion on irritating the anterior roots only of the spinal nerves,
— the whole amount, I believe, of his real contributions to the
physiology of the nervous system,— are only sullied by his views
of the functions of his respiratory set. Even the two first of


* M. Manec says it often arises at a right angle from the posterior roots of
some spinal nerves. Anatomie Analytique. ‘Tableau. 7

y Dr. Spurzheim asked Sir C. Bell (Appendix, &c. p. 31.) whether it is true,
i. e. whether it is not untrue, that “ each lateral portion of the spinal marrow
contains three tracts or columns, one for voluntary motion, one for sensation,
and one for the act of respiration ;” and “ that a fasciculus may be traced down
the spinal marrow between the sulci which give rise to the anterior and posterior
roots of the spinal. nerves.” These are Sir C. Bell’s words, in his Ewposit. &c.
p- 123. 129. — I said nothing of the origin of the anterior and posterior roots of
the spinal nerves from an anterior and posterior lateral sulcus, when speaking
of the anatomy of the chord, because Gall says he could find the posterior only
and seldom lower than the first dorsal vertebra, and that the anterior roots
do not proceed ina straight line and regularly, as M. Chaussier describes and
represents in his plates, but confusedly, sometimes at one distance, sometimes at
another, from the middle fissure ; the very dots by which M. Chaussier represents
the exits of the nerves, are farther from the middle line than the grooves. (Gall,
4to. vol.i. p. 61. sq.)

* Dr. Fletcher conceives that Sir Charles Bell is right, as far as he goes; yet


462 SYMPATHY.


these three discoveries he has obscured by: ascribing morbid
phenomena dependent upon the motor branch of the trigeminus


that the nerves arising from the respiratory tract serve not only for the sym-
pathetic action, as he regards it, of respiration and the expression of the passions,
but that they serve for the production of all sympathy and for the effects of in-
stinct and the passions on the system ; instinct being considered by him as a part
of the passions, only attended by a desire and by actions adapted to a particular
end, and the word passion being synonymous with emotion. The operation of
passion or instinct and of sympathy may be regarded as the same: the various
parts of the body sympathising only with the brain in the two first cases. Now
instinctive actions may be actions of any voluntary muscles of the body, and
their source must be certain parts in the brain, but the conveyance of the im-
pression from these parts of the brain which are the seat of the mental operation
must be to that other part of the brain or spinal chord whence the voluntary
motor nerves which excite the respective muscles arise. No peculiar system of
nerves is required farther for instinctive motion. Peculiar nerves or nervous fibres
may exist in the brain and chord, or peculiar nerves may exist only between these
and all parts of the body for the conveyance of the effects of the passions, and be-
tween the various parts of the body for their endless sympathies. Nervous commu-
nication there must be between all parts sympathising not through mere continuity,
but the communications throughout the system by means of all the encephalo-spinal
and ganglionic nerves are abundant enough for sympathy to occur between any
two. Many of the very nerves which he regards as the specific agents of sym-
pathy are voluntary nerves; the facial, pathetic, phrenic, are employed by our
will; and I conceive that they no more excite muscles sympathetically than any
other voluntary nerves, where the nerve is excited sympathetically through some
other nerve communicating with their roots: the fact being that these nerves of
motion may be stimulated at their source in the brain or spinal chord by the will,
or by emotion or some other excitement operating sympathetically. Dr. Fletcher
only makes it probable, in his own mind, that such general communications exist
by these peculiar nerves. He argues, 1. That the respiratory system of nerves is
likely to be distributed almost universally, because the ramifications of the
pneumono-gastric are inextricably interwoven with the roots of the ganglionic
nerves, which are presumed already by him to be universally dispersed by
travelling with the blood-vessels, and which also reinforce every encephalo-spinal
nerve, so that, wherever a ganglionic nerve goes, a so called respiratory twig
may go likewise: this probable distribution of the pneumono-gastric nerve would
be sufficient to establish the universal distribution of these nerves, though others
of the set are probably very widely disseminated. In fish, the pneumono-gastric
is universally distributed. This set of nerves have almost a common origin, so
that by means of one’s diffusion, the whole may be regarded‘as diffused. Thus
the sympathy between the lungs and the respiratory muscles is maintained by
the pneumono-gastric nerve distributed to the lungs and conveying the sensation
of want of breath; by the phrenic and intercostals and accessory and external
respiratory nerves, which are associated at their roots with it, and excite the
muscles as well as by other muscular nerves, the pathetic, facial, and even


NERVES. 4.63


nerve to affection of the ganglionic portion and of the facial, and
by considering the facial as exclusively controlling all motions


those distributed to numerous muscles of the body when the irritation from
dyspneea is extreme. ‘The pneumono-gastric and the rest of the set associated
with it at their roots appear to maintain the sympathy between the heart and
the rest of the system.—TI reply that he allows the ganglionic nerves to
be as widely distributed ; and so indeed must be the nerves of sensation, for
any vascular part of the body may show sensibility when inflamed.

2. He argues that the nerves of sensation cannot convey sympathy, because
this may occur independently of sensation and some sympathising parts have no
sensibility. —But all vascular parts may acquire sensibility under inflammation ,
and therefore all vascular parts must have nerves of sensation. Yet sympathy may
doubtless occur without sensation, just as the various nutritive functions occur
without it. Still, if the ganglionic nerves are allowed by him to administer
to these, they may administer to sympathy. Indeed, sympathy is often the result
of sensation only. We do not sneeze unless the sensation in the nose arises to a
certain height, — not the sensation of smell, but of touch ; and I may remark that
Dr. Fletcher appears wrong in arguing that sensation in the nose does not occur
before sneezing, because it is not the sensation of smell. Some sympathies
are sensations and therefore carried on in some measure at least by nerves of
sensation ; other sympathies certainly can have nothing to do with nerves of sens-
ation, but it does not follow that they must be carried on by the so called
respiratory nerves.

3. The occurrence of sympathy during sleep he considers an argument that
sympathy is independent of the brain.—No one can doubt that many sympathies
are independent of it. Communications of nerves exist independently of the
brain: and Dr. Fletcher is correct in condemning the old hypothesis that the
brain is necessary to sympathy. Still this does not show that the so called
respiratory nerves must be the sole organs of sympathy.

4. He maintains that the manifestation of the effects of sympathy, passion,
and instinct, are in proportion to the development of this system.—Certainly,
in proportion to the voluntary muscles, which act under instinct and passion, are
the nerves which serve these voluntary muscles, Fish, he urges, have, of the
respiratory nerves, only the pathetic and the pneumono-gastric, which latter is
in part a nerve of motion like the pathetic, and they have it of great size. _ Fish
display the effects of many instincts and passions. Reptiles have, in addition,
the glosso-pharyngeal and facial. Similar additions of other nerves are found in
other classes. The glosso-pharyngeal, however, is now proved to be a nerve of
special sense, and the facial supplies the voluntary muscles of the jaws and
fauces, which in fish were supplied by the pneumono-gastric. But I can see
here no argument for these voluntary nerves being exclusive agents of sympathy,
although they are used as excitants of voluntary muscles under instinct and
passion, and in morbid involuntary excitement of thesé muscles as well as in
volition. '

5, The structure of the sensiferous and ganglionic nerves is similar; and of

ri


464 . FUNCTIONS OF


of the face concerned with respiration and expression, when
the mere descent of the lower jaw which accompanies surprise
proves the aganglionic portion of the trigeminus nerve to be,
as almost any nerve of voluntary motion may be, a nerve of
expression."


the motiferous and respiratory. As the motiferous convey a stimulus, so there-
fore probably do the respiratory.— Unquestionably those which are voluntary
nerves are like all other voluntary nerves. Such are the facial, phrenic, and
partly the pneumono-gastric, which are similar to the common motor of the eye,
the abductor, and the hypo-glossal. This really tends nothing to the argument.
Indeed the analogy does not hold with respect to all, for the glosso-pharyngeal,
however similar in structure to nerves of motion, is a nerve of sense.

6. The sensiferous and ganglionic nerves do not transmit the galvanic in-
fluence; while the motiferous and respiratory transmit it with facility. —But this
proves no more than the fifth argument ; and I know not that all the latter do.

7. A stimulus applied to the trunks of these nerves occasions in general a
display of irritation in parts sympathetically connected with them.—I believe
this is the case with all nerves of motion, as well as those concerned in the
motions of respiration. Stimulation of even nerves of sense will often excite
those of motion which are sympathetically connected with them. Indeed, the
acceleration of respiration after a time is said to follow the irritation of the
glosso-pharyngeal — a nerve of only specific sense, as much as of the accessory
and pneumono-gastric.

8. When the respiratory nerves are divided, the effects of passion and
sympathy upon the parts which they supply are lost.—This is true of those
which convey the effects of volition,—for this they can do no longer, nor, of
course, can they convey involuntary any more than voluntary excitement to the
muscles to which they run. But the fact amounts to no more than would be true
of the division of any netve of voluntary motion. The division of the glosso-
pharyngeal can have no such effect, — for, being a nerve of sense, its sense
(taste) only is lost in the part which it supplies. Various disturbances follow
the division of the pneumono-gastrie, but various ill effects also ensue upon
the divisions of the sensiferous fifth.

Although I consider Dr. Fletcher’s views equally unfounded with those of
Sir C. Bell, I must not omit to mention that he puts them forth most candidly
and. rationally as purely hypothetical, and intended to give way to whatever
shall be proposed of a more satisfactory nature.

It may be well to mention here that Sir Astley Cooper has lately published
an account of the ligature of the two great sympathetic nerves in rabbits, and
found no evident effect. One rabbit was killed at the end of seven days, when one
nerve was found ulcerated through and the other nearly so; another rabbit was
alive, at the end of a mouth, when the account went to press. (Guy’s Hospitat
‘Reports, No. iii.)

" For his three discoveries Sir C. Bell deserves great praise, and his name
will endure as long as the physiology of these respective nerves. But, when


NERVES. 4.65


eredit is given him for having made discoveries, some of which belong to others,
and some of which are no discoveries at all, but fancies; and when so much
that to me is unintelligible, so much error, so much want of extensive knowledge,
pervade his writings, I cannot refrain from smiling at the expressions splendid,
brilliant, profound, luminous, and I know not what others, applied to his opinions
by persons who cannot have considered the subjects laboriously, and only imi-
tate one another in their belief and their language. The most ludicrous eulogy
is in the Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association. Dr. W.C. Henry
says, ‘“‘ The honour of this discovery’(that there are distinct nerves of sensation
and motion), doubtless, the most important since the time of Harvey, belongs ex-
clusively to Sir C. Bell.”” (p. 62.) Now no new principle was discovered. We
knew before that some nerves, as the optic and olfactory, were for sensation only,
and some, as the common motor, the external motor, and the internal motor of
the eye, and the lingual, for motion only. The only discovery was that two
individual nerves were, one for the first function and the other for the second.
That no one nerve could be for. both sensation and motion had always been
evident to reflecting minds. Galen taught his cotemporaries that one set of
nerves went to the skin for sensation, and another to the muscles for motion.
That Sir C. Bell had no idea that the anterior spinal roots were for motion only
and the posterior for sensation only, is evident from the fact that above ten
years after he had found motion to depend upon the anterior roots only, his able
nephew, the late Mr. John Shaw, who lived with him and acted under him,
published a paper * in which he says that his uncle is of the same opinion as
Galen, and mentions the experiments of his uncle showing the connection of
the anterior roots with motion, but has no idea that they are for motion only
and not for sensation also, nor that the posterior are for sensation. His words are,
— ‘“ These experiments we have often repeated, and always with the same re-
sults; but from the violence necessarily used in making them, it has been dif-
ficult to ascertain which of the filaments bestows sensibility on the part. It was
easily shown that if only the posterior set was destroyed, the voluntary power
over the muscles continued unimpaired, but the pain necessarily attendant upon
the performance of the experiment prevented us from judging of the degree of
sensibility remaining in the part.” (p. 148. sq.) Now this paper was read on the
last day of April, and printed in July, 1822, and Dr. Magendie’s discoveries of
the distinct functions of the two roots appeared in August (Journ. de Physiol. );
so that, though Sir C. Bell refers to it in triumph (Nervous System, Preface, xxii.)
‘as a proof that he had made the discoveries before Dr. Magendie, it proves
precisely the reverse, and exhibits the imperfect state of his views up to the very
time of Dr. Magendie’s discoveries. Numerous as have been Dr. Magendie’s
physiological errors, humbly as I estimate his knowledge and reasoning
powers, and muchas I abhor his cruelty to brutes, I have never known him
dishonourable ; and I am satisfied that he knew nothing of Sir C. Bell’s original
discovery respecting the anterior nerves, for it was communicated in a pamphlet
privately distributed: and as to the discovery of the office of the posterior roots, it,
and thus the exact division of office between the two, is certainly Dr. Magendie’s.


* Med. Chir. Trans. vol. xii. 1822.
ae 4


466 FUNCTIONS OF


After all, I do not believe the whole discovered; because filaments from the
anterior, as well as from the posterior roots, go to the sympathetic ganglia, and
certainly not for motion. Gall had proved, in the last century, that distinct parts
of the nervous system had distinct offices. This he taught in opposition to many
of the most noted of his cotemporaries: he taught it with respect to the grand
nervous organ — the brain, and with respect to the universal divisions of the nerves.
(l.c. 4to. vol. i. p. 191. sq.) Sir C. Bell's discoveries are simply individual exam-
ples of Gall’s great general principle in merely nerves. So little, however, does
the gentleman entrusted to report for the Association know of Gall’s discoveries,
that he not only thus ventured to address it, but, after detailing the unsatisfactory
vivisections of Messrs. Fleurens and Magendie, he passes Gall’s labours over in
silence, and gravely informs the assembled savants that there does not exist any
conclusive evidence for referring separate faculties, or moral affections, to distinct
portions of the brain.” (p. 90.)! Phrenologists should really not allow the Asso-
ciation thus to expose itself.


Since the preceding sheets were printed, I have seen the paper by Professor
Ehrenberg, alluded to suprd, p. $24. 325., in which he asserts, in opposition to
M. Raspail, that, by means of the microscope, he has found the fibres of the
encephalon, spinal chord, and nerves to be tubular, The following is pretty
nearly his own summary of his observations : —

1. The fibrous substance of the brain consists not of solid fibres, but of
parallel or fasciculated tubes, dilated at intervals, or jointed, and from x, to x4, of
a line in diameter. Conveyed from the surface towards the ventricles and basis,
increasing in size, and not united by any visible medium, they pass into the
spinal chord, which they in a great measure constitute.

2. ‘The brain, a central organ in function, is a peripheral in structure, as
Gall had already remarked, and not to be compared with the heart or stomach
as central organs.

3. The spinal chord of man, and of all great divisions of vertebrated animals,
“consists of tubes similar to those of the brain ; but the finer tubes are placed more
inwardly, the thicker outwardly. The thicker are continued into the cylindrical
tubes of the spinal nerves,

4. The three soft (higher) special nerves of sense, — the olfactory, optic, and
acoustic, and the sympathetic, consist of tubes which are collected into fasciculi
and surrounded by neurilema. The three are immediate prolongations of the
white matter of the brain: the sympathetic has a mixed structure of jointed and
cylindrical tubes.

5. The jointed tubes of the brain, spinal chord, and articulated nerves,
contain a perfectly transparent tenacious fluid, never visibly globular, the liguor
nerveus, which differs from the nervous medulla as the chyle does from blood.
Visible motion of this fluid has not been satisfactorily observed: a slow pro-
gression, however, is probable

6. All other nervous chords consist, not of jointed tubes, but of cylindrical


NERVES. 467


larger tubes, collected into bundles. These tubes are the immediate prolong-
ations of the jointed tubes of the brain and spinal chord, for the most part
suddenly changed and deprived of their dilatations, and are surrounded by
neurilema. In the invertebrata they are from .4 to yJ5y of a line in diameter:
in the vertebrata from 3, to sj They contain a granular, and, as it were,
congealed, medullary matter, that by gentle pressure can visibly be forced out
from them, after which they appear as empty sheaths, &c.

7. Hence the nervous substance consists of jointed tubes carrying the
liquor nerveus, and cylindrical tubes with true nervous pith.

8. The brain does not consist of nervous pith.

9. The invertebrata do not possess a spinal chord consisting of jointed
tubes without pith; or, in other words, the invertebrata have no spinal chord,
although their abdominal ganglionic chord, which consists chiefly of cylindrical
tubes containing pith, may perform the function of a spinal chord.

10. In the invertebrata the jointed cerebral substance and blood globules
appear in much less proportion.

11. The jointed nervous tubes are, in relation to the human organisation
and their distribution in the animal kingdom, the more important and noble part
of the nervous system, and more immediately subservient to sensation.

12. Almost all cerebral terminations (only less obviously in the ear) are
pervaded by a network of vessels, and contain large scattered globules, the size
of which has a constant ratio to that of the blood globules in the same animal.

13. The structure of the retina, even in man, has been hitherto very erro-
neously described. The granular layer of the anterior surface of the retina is
pervaded by a network derived from the central vessels. Behind this is. placed
the expansion of the optic nerve, which consists of jointed tubes, and separates
into a peripheral cortical, and a central medullary matter. Many single, scat-
tered, club-shaped bodies appear to moderate the luminous impression. Their
connection with the jointed tubes of the nerve, Professor Ehrenberg could not
clearly make out.

He confirms the discoveries of old anatomists mentioned above at page 341,
respecting the pulpy (cortical) substance,— that it consists of a thick but delicate.
vascular network, and a soft substance; and the latter he pronounces to be
finely granular, and to contain numerous insulated larger granules, which are
composed of smaller ones, strung on filaments, as far asit was possible to observe
them. Near the fibrous (medullary) portion of the brain, the filaments of the
pulpy (cortical) substance become more and more evident, and the blood
vessels somewhat larger and much less numerous. These observations greatly
strengthen Gall’s opinion of the pulpy (cortical) substance being the source of
the fibrous (medullary): and Ehrenberg farther states, we see (12), that al-
most all the terminations of the cerebral nerves are again contained in a dense
vascular network, with scattered globules, which he conjectures to be the nuclei
of blood globules, especially as these in the pulpy substance of the brain are pro-
portionate to the size of the blood globules of the animal.

Gall, it must be remembered, conceives that the nervous fibres originate, not
only in the pulpy portion of the encephalon and chord, but in the peripheral
extremities, where also pulpy substance, he urges, is found. In the pulpy
portion of the ganglia, similar granules have been discovered by Ehrenberg, so


Los


468 FUNCTIONS OF NERVES.


that at least one great use of the ganglia of the sympathetic, as of the encephalo-
spinal system, may, with still further probability than I urged at page 451. sq.
be to reinforce the substance of the nerves; and the opinion of Gall respecting
the use of the pulpy substance of the nervous system, supported by his most
powerful arguments, though rejected on the most silly grounds by Dr. Tiede-
mann, has acquired more probability than ever. The series appear to be exter-
nally abundant blood vessels, though fewer and fewer inwards ; next granules,
probably the nuclei of blood globules; and, lastly, the fibrous structure, now
pronounced to be tubular. “be

Beobachtung einer auffallender bisher unerkannten Structur des seelenorgans bet
Menschen und Theren. Von C. G. Ehrenberg. Read Oct. 24, 1883. Abhand-
Fungen der Kiniglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften xu Berlin, 1834.


469


CHAP. XX.


VOLUNTARY MOTION.


Tue processes of every living system, like those of inanimate
nature, are carried on with motion.


“¢ By ceaseless action all that is subsists.” *


It is implied in the circulation, secretion, nutrition, and absorp-
tion of the minutest vegetable and animal; and, generally, when
observation is possible, the solids, no less than the fluids within
them, are seen in these functions to move.» Some contend, though
without proof, that the nervous functions are performed with
motion of a vibratary kind. The evident motion of the brain
from circulation and respiration, and the very much larger quan-
tity of blood constantly passing through the brain and other
nervous parts than mere nutrition (unless each functional act causes
waste of solids) can require, and this in proportion to activity of
function, show that in one sense motion is indispensable even to
nervous function. The other functions by which fresh substance
from without is obtained, the blood purified, the new animal
originated, and indeed all those other functions and modes of
function which distinguish animals from vegetables, take place
with manifest and considerable motion, and, though vegetables
have not the power of locomotion, the leaves and flowers of
many of them move rapidly and considerably. Now motions of
the leaves, flowers, and vessels of plants are evidently the result
of life, and are inexplicable by mere gravity, electricity, &c. No
peculiar known structure is united with their movements. Some

* Cowper. Task.

> We witness vegetable fluids passing along surfaces and through cellular
structure; and fluids in some adult animals through such a structure; and in all
before a heart exists, or even vessels at the spot. Many declare that particles
move spontaneously not only in blood (Dr. Tiedemann, 1. c. cclxv.), but in the
juices of plants (cclxxxvii.), (cccc]lxxxiii. sqq.) (also dlxx.). Perhaps some of
these motions are to be explained by the absorption and emission of fluid, some
by evaporation, some by chemical processes altering the position of particles, and


some by extraneous impulse. In many animals we shall see that the movements


of fluids upon surfaces arise from the vibration of hair-like projecting bodies,
termed cilia. |


ri 4


4.70 VITAL ‘MOTION.


animals consist of substance as soft as mucous or gelatinous tissue;
for instance, the polypi, most radiaria, some entozoa and the
infusoria: yet the former will swim or crawl, attach or detach
themselves, and seize prey; the infusoria swim rapidly, turn, and
avoid each. other, and possess distinct muscles. Sedatives and
stimulants affect these movements of vegetables and of such
animals like those of large animals. Such vegetables and animals,
as well as minute insects and infusoria, which evidently perform
what in large animals we should term muscular movements, show
that living structure, though so soft that it cannot be regarded
as precisely similar to the flesh of large animals, —to muscular
fibre,—to what is termed muscle, is capable of living contrac-
tion. Such minute voluntary actions are attended, Raspail de-
clares, in one infusory animalcule—the rotifer, by thickening
during contraction of the muscular cylinders running from its
head to its tail, and by tenuity of them when they lengthen.© In
animals possessing muscles, many parts, not apparently muscular,
contract, and instantaneously and forcibly, by a living force. Such
are minute vessels and canals of all kinds. These lose their con-
tractile power, like muscles, immediately or soon after death.
Some structures are most adapted for contraction, as muscles;
others not at all, as tendons and bones: but others, though not
evidently muscular, possess the faculty in various degrees ; and
to expect distinct muscular fibre in every excitable part would
be erroneous.

The vital power of motion, whether sensible, as in the heart
and voluntary muscles and the leaves and flowers of many vege-
tables; or insensible, (except by its effect on contained fluids) as —
in the minute vessels_of vegetables and animals, may have the
term excitability restricted to it (see supra, p.25.), and thus will
be distinguished from sensibility, to which the idea of motion‘is not
necessary, as seen in the terminations of the optic and olfactory
nerves, though motion may follow sensation; and sensation again is
not necessary to motion, for not only do many animal motions oc-
cur without sensation, but vegetables are utterly destitute of sens-
ation. The term zrritabdlity was peculiarly given by Haller 4 to the


° 1. c. § 497. Dr. Tiedemann says that, with a microscope and strong lens,
he observed contractions and expansions in the simplest infusoria, I. c. dlxxv.
though previously he had asserted that neither could be detected in them,
écccl xiii. ;

a“ See Haller on the irritable parts of the human body, Commentar, Soc. Se.


Golting. t. ls


VITAL MOTION. 4:71


excitability of parts which both move evidently from the applica-
tion of stimuli, and possess: distinct fibres; and he therefore said
that muscles only are irritable®, though other animal parts, as
well as vegetables, possess excitability, — move independently of
gravitation, or chemical or electric circumstances, or mechani-
cal impulse. To deny this power, styled also by Haller wis znsita
or propria, to parts which may not show muscular fibres, or which.
may not move evidently on the application of a stimulus, would
be absurd; yet Haller did this. To avoid confusion, the term
myotility is given to the power of instant and evident con-
traction of fibrous parts on the application of a stimulus: it is


And Nov. Commentar. Gotting. t. iv.

Among innumerable other writers on the same subject, suffice it to quote the
following : —

Zimmerman, De irritabilitate. Gott. 1751. 4to.

Oeder, on the same. Copenhagen, 1752. 4to.

J. Eberh. Andre, on the same. (Pras. Ph. Fr. Gmelin.) Tubing. 1758.
4to.

As well as three entire Collections of writings which related to the great
controversy excited throughout Europe in consequence of the Gottingen
publications. .

Sul? Insensibilita e Irritabilita, Dissertaxioni transportate da J. G. V. Petrint.
Roma, 1755. 4to. “

Sulla Insensitivita ed Irritabilita Halleriana opuscolt raccolti da G.B. Fabri.
Bologna. 1757—59. iv. vol. 4to.

And what were published under Haller’s inspection, Mémoires sur la Nature
sensible et irritable des Parties du Corps Humain. Lausanne, 1756—59.
iv. vol. 12.”

© Our countryman, Dr. Glisson, whose portrait we possess in the College
of Physicians, was the first who absolutely ascribed animal movement to
a specific power, which he termed irritability, (De Natura Substantie ener-
getica, seu de Vite Natura, London, 1672. 4to.),—to a property of being
influenced by excitants; and he distinguished it from sensibility. He pointed
out that it might occur without sensation, with sensation, or through the
will, — ‘‘Irritatio est perceptio, sed sensatio est perceptio perceptionis.” Yet
his facts, for his statements of the existence of such a living power were no
theory but facts, found no supporters, Dr. Tiedemann remarks, (I. c. dxxvi.)
“among his contemporaries, blinded as they were by the system of chemistry
and iatro-mechanics, and were only justly appreciated in the following century.”

Dr. De Gorter pointed out that the former is possessed by all parts of living
bodies and by vegetables also. (wercitationes Medice quatuor. Amstel. 1734. 4to.
Ex. Med. quinta, Amst. 1748, 4to.) . Dr. Glisson had allowed excitability even
to the blood and humours, and Dr. Gaubius of Leyden afterwards did the same.
(Institutiones Pathologie. ‘Leyden, 1758. 4to. p. 169.)


4.72 MUSCLES.


synonymous with the two words — muscular contractility; but we
must regard the power as the same with that which produces the
motions of the minute vessels of all kinds of minute or gelatinous
animals, and those rapid motions of some animal and vegetable
parts which show no fibres, — we must regard it as a form of ex-
citability. The term irritability should have a more extensive
meaning than excitability: for, while this implies motion, irri-
tability implies the general power of being affected by irritating
causes, whether manifested by direct motion or by other changes
which show either sensation or an operation distinct from what
is seen in inanimate bodies: it is in truth vital affectibility in the
largest sense.f ee .

“« The muscles, which are the immediate organs of by far the
greater number of our motions, form the greatest bulk among all
the similar parts.”

‘“‘ They are distinguished from other similar parts chiefly by two
characteristic features, the one derived from their structure, the
other from their remarkable powers.

‘“‘ Their fleshy structure is formed of moving fibres, suz generis,
and of a very faint red colour, and every muscle may be resolved
into fibrous bands, these into bundles of fibres, and these again
into very fine fleshy fibres and fibrils.

“‘ Every muscle possesses a covering of cellular membranes,
which is so interwoven witn its substance as to surround the bands,
the bundles, and even each particular fibre and fibril.

«« Every part of the muscles is amply supplied with blood-vessels
and nervous threads. The latter appear to deliquesce into an
invisible pulp, and unite intimately with the muscular fibres: the
former are so interwoven with the fibres that the whole muscle
is red and acquires its own paleness only by being washed.

“‘ Most muscles terminate in tendons», which are fibrousi parts,
but so different in colour, texture, elasticity, &c., as to be readily
distinguished from muscles: thus disproving the opinion of some,
—that the tendinous fibres originate from the muscular. This
error arose chiefly from the circumstance of the muscles of infants


f In my own use of terms, at note (°) p. 24, 25. supra, irritability and
irritation, should be substituted for excitability and excitement.

& « See Ad. Murray, De Fascia Lata. Upsal. 1777. 4to.”

h «6 See Fourcroy, Mémoires de l Académie des Sciences de Paris, 1785, p. 392.3
and 1786. p. 38.”

i « Albinus, 4nnotat. Academ: |. iv. tab. v. fig. 2.”


MUSCLES. 473


containing a greater number of fleshy fibres, in proportion to the
tendinous, than those of the adult.”

“‘ They are in general divided into hollow and solid. The first,
not directly subject to the will, belong more to the vital and
natural functions.” They are the heart, one of the coats of the
alimentary and respiratory canals, of the urinary bladder, and
of some blood-vessels ; and are seen in a few other parts. They
shorten and narrow the cavity or canal which they surround.

** Among the second,” which are subject to the will, “there is
much variety. For, not to allude to difference of size, there is
great diversity in the disposition of their bands and fasciculi, the
direction of their fibres, the proportion of the fleshy to the
tendinous part, their course, mode of insertion, &c.

* The greatest number are long, and their fleshy bellies,” lying
outside solid parts, and passing over one or more joints, “terminate
at each extremity in tendinous chords, inert, and destitute o
contractility, and fixed to different bones, which, while con-
tracting, they move in the manner of levers.” The movable
solids are drawn towards each other, if of equal mobility and
size; if not, that which is movable or more movable and small is
drawn towards the other.

«« The commonly received law—that a muscle during its con-
traction draws the more movable point of insertion to the more
fixed, must be considered, as Winslow justly remarks, perfectly
relative and subject to various limitations. Thus, for example,
sometimes the one point, and sometimes the other, may be the
more movable, accordingly as the united action of many different
muscles may render the opposite more fixed.”

«‘ While a very few muscles are destitute of tendons, such as the
latissimus colli, an equally small number are not inserted into
bones,” but into soft solids, as into the lips, palate, tongue,
pharynx, nose, eye, ears, genitals. These epprases the hard part
during contraction.

“ A property common to all muscles is to become shorter, more
rigid, and generally unequal, and, as it were, angular, during
contraction,” gaining in thickness what they lose in length.
Dr. Tiedemann argues that, in contracting, a muscle acquires
greater density, because it will support or raise a weight which
would tear it after death. This, however, shows only the more


k « Mém, de? Acad, des Sc. de Paris, 1720,”


4.7 4: MUSCLES.


perfect composition of the part during life than after death. A
muscle, however, may act, without shortening or growing thicker.
If we hold, or act upon, a resisting body without moving it, the
muscle, though in action, does not shorten. Again, a muscle
may be made to shorten without contraction. We can bend
the extremities of a person asleep, and thus his flexors be pas-
sively shortened.

‘To attempt, with J.and D. Bernouilli and ae mathematical
physicians, to reduce the shortening of muscles to a general
admeasurement, is rendered impossible, by the great difference,
among other causes, between the hollow and solid muscles in
this respect, and between the solid muscles themselves, v. c.
between straight muscles (such as the intercostals) and sphinc-
ters.”

Some have peculiar actions, dependent upon figure, situation,
&c., “and, consequently, varying so much as to be referable to no
general laws.

“To cite one instance out of many, that action of certain
muscles is peculiar and anomalous which seldom occurs alone,
but nearly always subsequently to, or simultaneously with, the
action of some of a different order. Such is that of the lum-
bricales, when, during rapid motions of the fingers, they follow
the action of other muscles of the metacarpus and fore-arm; and
of the lateral recti muscles of the eyes, the adducens of either
of which seldom acts unless simultaneously with the abducens of
the other eye.

«« And, on the other hand, although the action of the flexors is
generally so much stronger than that of their antagonists — the
extensors, that, when the body is at rest, the arms, fingers, &c.
are a little bent, this docs not so much depend upon the strength
of the contraction of the flexors, as upon the voluntary relaxation
of the extensors for our own relief.

‘Every muscle has, moreover, a peculiar mechanism!, adapted
to the individual motions for which it is intended.

‘‘ Besides the determinate figure of each, many other kinds of
assistance are afforded to their peculiar motions, v. c. by the
burse mucose, chiefly found among the muscles of the extremities ;
the annular ligaments by which some are surrounded; the fat in


'« P, J. Barthez, Nouvelle Mechanique des Mouvemens de Homme et des
Animaux. Carcass. 1798. 4to.”


MUSCLES. 4.75


which most are imbedded; the lymphatic vapour around each ;
and, above all, by the conformation of the skeleton, chiefly in
regard to apophyses, condyles, and articulations; nay, even
whole bones, v.c. the patella, the pisiform of the carpus, and the
sesamoid bones™, are destined solely to facilitate the actions of
certain muscles.

“In this mode is compensated, or, at least, diminished, that
inevitable loss of power which necessarily takes place from the
conformation and stature of the whole system, as, from the acute
angle at which some muscles are inserted, or the proximity of
their insertion to the centre of motion, much of that power is lost
which would have existed, if their insertion had been more remote
or at a more obtuse angle.

‘¢ The human body, possessing about 450 voluntary muscles, or
upwards, according to sexual or individual variety, is thus fur-
nished with a double advantage,— with an extreme agility of
motion in particular parts and throughout the whole, and with a
surprising degree of strength and endurance of labour. Both
these are accomplished partly by the perfection of the muscles
that, like the perfection of the bones, takes place at manhood;
and partly by habit and practice, the power of the former of
which in affording strength and agility to the muscles is demon-
strated in rope-dancers, leapers, runners, wrestlers, porters, sa-
vages, and the examples of ancient nations.” °

When a muscle has ended its contraction, antagonising muscles,
the elasticity or gravity of parts, solid, fluid, or gaseous contents
pushed forwards from the higher portions of the canal, &c. &c.,
are enabled, through its diminished resistance, to elongate it. The
mere cessation, however, of its contraction must be supposed to
lengthen a muscle. For if, while under the exertion of a force
drawing it together it is of a given length, this cannot remain the
same when this force is no longer exerted. But any great elong-
ation of it is accomplished by antagonising powers. When the
heart has contracted, its relaxation is said, as we have seen, to be


™ « Hence, of all animals which I have dissected, the mole is supplied with


the most remarkable apparatus of sesamoid bones; its anterior palmated feet,
with which it digs, have many of these bones, which greatly facilitate the action
of the brachial muscles.”

" « Gilb. Blane, On Muscular Motion, p. 51.”

° «JT have treated on this point at large, in the Medic. Diblioth, vol. ii.
p. 407.”


4:76 MUSCLES.


attended with an active enlargement of the organ forcing it
energetically against the hand if placed upon it.

We will now consider the anatomy and physiology of the ultimate
muscular fibre. Mr. Hare affirms that, in the field of a moderately
powerful microscope, a muscular fibre evidently appears made up
of numerous minute tubes, each exhibiting longitudinal strize with
transverse bands; the average diameter of cach of these ultimate
fibres or tubes being =1, of an inch.P Under contraction, the por-
tions between the transverse bands draw the latter nearer together,
and, swelling out, seem girted by them, so that the whole fibre some-
what resembles a string of eggs. This appearance, Mr. Hare sup-
poses, led Dr. Croon to adopt the idea that the ultimate fibre of
muscle was constituted by a chain of bladders filled with fluid.
In fact, Mr. Bauer thinks he discovers muscular fibres to be chains
of globules4, and Prevost and Dumas declare the same from their
microscopic observations.t. The muscular tubes are represented
by Mr. Hare as filled with a matter which causes them to appear
solid till it is liquefied by heat: Mascagni describes the muscular
fibre as a small cylinder, filled with glutinous matters Fon-
tana asserts that the primitive muscular fibre is marked by con-
tinual minute crispations and nodosities, and that it pursues a
straight course, but is solid like the tendinous. Meckel, Rudolphi,
and ‘Tiedemann believe the primitive muscular fibre solid. Dr.
Hodgkin found it not to consist of globules, and to be marked
by transverse lines, which he thinks distinguish muscular from all
other fibres. Raspail, like Mr. Hare, corroborates the assertion
of Mascagni. He declares that every muscle, like the adipose
texture and vegetable organs in general, consists of cells inclosed
within each other in an indefinite series; but that, whereas their cells
approach to a spherical form, those of muscle are cylindrical. The
ultimate cylinders are closely applied to each other in very loose
spirals round an imaginary axis ; and each is full of a substance not
completely miscible with water; and here and there globules ap-
pear irregularly, in contact with the inner surface. In the bullock,


P Thomas Hare, 4 View of the Structure, Functions, and Disorders of the
Stomach, &c. p. 28. sq. 1821.

9 Phil. Trans. 1818. J. F. Meckel, by microscopical observations, fancies
the muscular no less than the nervous fibre, and the substance of the liver, kidney,
spleen, &c., to be globular.

r Annales de Chimie, t. xviii. * Prodromo. p. 97.


MUSCLES, 477


each cylinder is 002 of an inch in diameter, and slightly crimson.
A bundle of cylinders is enveloped in a membrane; and such
masses are enveloped in another membrane; these larger masses
in others; till all have one general outer covering, which is usually
white and hard towards its extremities, and terminates in a white
shining chord called tendon and inserted into periosteum.“ The
fibres of tendon are said to be really solid, of infinitely smaller
diameter, and disposed in a reticulated manner. Even cellular
membrane is said to consist of reticulated tubular fibres, =4,, of
an inch in diameter on the average, and exhibiting transverse con-
tractions.x Fontana, by means of glasses of moderate powers,
found tendon to be composed of bands, which again are com-
posed of solid spiral cylinders, of uniform size, and pursuing a
tortuous course.Y

M.M. Prevost and Dumas assert that the muscular fibres, straight
while at rest, approximate each other at intervals, under con-
traction, so as to acquire a zigzag course (\/\/\/\/) and shorten
the distance of their two extreme points? ; and thus Dr. Hales re-
marked that, when the abdominal muscles of a frog contracted,
“the scene instantly changed from parallel fibres to series of rhom-
boidal pinnulz, which immediately disappear as soon as the muscle
ceases to act.” They ascertained satisfactorily that during con-
traction no increase of volume is acquired If muscles, while the
fibres are straight, are stretched still more, as continually hap-
pens in the muscular coats of cavities, the subsequent shrinking
to the original dimensions is unattended by the zigzag appear-
ance. Nervous filaments, they also assert, go perpendicularly to
the muscular fibre at the very points where the angles are formed
under the zigzag contraction, and yet not to terminate there or
unite with the muscular fibres, but to return to the same nerve or
anastomose with other nerves. The approximation of the nerv-
ous filaments to each other is thought to draw the muscular
fibres into angles, and thus be the cause of muscular con-
traction. But Raspail objects that it is hard to conceive how


‘ « The ultimate muscular filament has been estimated at ;,, of an inch in
diameter: their union forms fasciculi. Prochaska says that 200 fasciculi form
a bundle; these are from } to 4 of an inch in diameter.” Dr. Tiedemann,
l. c. p. 418. additional notes by Drs. Gully and Hunter Lane.

“ Nouveau Systeme, § 490. sqq.

* Mr. Hare, |. c. p. 36. Y Sur les Poisons, t. ii, p. 230. sq.

* Dr. Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, t. iii. * Hemastatics, p. 59.


4.78 MUSCLES.


elastic filaments could form lines so sharply angled; that he him-
self could not distinguish by the microscope which filament be-
longed to nerve and which to muscle; and that, if MM. Prevost
and Dumas did see something like what they represent, their ex-
periment was worth nothing, because, the muscular lamina being in
contact with the object-holder in many points, any tremor caused
mechanically or by galvanism applied to the nervous fibre would
produce sinuous movements which afterwards were supposed
more or less regular and angular. In short, he truly says that
the only rational mode of observation is with a living muscle in ac-
tion ; that he has carefully watched the contraction of the muscles
of the feet of gasteropoda, &c. and always found the fibre simply
shorten, its diameter increasing at the time and small swellings
appearing throughout its length>

Dr. Wollaston ¢ states that muscular contraction is accompanied
by a vibratory sound like that of carriages passing rapidly over
a pavement at a distance ; and infers that it is not continuous but
intermitting, consisting of a number of contractions repeated at
extremely short intervals: and he fancied that such vibratory
alternations might be about twenty or thirty ina second. He
applied the ball of the thumb to the ear, pressing the end of
the thumb at the same time against the head. As soon as the
thumb is bent so as to press against the head, the noise is heard;
and I find it far louder if both thumbs are used at once, and still
louder if the jaws are at the same time tightly closed. In regard,
however, to the intermittence of muscular action, a friend informs
me that the action of the muscles of the eye cannot intermit
even the 2000th part of a second, because, if a luminous point is
moved with rapidity-perpendicularly, and the eye horizontally,
the luminous line is not a zigzag, as it would be were there inter-
missions, but perfectly continuous.4

The muscles, voluntary and involuntary, of all animals in which
a nervous system has been discovered, contain nerves; for the
will operates by encephalo-spinal nerves on the voluntary muscles,
and the stimulating contents of involuntary muscles do not act,
except by distension, directly upon them, but upon a membrane


b lhc. § 494, sqq. © Phil. Trans. 1810, p. 2. sqq.

¢ Two curious cases are related in Dr. James Johnson’s Med.-Chir. Review,
Oct. 1834, of the action of muscles occurring with a cracking noise like that of
snapping joints, and with pain.


MUSCLES, 479


which lines them, as in the case of the heart and blood-vessels, the
alimentary canal, and other hollow muscles, nor does light act
upon the iris but upon the retina, and the influence of emotions,
sudden or continued, on the action of all involuntary muscular
parts, whether large, like the heart and as in the alimentary
canal, or minute, as in the capillary vessels, must be communi-
cated by nerves. Some vivisectors say that a stimulus applied
to the nerves of an involuntary part do not excite it ; others
assert the reverse. But any stimulus applied to a nerve belong-
ing toa voluntary muscle, mechanical or pungent, heat or elec-
tricity, excites it instantly to action, and will excite it after
pricking or cutting the fibres themselves has ceased to produce
contraction.¢ Stimulation still further back, of certain parts of the
chorda spinalis or oblongata, or of the brain, has the same effect.
Division of the nerves or spinal chord, great compression, dis-
integration, any thing which prevents continuity of influence
from the brain to the termination of the nerve in the muscle,
destroy the power of the will. The contractility of the
muscle is of course unimpaired; it contracts equally as before,
if a stimulus is applied to it or to the portion of the nerve
connected with it. Yet, some contend that the very power of
contraction depends upon nerves. They adduce the influence of
poisons, applied to the nerves, in destroying the irritability of
muscles to which they are distributed, and declare that, even if
strong poison is applied to the nerves of muscles detached from a
living animal, the muscles cannot afterwards be excited.f But
Fontana discovered that the portion only of the nerve that has
been in contact with alcohol is incapacitated from conveying
stimulus ; so that, if the stimulus is applied to the nerve farther on,
the muscle contracts as at first. Even had not Fontana made
this discovery, the effect could have been ascribed to the trans-
mission only of the effects of the poison along the nerve, and
could, like the effect of mechanical and all other irritation of
the nerves upon muscles, have shown only the connection and
influence between the two. Dr. Whytt discovered that, if an
animal is poisoned by opium, the effects pervade the system much


® Whytt. Physiol. Essays. ed. 2.1761. p. 249. Sensibility.
£ Dr. Bostock. Elemen. Syst. of Phys. ed. 3. p. 179. Dr. Tiedemann, ccccxlii.
& This was fully confirmed, in regard to other narcotics, by Dr. C. Henry,
Edinb. Med. and Surgical Journal, 1832. No. CX, p. 17-
K K


480 MUSCLES.


more if the brain and spinal chord are entire, than if they are
previously removed: and the inference is clear, that the nerves
more readily transmit the effects of the poison than other parts, and
not that the muscles lose their excitability through the loss of the
nervous influence ; because the destruction of the brain and spinal
chord has not the effect of poison.s Another fact of the same
kind is the immediate cessation of the action of the heart or of
the intestines by the injection of poison into their cavities, while
its application to their external surface operates slowly upon
them." Far greater nervous connection must exist between their
inner surface than their outer surface and their muscular fibres,
because these are destined for stimulation by their contents, and
not by matters on the exterior; and thus the effects of poisons
will be more readily transmitted by the inner than the outer
surface, just like the effects of all stimulating causes. Detached
muscles contract under the application of various stimuli of
all kinds, and this looks as if their power of contraction is
their.own. When a detached muscle can be excited no longer,
a little rest enables it to become excitable again: and the
alternations may be repeated many times. Nay, if a muscle is
not detached, but merely all its nerves divided so that its life is
preserved, its excitability may be exhausted and recovered for
some days.! The power continues longer after separation in cold
than in warm blooded animals ; in voluntary muscles than in the
involuntary; and Dr. Whytt discovered, also, that, when an


= Whytt himself infers that ‘* opium does not only destroy the moving power
of the muscles of animals, by intercepting the influence of the brain and spinal
marrow, but also by unfitting the muscular fibres themselves, or the nervous
power lodged in them, for performing its office.” «It destroys their powers, by
means of that sympathy which they have through the brain or spinal marrow,
with the nerves to which the opium is immediately applied.” Haxperiments made
with Opium on living and dying Animals. First published in Ed. Physical and
Literary Essays. 1755. (r.)

I may remark that he found the nearest part of the nervous system to be the
most affected ; for, when a solution of opium was inserted into the large in-
testines, “* dogs not only lost the power of motion sooner in their hinder legs
than in their fore ones, but also were insensible of any pain in them, and yet
howled strongly when their ears were pinched.” (m.)

h Dr. Munro Secundus, and Dr. Wilson Philip; confirmed by Dr. C. Henry,
l,c. Still Whytt found opium to poison the whole system sooner if injected
into the peritonzum than into the stomach or rectum. 1. c. Exp. 21, 22, 23.

i Report of the Fourth Meeting of the British Association. 1835. p. 671. sqqe


MUSCLES. 481


animal is poisoned by opium, the actions of the involuntary muscles
of the heart and intestines continue after the voluntary muscles
have ceased to contract on the application of the scalpel*; the
power continues longer in the muscles of the young than of
the old; of the well fed than of the ill fed; in warmth than in
cold; in atmospheric air and oxygen than in irrespirable gases ;
and strong stimuli, chemical agents, or narcotics, applied to
either muscles or their nerves, rapidly annihilate their powers. !
Repeated stimulation exhausts a muscle more slowly if its nerves
have been divided, because, while the nerves are in connection
with it ™, the stimulus affects them also and thus the muscle
indirectly as well as directly. If the power of contraction de-
pended on the nerves, the division of the nerves, by cutting off
the supply of power, should hasten exhaustion. Vegetables
have no nerves, and yet exhibit striking movements. If a
muscle, in a mean state of extension, is divided transversely
in the living body, the two portions instantly separate ; and Bi-
chat found that they separate just as far if its nerves have been
previously divided, — another fact in harmony with the opinion
of the contractility of muscles being inherent. To ascribe mus-
cular excitability to the nervous system, is but an individual
instance of the ascription of the vital properties of all parts to
the nervous system, — an opinion which I endeavoured to refute
at page 431. sqq. supra.» Still the contraction of voluntary
muscles is not only excited by nerves at the moment of volition,
but preserved constantly to a certain point by the encephalo-
spinal nerves of motion, because, if connection with them is dé-
stroyed, or the portion of the encephalon or spinal chord with
which they unite is disorganised or compressed, the antagonist
muscles, as those of the face, overpower them, or the sphincter
of the rectum or bladder is no longer able to retain. ‘Thus in
hemiplegia the muscles of the mouth half draw their antagonists


* Of course galvanism to their nerves is equally inoperative. Dr. C, Henry,
Lc ti Pe.

1 Dr. Tiedemann, 1. c. cccecxlv.

™ Dr. Wilson Philip, Exp. Inquiry, p. 100.

« Whytt, in opposition to Haller, contended that the susceptibility of excite-
ment. in muscles,— the recognition of stimulus,—depended altogether upon their
nerves ; and that stimuli excite them by producing an uneasy feeling in them or
their nerves. Essay on the Vital and Involuntary Motions of Animals. Edinb.
1751,


KK 2


482 MUSCLES.


towards them: in perfect paraplegia, the sphincters of the rectum
and bladder no longer retain their respective contents. Some
persons, as Cuvier, and since him Dr. Tiedemann, allow excita-
bility to be inherent in muscles, but contend that it is always acted
upon through the medium of nerves. It is, however, a mere
assumption that, if stimulus can be applied to muscular structure,
directly, the presence of nerves is indispensable. Distension acts
directly on the muscular fibres; but, with this exception, the
functions of muscles are excited intermediately, and therefore
through nerves.

The constant tension of muscles is called their tone. After
the retraction of the two portions of a divided muscle, these
will contract further on stimulation, and relax again to the
length they had after retraction. If overstretched, as by a
tumour or other cause, muscles lose much of their forced
length immediately on the removal of the cause, but may not
completely recover for some time; and such shortening is said
by Prevost and Dumas not to be accompanied by a zigzag di-
rection of their fibres, though this appears in them as soon as
farther contraction is excited by galvanism. If a muscle not
yverstretched is divided transversely in several places before its
life has ceased, each portion necessarily retracts and necessarily
grows harder and heavier. When this is done with fish, it is called
crimping, and the retraction is, as might be expected, heightened
by immersing the portions in cold water. When fish are to be
crimped, they are knocked on the head as soon as caught, that
they may crimp the better. This impairment of their nervous
powers preserves the power of the muscles, which would other-
wise be lost in the struggles of the poor animal: but, if the con-
tractility of muscle depended upon nervous energy, it should
impair the effects of crimping. This retraction on transverse di-
vision takes place only during life or very soon after death, because
muscles grow rigid when life has ceased. The latter rigidity
is unattended by contraction: it is a mere consolidation, and unfits
the fibres for contraction from any cause. Mr. Mayo says that
the injection of warm water into the arteries of a muscle induces
sudden rigidity. I presume that, like the coagulation of the
blood or of albumen, it is amerely chemical change. When death
occurs under circumstances which prevent the coagulation of the
blood, the rigidity of the muscles is said to be equally prevented.


° Outlines of Human Physiology, ed. 3. p. 38.


MUSCLES. 483


If a muscle has been much distended, it does not contract
readily at first. This we notice in the case of the urinary bladder:
when the urine has'been retained too long it stops, after flowing
for a short time; and flows again when the bladder has a little
recovered itself. Leeuwenhoek believed that over-distension of
the heart might cause sudden death: and he probably was right, for
sometimes nothing is seen in cases of sudden death but extreme
distension of the right half. of the heart, and Professor Coleman,
after hanging and drowning animals, found the right auricle and
ventricle turgid with blood, and the auricle insusceptible of irri-
tation; but, on opening one of its veins and allowing blood to
escape, the application of stimulus in a few minutes induced con-
traction of the auricle? Pressure upon a muscle facilitates its
action. ‘Thus the over-distended bladder, and the uterus after
delivery, contract better if the hand is placed over them; and a
moderate ligature is often employed by those who are about to
make much exertion with particular muscles. |

When a muscle is weakened by excessive action, a peculiar
unpleasant sensation is experienced, termed fatigue. The weaker
the system, the sooner is this sensation experienced, General
weakness at the commencement of disease is usually attended
by this sensation of weariness, though, when disease is over and
mere weakness remains, it is commonly not felt till exertion is
made. Distress of mind will bring on this sensation. Whena_
set of muscles is much more exercised than usual, they at first
become stiff and painful: but these conditions soon cease, not-
withstanding equal exercise is persevered with.

All muscles increase by use; so that, if a man has spent much
of his life in some mechanical occupation which requires the
action of particular muscles, these are easily distinguished through
their disproportionate magnitude. It is thought that the mus-
cular fibres of the urinary bladder increase by exercise more than
any others; a continued obstruction to the exit of the urine calls
them into such exertion that the inner surface of this organ often
resembles that of a cardiac cavity. The heart also frequently
grows inordinately from obstruction to the exit of its blood. But
this organ, above all other muscular parts, will grow inordinately
from mere morbid disposition. In the heart this hypertrophy
may produce much distress, if any undue excitement occurs;


P Lectures on the Blood, by James Wilson, F.R.S. London, 1819.
| KK 3


484 VOLUNTARY AND


whereas, in another muscle, the overgrowth may be a matter of
no importance. In different persons, different muscles may be better
developed and stronger than others: and some persons have their
general voluntary muscular system remarkably developed. When
this is the case, there is usually a disposition to employ the more
powerful parts freely, and thus exercise farther augments them.
From the most ancient times some men have performed extraordin-
ary feats of strength. Milo of Crete, after killing an ox with his fist,
carried it through the stadium,—a space of 625 feet ; and, when the
pillar which supported the roof of his master’s school gave way, he
saved Pythagoras and the scholars from destruction by supporting
the roof himself till they escaped. The Jews had their Sampson ;
and at,our shows I have seen a man support a table with many
persons upon it and even carry it some little distance between his
teeth. Muscular strength appears by Dr. Edwards’s experiments
to vary at different periods of the day, and to be much affected by
diet. By means of the dynamometer he found it increase during
the first half of the day,.and decrease during the latter; to be in-
stantly increased by a moderate and nutritious meal, except in the
weak, in whom the immediate effect of a meal was depression of
the strength. Mere water, especially warm, and sugar and water,
also instantly diminished the strength. Gelatine, well flavoured
with the skin and odorous parts of meat, gave the greatest
strength. 4

The muscles are usually divided into involuntary and volun-
tary, — those which we have not ordinarily the power of di-
rectly contracting, and. those which we have ordinarily the
power of directly contracting. The action of the heart and all
vessels, canals, and cavities, except the outward opening of
some, is involuntary: that of most other muscles, voluntary,
The mind, however, though not its will, powerfully affects in-
voluntary muscles. Under emotion, the action of the heart may
be excited or depressed: any one part may grow turgid and red
or shrink and grow pale: and by thinking, voluntarily, of circum-
stances calculated to excite such emotions, we may voluntarily,
in this indirect manner, affect the action of involuntary parts,
and even without thinking of circumstances affecting ourselves,
but. by only dwelling on the circumstances of others,— as in
reading. Betterton the actor, when playing Hamlet, could cause


1 Read in the pede: of Arts and Sciences at Paris, Feb, 11. 1835.


INVOLUNTARY MUSCEES. 485


his:face at once to become bloodless... Blumenbach says he has
seen “some persons able, at any time, to produce a spasmodic
horripilation of the skin, by representing some unpleasant object
to their imagination. Others have had the power of exciting local
sweat in the hands, &c.’”* Strong feelings and a strong power of
attention may render many involuntary parts thus indirectly
voluntary. Whether strong attention explains the power which
some possess over the iris, I donot know. The distribution of
its nerves is sometimes unusual, and this may render it directly:
voluntary. Blumenbach says he once found “the action of the
stomach distinctly voluntary in a ruminating man.” Unusual dis-
tribution of nerves may occur any where just as of arteries: and,
if a nerve of voluntary motion should run to a muscle intended
to be involuntary, this would become voluntary. *


* Penny Cyclopedia.

* « See, for instance, T. Bartholin, dct. Hafniens. 1676. vol. iv. p. 191.”

t « See the Rapport des Commissaires chargés par le Roi de Examen du
Magnétisme Animal, written by J. Sylv. Bailly, a. man worthy of a better
fate. Paris, 1784. 4to. p. 16.”

* Belingeri informs us that: Mascagni found the iris voluntary in Fontana.
Dissertatio Inauguralis, P. iis §. xxi. F ‘

* Dr. Cheyne, in his Treatise on Nervous Diseases, p. 307. sq., relates the
following case, which is often adduced as an instanee of voluntary power over
the heart. If it was, this power had not always existed, nor could it be exerted’
at once as over voluntary muscles: and probably the mental influence’ was-
indirect.

“ Colonel Townshend, a gentleman of excellent natural parts, and of great
honour and integrity, had for many years been afflicted with a nephritic com-
plaint, attended with constant vomitings, which had made his life painful and °
miserable. During the whole time of his illness he had observed the strictest
regimen, living on the softest vegetables and lightest animal foods, drinking™
asses’ milk daily, even in the camp; and for common drink Bristol water,
which, the summer before his death, he had drunk on the spot. But his illness
increasing and his strength decaying, he came from Bristol to Bath in a litter,
in autumn, and lay at the Bell Inn. Dr. Baynard and I were called to him,
and attended him twice a-day for about the space of a week, but his vomitings
continuing still incessant and obstinate against all remedies, we despaired of ‘his
recovery. While he was in this condition, he sent for us early one morning;
we waited on him with Mr. Skrine his apothecary ; we found his senses clear
and his mind calm; his nurse and several servants were about him. He had
made his will and settled his affairs. He told-us he had sent for us to give him
some account of an odd sensation he had for some time observed and felt in
himself, which was, that composing himself, he could die or expire when he
pleased, and yet by an effort, or somehow, he could come to life again; which it

KK 4


486 VOLUNTARY AND


On the other hand, there is no voluntary muscle that may not
act involuntarily. If the motive to contract a muscle is very


seems he had sometimes tried before he had sent for us. We heard this with
surprise ; but as it was not to be accounted for from now common principles,
we could hardly believe the fact as he related it, much less give any account of
it, unless he should please to make the experiment before us, which we were
unwilling he should do, lest in his weak condition he might carry it too far.
He continued to talk very distinctly and sensibly above a quarter of an hour
about this (to him) surprising sensation, and insisted so much on our seeing the
trial made, that we were at last forced to comply. We all three felt his pulse
first: it was distinct, though small and thready, and his heart had its usual
beating. He composed himself on his back, and ‘lay in a still posture some
time; while I held his right hand, Dr. Baynard laid his hand on his heart, and
Mr. Skrine held a clean looking-glass to his mouth. I found his pulse sink
gradually, till at last I could not feel any by the most exact and nice touch.
Dr. Baynard could not feel the least motion of his heart, nor Mr. Skrine the
least soil of breath on the bright mirror he held to his mouth; then each of us
by turns examined his arm, heart, and breath, but could not by the nicest
scrutiny discover the least symptom of life in him. . We reasoned a long time
about this odd appearance as well as we could, and all of us judging it inexpli-
cable and unaccountable ; and finding he still continued in that condition, we
began to conclude that he had indeed carried the experiment too far, and at last
were satisfied he was actually dead, and were just ready to leave him. This
continued about half an hour, by nine o’clock in the morning, in autumn. As
we were going away, we observed some motion about the body, and upon
examination, found his pulse and the motion of his heart gradually returning :
he began to breathe gently, and speak softly: we were all astonished to the last
degree at this unexpected change, and after some further conversation with him
and among ourselves, went away fully satisfied as to all the particulars of this
fact, but confounded and puzzled, and not able to form any rational scheme that
might account for it. He afterwards called for his attorney, added a codicil toe
his will, settled legacies on his servants, received the sacrament, and calmly and
composedly expired about five or six o’clock that evening. Next day he was
opened (as he had ordered) : his body was the soundest and best made I had
ever seen ; his lungs were fair, large, and sound ; his heart big and strong, and
his intestines sweet and clean; his stomach was of a due proportion, the coats
sound and thick, and the villous membrane quite entire. But when we came to
examine the kidneys, though the left was perfectly sound and of a just size, the
right was about four times as big, distended like a blown bladder, and yielding
as if full of pap; he having often passed a wheyish liquor after his urine, during
his illness. Upon opening this kidney, we found it quite full of a white chalky
matter, like plaster of Paris, and all the fleshy substance dissolved and worn
away, by what I called a nephritic cancer. This had been the source of all his
misery ; and the symptomatic vomitings from the irritation on the consentient
nerves, had quite starved and worn him down. I have narrated the facts, as I


INVOLUNTARY MUSCLES. 487


strong, we may not be able to refrain from willing its contraction ;
just as a very strong motive may involuntarily impel us to will
any mental operation. If you cause strong pain or titillation in a
person, he will be compelled, whatever restraint he may at-
tempt upon himself, to cry out or laugh, and to make an effort
to remove it by motion of some part. We are instinctively and
almost unconsciously led to will suitable motions, and if, as
usually is the case, we have no motive not to yield to the in-
clination, the motion takes place almost without the appearance
of our will. It is thus that we breathe and wink all day. The
respiratory muscles deserve the epithet voluntary as much as any
in the body, for we directly contract themy: we feel an uneasy
sensation in the chest from the retardation which occurs to the
blood, and we inspire to remove it; the uneasiness being re-
moved, our effort ceases, and expiration spontaneously ensues.
The necessity for sighing after reading or listening attentively
arises from our having forgotten to breathe fully,— not having
fully perceived the want of breath while our attention was so oc-
cupied?; and the general coughing and sneezing in church at
a pause in the sermon are owing to the sensations which give rise
to those actions having been for a time overpowered throughout
the congregation by other feelings.* It is true that respiration
continues while we are asleep, and that the uneasiness is so
great that we are forced to inspire.» But the same is true
of all voluntary muscles.


saw and observed them, deliberately and distinctly, and shall leave to the philo-~
sophic reader to make what inferences he thinks fit; the truth of the material
circumstances I will warrant.”’ :

M. Ribes is said to have published a similar case: but I have not been able
to findit. é

y This is the opinion of Haller, and ably defended by him, El. Physiol. t. iii.
lib. viii. § 18.

‘% Dr. Darwin, Zoonomia, vol. i.

a Dr, Alison’s Observations on Sympathy in the Edinburgh Med. Chirurg.
Trans. vol. ii.

> Opposite circumstances have an opposite effect. When the French soldiers
drove the Piedmontese on the tops of the Alps between St. Bernard and Cenis,
Parat and Martin say that the mouth and nose were involuntarily closed against
the storm, — that all attempts at inspiration were fruitless, and, if they could not
oppose the blast by turning round or putting the hand to the mouth, they fell
down giddy and died. (Mém, de la Soc, Méd. de Lyons. 1798.)


488 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


First, as. to the continuance of respiration during sleep.
If you irritate any part, of a person asleep, an effort of some
kind is made to withdraw from. the source of uneasiness;
and people turn in, their sleep when uncomfortable ;_ fowls
perch on one leg, voluntarily contracting their claws be-
fore they go to sleep, and remain thus supported till they
awake, though the bent condition of the claw is mucl: pre-
served by mere mechanism. But men will sleep standing : som-
nambulists unconsciously perform astonishing muscular, move-
ments: and, while awake, we. continue winking, coughing,
and often continue. walking, or performing other. voluntary ac-.
tions, while our minds are totally absorbed in. reflecting and give
no perceptible, attention to our corporeal movements; a person
will play even a rapid piece of music, familiar to him, while
thinking and: perhaps-talking of something else, and forgetting
that. he is at the instrument, though originally each of the
infinite number of volitions requisite to the performance may have:
been. slow. and laborious¢*: nay, a person may fall asleep after
beginning, a very habitual, set of actions, and continue them;


© Dr. Whytt confounded mind and life, and, believing that they were an im-
material substance, and matter incapable of vital and mental properties or soul,
ascribed all the functions of animal. bodies, human and brute, to a soul”
diffused through every part. (Of the Vital and Involuntary Motions of Ani-
mals. 1751. sect. xi. obj. i.) But, notwithstanding this prejudice and hypothesis,
he shows that volition may be exerted without consciousness. ‘ Many of the,
voluntary motions are performed,” he says, “when we are insensible of the
power of the will excited in their production. ‘Thus, while in walking, we either
meditate by ourselves, or converse with others, we move the muscles of our legs
and thighs, without attending to it or knowing what we are doing. We are not
sensible of the eye-lids being kept open by the continued operation of the will ;
but yet, when drowsiness and sleep steal upon us, we find it requires a con-
siderable effort to prevent the falling down of the superior palpebre. The same
thing is known of the muscles which support the head. ‘The most probable
account of our ignorance of these things seems to be this;— namely, that we
not only acquire, through habit, a faculty of performing certain motions with
greater ease than at first, but also, in proportion as this facility is increased, we
become less sensible of any share or concern the mind has in them. ‘Thus a
young player upon the harpsichord, or a dancer, is, at first, solicitous about
every motion of his fingers, or every step he makes, while the proficients or masters
in these arts, perform the very same motions, not only more dexterously, but
almost without any reflection or attention to what they are about. (Ib. obj. iii.)

Mr. Dugald Stewart’s chapter on attention (Elements of the Philosophy of
the Human Mind. 1792. ch. ii.) well deserves perusal, though published forty-
one years after Dr, Whytt’s Essay.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 489


as, we have seen in the instance of poor little children, who, when
dead asleep, were observed still to move their fingers as if at


«¢ In the case of some operations which are very familiar to us, we find our-
selves unable to attend to, or to recollect, the acts of the will by which they were
preceded ; and accordingly, some philosophers of great eminence have called in
question the existence of such volitions; and have represented our habitual
actions as involuntary and mechanical. But surely the circumstance of our
inability to recollect our'volitions, does not authorise us to dispute their possi-
bility; any more than our inability to attend to the process of the mind, in
estimating the distance of an object from the eye, authorises us to affirm that the
perception is instantaneous. Nor does it add any force to the objection to urge,
that there are instances in which we find it difficult, or perhaps impossible, to
check our habitual actions by a contrary volition. For it must be remembered,
that this contrary volition does not remain with us steadily during the whole
operation; but is merely a general intention or resolution, which is banished
from the mind, as soon as the occasion presents itself, with which the habitual
train of our thoughts and volitions is associated.

‘It may indeed be said, that these observations only prove the possibility that
our habitual actions may be voluntary. But if this be admitted, nothing more
can well be required; for surely, if these phenomena are clearly explicable
from the known and acknowledged laws of the human mind, it would be un-
philosophical to devise a new principle, on purpose to account for them. The
doctrine, therefore, which I have laid down with respect to the nature of habits,
is by no means founded on hypothesis, as has been objected to me by. some of
my friends; but, on the contrary, the charge of hypothesis falls on those who
attempt to explain them, by saying that they are mechanical or automatic; a
doctrine which, if it is at all intelligible, must be understood as implying the
existence of some law of our constitution, which has been hitherto unobserved
by philosophers ; and to which, I believe, it will be difficult to find any thing
analogous in our constitution.”

«IT cannot help thinking it more philosophical to suppose, that these actions
which are originally voluntary, always continue so; although, in the case of
operations which are become habitual in consequence of long practice, we may
not be able to recollect every differect volition. Thus, in the case of a performer
on the harpsichord, I apprehend, that there is an act of the will preceding every
motion of every finger, although he may not be able to recollect these volitions
afterwards; and although he may, during the time of his performance, be em-
ployed in carrying on a separate train of thought. For, it must be remarked
that the most rapid performer can, when he pleases, play so slowly, as to be able
to attend to, and to recollect, every separate act of his will in the various moye-
ments of his fingers; and he can gradually accelerate the rate of his execution,
till he is unable to recollect these acts.. Now, in this instance, one of two sup~
positions must be made: the one is, that the operations in the two cases are
carried on precisely in the same manner, and differ only in the degree of rapidity ;
and that when this rapidity exceeds a certain rate, the acts of the will are too


490 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


work after the machinery had all stopped. (supra, p. 460.) There
is nothing surprising in this, if we consider the counterpart in
regard to sensation. For that, on the other hand, we may have
sensations and not be aware of them, is shown by persons falling
asleep at church and remaining so during the sermon, but awaking
as soon as the preacher’s voice is silent. The effect of the cessa-
tion of the stimulus shows that the stimulus was all along felt—
These facts are true of all voluntary muscles: and so likewise
are those of the facility of action where there is no habit but an
instinctive impulse to will certain motions. In one sense all
voluntary motions are instinctive: that is as far as men and
brutes know nothing of their muscles, and do not determine upon
contraction of these fibres or those, or of this combination
of muscles or that, or upon the amount of contraction in each re-
spective muscle, but upon such a movement as they choose of a


momentary to leave any impression on the memory. — The other is, that when’
the-rapidity exceeds a certain rate, the operation is taken entirely out of our

hands; and is carried on by some unknown power, of the nature of which we

are as ignorant, as of the cause of the circulation of the blood, or of the motion

of the intestines. The last supposition seems to me to be somewhat similar to

that of a man who should maintain, that, although a body projected with a

moderate velocity, is seen to pass through all the intermediate spaces in moving

from one place to another, yet we are not entitled to conclude, that this happens’
when the body moves so quickly as to become invisible to the eye. The former’
supposition is supported by the analogy of many other facts in our constitution.

Of some of these, I have already taken notice ; and it would be easy to add to

the number. — An expert accountant, for example, can sum up, almost with a

single glance of his eye, a long column of figures. He can tell the sum, with

unerring certainty ; while, at the same time, he is unable to recollect any one of
the figures of which that sum is composed; and yet nobody doubts, that each

of these figures has passed through his mind, or supposes, that when the rapidity

of the process becomes so great that he is unable to recollect the various steps of:
it, he obtains the result by a sort of inspiration.”

The rapidity of the volitions can afford no objection. ‘ A person playing on
the harp, dancing, and singing, at the same time, exercises about three hundred
muscles at once. (G. Ent, dnimadv. in Thrustoni diatribam, p. 130.) ” Inspeak-
ing, fifteen hundred letters may be distinctly pronounced in a minute, each
requiring a separate volition. The rapidity of thought is still quicker. Ra-
pidity, like minuteness, is only relative to what we commonly witness. An ani-
mal millions of times smaller than the minutest known microscopic creature
might have as great a complexity of parts as ourselves; movement might be’
millions of times swifter than any thing we ever observed.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 491


moveable part. In another sense all voluntary motions are in-
stinctive, because, on the occurrence of certain wishes, of a cer-
tain strength, we perform certain motions: a person who dances,
dances because his wish is at a certain height ; a man who makes
a machine, cuts and arranges its parts through the same cause.
But some sensations, some states, cause us and brutes to
will certain motions without habit or experience; and yet the
occurrence of will is just as clear. The teat in the young
animal’s mouth causes it directly it is born to will suction. The
only difference in this case is one of time: the particular sens-
ation or state is, without habit or circuitous circumstances, at
once followed by the action. ‘To depress the head, when passing
on the top of a coach under a low arch, is just as instinctive:
and the action of any muscle may be so willed, or any com-
bination of muscles.

Secondly as to our being forced to inspire. If you cause.
strong pain or titillation in a person, he will be compelled, what-
ever restraint he may attempt upon himself, to cry out or laugh,
and to make an effort to remove it by motion of some part,
quite as forcibly as he is compelled to remove the uneasiness
in the chest by inspiration; and while history records innu-
merable examples of persons, whether Christians or heathens, so
resolute as to remain motionless and silent, by the force of their
faith or innocence or their contempt for their persecutors4, in
the midst of fire till they were consumed, and we ourselves
know the resolution of Hindoo widows every day to perish on
the funeral pile of their husbands, we read of suicides so deter-
mined as to have accomplished their purpose by merely holding
their breath, when deprived of access to instruments of de-
struction.¢ Thus, though some have regarded the muscles of


4 See Lord Bacon, De Augmentis Scientiarum, |. iv. cap. 1. Among other in-
stances of resolution he mentions that, in his day, a murderer of Burgundy,
“‘ when beaten with iron rods and torn with red-hot pincers, did not utter a
groan, and, seeing something break and fall accidentally on the head of a by-
stander, the rascal laughed in the midst of his torments while being burnt,
though he had just before cried at having his curly hair cut off.”

€ «¢ Servus barbarus, cum vehementi ira concitatus, mortem sibi consciscere
decrevisset, prostratus humi, respirationeque cohibita, longo tempore immobilis
erat; postea verd paululum volutatus, hoc pacto mortuus est.” (Galen, De Nat.
Muse. lib. ii. c. 6.)

A robber named Coma, when taken before the consul Rupilius, is said by


492 VOLUNTARY MOTION,


respiration as of a mixed character, as both voluntary and
involuntary, they appear to me as voluntary as any voluntary
muscles; but equally, though not more, liable to become in-
voluntary. The orbicularis palpebrarum all allow to be a volun-
tary muscle ; yet, if a person suddenly moves his finger towards
one of our eyes, even without touching it, we wink involun-
tarily. Nay, without such motives, some voluntary muscles are in
certain circumstances involuntary. We move our ring finger at
pleasure; yet if we bend our little finger, few can refrain from
bending the ring finger. We experience great difficulty “ in
attempting to move the hand and foot of the same side in
diferent directions, and in all those motions which, although
voluntary and perfectly easy if produced separately, are found
very difficult if attempted together.”f Again, “ few voluntary
motions may not be rendered involuntary us the force of habit,
whose influence upon the mind is immense.” Every action of the
system, mental or corporeal, takes place more readily in pro-
_portion to its repetition; and therefore certain actions of volun-
tary muscles may at length occur not only with an almost im-
perceptible exciting cause, but in doing an action we may from
habit be unable to perform it except in one way, and actions of


Valerius Maximus to have so destroyed himself. ‘ Let others,” says the his-
torian, ‘‘sharpen the sword, mix the poison, take the rope, look for precipices,” —
‘‘ nihil horum Coma, sed intra pectus inclusa anima, finem sui reperit.” (Lib. ix.
cap. xii. externa. 1.)

Few can have so much determination; and, indeed, success can rarely follow
this attempt at suicide, because, as soon as the brain begins to suffer, the effort
must decline, and the effects cease. Still, from general or partial tenuity of the
vessels of the head, such congestion may readily occur as may occasion rupture ;
and suicide of this kind is therefore by no means:impossible. I have known the
sinuses rupture under strong muscular exertions.

Dr. Georget mentions that a M. Bourdon made some experiments upon him-
self, from which it appeared that a person may commit this kind of suicide.
(De la Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux, &c., t. i. p. 387.)

It is said that suicide has frequently been committed by turning the tongue
back, and thus excluding the air from the larynx. In Notices of Brazil, in 1828-9,
the Rev. R. Walsh says that the poor wretched slaves often destroy themselves
thus. “ A friend of mine,’ he adds, ‘‘ was passing when a slave was tied up .
and flogged; after a few lashes he hung his head, appearing lifeless, and when
taken down, was actually dead; his tongue was found wedged in the cesophagus.

f « Consult Winslow, Mém. de I’ Acad. des Sciences de Paris. 1789.”


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 493


voluntary muscles in which we have indulged may be performed
against our wishes in particular circumstances.

Between the portion of the brain that wills and the muscle,
an intermediate portion of the nervous system exists. The will
is not exerted upon the muscles, but upon the motor nerves of
muscles at their extremity in the brain or spinal chord. Now
this extremity or the nerve in any part of its course may be
stimulated by other causes than the will, and thus the muscles
ordinarily stimulated by the will may be stimulated without it,
—the will may neither voluntarily nor involuntarily have a share
in stimulating the muscles. Thus it is in chorea’, tetanus, and
other spasmodic diseases of the voluntary muscles. Even in
palsy of motion, we often observe spasms, especially in para-
plegia. Now, when a motion is naturally willed in conse-
quence of a sensation in a particular part, a peculiar relation
exists between the nerves of sensation of that part and its nerves
of motion, so that irritation of the former is communicated to the
latter. Thus at page 420. we saw that in 1788 Sir Gilbert
Blane found the hind legs of a decapitated kitten retract if the
paws were touched with a hot wire, and the tail move if so
touched after division of the chord below the last lumbar
vertebra. In cold blooded animals similar observations had
long before been made. Redi in 16874 found in a large tor-
toise, which lived twenty-three days after losing its head, that
the fore and hind feet were forcibly convulsed whenever they
were pricked. Whytt, in 1745, found that, if the toes of both
feet of a decapitated frog are stimulated, the feet are drawn up


® The exciting cause that influences the nervous system beyond the cerebral
part which wills may be opposed, and temporarily with success, by the will; andon
the other hand the will may aid the exciting cause. So that under chorea persons
can frequently arrest the motions for a few seconds, or run when they cannot
walk ; and, again, they often seem to feel a pleasure in co-operating to produce
the morbid movements.

» T mentioned, supra, p. 421., that, above a century and a half ago, Duverney
found a bird would move after losing its brain; Dr. Kaau, in 1745, observed
a frog move all its limbs for half an hour after decapitation, and for a con-
siderable time after its body was divided in two. A viper, after losing its
head and bowels, moved towards a heap of stones where it had been accustomed
to hide itself. (Impetum faciens, No. 331.) Medi extracted the brain of a
land tortoise through a hole in the skull, and it lived from November to, May,
moving and walking about to the last. (Osservazioni intorno agli animali viventi,
&c. Napoli. 1687. p. 209. sq. Butterflies copulate and lay eggs after decapitation.


494 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


to the body; or, if one foot only, that foot only is drawn up.!
He also found that, if the muscles of the leg of a decapitated frog
are irritated, almost all the muscles of the lower extremities move,
provided the spinal chord is entire; but, if the chord is de-
stroyed, the neighbouring muscles remain still, and the irritated
muscle itself is only excited to a tremulous motion.* He also
noticed that, though the muscles of the thighs were contracted
when pricked or cut, neither they nor the neighbouring muscles
were nearly so strongly convulsed as when the toes were wounded,
— the toes having a much more acute sensibility.

Others have since variously illustrated these facts. Dr. Ma-
gendie mentions that, when the posterior roots of the inner
side of the spinal nerves are irritated, the signs of extreme
pain are accompanied by convulsions of the muscle of that
same side only: Mr. Mayo, that, if the head of a pigeon is
cut off and all the brain removed except the little to whieh
the common motor nerve of the eye is attached, and the
optic nerve divided and its truncated extremity connected with
the brain pinched, the iris instantly contracts: Dr. Macartney,
that, if the head of a pigeon is cut off, nay, if even the eye is
taken out, light suddenly admitted to the retina produces con-
traction of the iris.

These facts have lately given rise to a speculation that a por-
tion of the nervous system exists independent of will, and solely
for involuntary actions of what are usually considered volun-
tary muscles, by means of impressions, not felt, on nerves usually
considered nerves of sensation. A portion of the chorda ob-
longata and of the chorda spinalis is fancied to be separate and
ceuee dard of the rest,and this imaginary part is called by its in-
ventor,—Dr. Marshal Hall', excito-motory. This physician has
made experiments fundamentally the same as those of Sir Gil-
bert Blane and his successors. Instead of separating a portion
of the body with its corresponding portion of encephalo-spinal
substance in which the nerves of sensation and motion meet,
he only stupefied an animal. He struck a horse with a pole-
axe over the anterior lobes of the brain. It fell as if thunder-
struck; was convulsed, and then motionless. But it soon
began to breathe, and continued to breathe freely. When


i Observations on Irritability, sect iv. p. 4. k Tbid.
Phil. Trans. 1833. P. ii. ; and Lectures on the Nervous System. 1836.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 495


lacerated or pricked by a pin or nail on any part of the face or
rest of the surface, it was still motionless, and gave no evidence
ofimpression. But on touching the eyelash with a straw, the eye
forcibly closed; on touching the cornea, the eye rolled outwards ;
and on touching the verge of the anus, the sphincter contracted,
the tail was raised, and the vulva drawn towards the anus. Now
this only shows what is well known, that tickling certain ex-
quisitely sensible parts with a straw induces a stronger im-
pression than rough usage with a nail or pin. A person who
could bear pain without flinching, could not remain still under
tickling of certain parts: and yet it is only certain parts that are
so ticklish. The sensible ends of the fingers or the back of the
hand may be touched with a straw in vain. Dr. M. Hall himself
shows that a strong impression made any where would equally
excite motion. For he goes on to repeat the very experiment of Sir
Gilbert Blane. He divided the spinal chord of a frog below the occi-
put. The animal was still. He pinched, not tickled, a toe with a pair
of forceps. Both hind extremities moved. He pinched again,
and the motions recurred. Now this was not an eyelash, the
cornea, or verge of the anus, but some other part of the surface,
and it might of course have been any sensible part, and the cor-
responding muscles of the part would have acted. If a corre-
spondently strong impression had been made in the horse, mo-
tion would have equally taken place. Surely, when we wink
on the eyelash being touched, we do this by precisely the same
operation as when we withdraw a hand that is struck. Of course,
when the spinal chord is destroyed, or any portion of the ence-
phalon is destroyed in which are the extremities of the nerves of
sensation that convey the impression, or the extremities of the
nerves of motion that convey the stimulus to the muscles, or in
which they meet, as they probably do, no effect from pricking or
tickling, &c. can ensue. Dr. M. Hall considers that the excitor
nerves of the excito-motory system are the ganglionic portion
of the fifth and of each spinal nerve, and the pneumono-gastric ;
the motor nerves of it, the aganglionic portion of the fifth and of
each of the spinal nerves; the fourth, sixth, seventh, and ninth
encephalic, the pneumono-gastric and its pharyngeal and laryn-
geal branches, the spinal accessory, the phrenic, and Sir C. Bell’s
external respiratory.

Now really the whole truth appears to be what is «well known,

Ea


gta


4.96 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


that an impression made upon any nerve of sensation, or, what
is the same thing, upon any part endowed with sensibility, may in-
duce action of any voluntary muscles calculated to remove it, if
disagreeable, or to be useful in some way to the individual, even
though the brain be prevented from perceiving the impression,
— from having a sensation from the impression. The impression
need not be upon nerves running to the part of the encephalo-
spinal organs where the roots lie of the motor nerves excited,
for a sharp pinch of the toe will make a man not merely draw
away his foot, but raise his arms, make a face and halloa into the
bargain, whether he is asleep or awake. ‘Tickling the sentient
twigs of the fifth pair, the eyelid, and cornea, is not requisite to
cause winking ; if by the optic nerve, one not included in Dr. M.
Hall’s excito-motory class, we see a finger suddenly approach
the eye, instinctive, involuntary winking will as certainly occur.
Winking will occur if a strong light issuddenly admitted through
the lids to the retzna of a person asleep. ‘The sun’s glare upon
the retina wil] excite sneezing.» Not only are sneezing, vomiting,
sobbing, mentioned as acts of this system, but even deglutition,
which is declared always to be of this nature, and always to
require the presence of some stimulus to the sensible nerves of
the pharynx, it being “ impossible to perform the act of swallow-
ing three or four times in rapid succession, without taking some-
thing into the mouth.” Now if deglutition is always an excited
act, —to use this gentleman’s peculiar language, —is always pro-
duced involuntarily by an impression on the pharynx, it must be
as impossible once or twice, without taking something into
the mouth, as three or four times, and slowly as rapidly. I,
however, can swallow with nothing in my mouth in rapid succes-
sion, as readily as with something, and above fifty times: that

to say, till the muscles are fatigued. If swallowing is instinctive
when any thing reaches the pharynx, so is the act of opening the
mouth when a sugar-plum is offered to the eyes of a baby: and


m Just as Dr. Fletcher considered the respiratory function of Sir C. Bell’s ima-
ginary respiratory system of nerves, as only a part of its functions, its destination
being for sympathy at large, as well as for the sympathetic respiratory move-
ments, Dr. M. Hall considers. Sir C. Bell’s respiratory system of nerves as only
a part of his own peculiar excito-motory system, which presides over respiration
as well as other excito-motory functions. The views of all these gentlemen
appear to me equally confined and erroneous.


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 497


indeed the various movements of the extremities, head, and
trunk, which naturally are performed on various circumstances
presenting themselves, are just as instinctive; and we have only
to observe the movements of other animals, especially of those
most like ourselves, and above all of monkeys, to see how instinctive
our voluntary actions are, when we are most apt to regard them as
determined by our reflection. We contract all voluntary muscles
either simply because we think proper, as when we cough at the
request of another, or because a strong motive is given, as
when we withdraw the hand from any thing hot; and the latter
is only such an instance as swallowing, coughing, winking, &c.
when food is in the pharynx, phlegm in the larynx, or strong light
in the eyes. Certain sensations excite a certain desire, and this
may be too strong for us to overcome. But according to the
strength of mind will be the resistance to the strength of the desire
induced by the sensation. Some actions result from certain sens-
ations only, and. we can neither perform some without these
sensations, nor when these sensations exist find it possible not
to yield to the desire. With some deglutition is not an act of
this kind. But sneezing is with all. I never knew a person able
to sneeze at pleasure. To be induced to will sneezing we must
have a certain sensation. If our attention is drawn to something
else, though the irritating cause act, we do not feel the sensation,
and do not sneeze. If the sensation is felt forcibly, the impulse
may be too strong for us to resist, and sneezing will be involun-
tary : and we can bring ourselves to sneeze by attending closely
to the sensation, and by increasing it. I have often amused my-
self by looking more or less at the sun, or thinking more or less
of tickling felt at the moment in the nostrils, and so increasing
and lessening the inclination to sneeze. Without the sensation,
and a certain amount of it, the sneezing no more than venereal
convulsion of the ejaculatores takes place. At the same time,
the facts discovered by Sir Gilbert Blane and others show a
connection between motion and impression independent of the
brain. But this is probably intended to assist the will in exciting
motions on the occurrence of impressions on individual parts ; and
the impression may be so strong that the will may be compelled
to determine the motion, and this compulsion will be according
to the strength of the impression and the weakness of opposing
motives and of the resolution to resist the inclination. Nay, these
Ii Lt. Z


498 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


facts show that motion will occur when the brain is removed
and there can be no sensation. Yet when the brain exists and
in healthy force, that the will does co-operate with this local
excitement of nerves of voluntary motion by those of sensation,
when we might not be disposed to believe it, appears from the
curious facts mentioned at pages 486-491. showing that sens-
ations may occur, and the will may be exercised, almost uncon-
sciously. While the brain exists and the system is in health,
these motions do not occur without will, or without sensation
should the will be overpowered. :

Involuntary muscles have generally a faint red colour, —
tolerable firmness, fibres small and rather interwoven together,
blood-vessels and nerves comparatively numerous and small, and
seldom a tendon: while voluntary muscles have generally a deep
colour, comparatively soft consistence, their apparent fibres large
and generally parallel, comparatively few and large blood-vessels
and nerves, and commonly a tendon.

Involuntary muscles are said not to contract suddenly on
division, and to perform not one sudden but several contractions,
when stimulated; whereas voluntary muscles, when divided or
stimulated, contract suddenly. 3

Involuntary muscles are said to have more nerves propor-
tionately than the voluntary. .

Like all other parts, muscles require a supply of arterial blood;
and this is proportionate not only to the bulk of a muscle, but to
the force and duration of its action. If venous blood is sent to
the brain, we have seen that death ensues, and the function of
any part is arrested by forcing venous blood into its arteries °:
this not only not supplying the place of arterial blood, but acting
as a poison. Muscles, however, retain their excitability after
their supply of arterial blood is cut off, as when they are se-
parated from the body. “In the Stenomian? experiment, para-
lysis of the hind legs commonly follows the application of a
ligature upon the abdominal aorta.” But this does not show
the excitability of the muscles to be impaired ; they would doubt-
less contract immediately after the experiment, upon the appli-


"Dr, Fletcher tte, bed. .p: 109.
° Bichat, Recherches Physiologiques.
P * Steno. Elementar. Myologie Spec. Florent. 1667. 4to. p. 86.”


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 4.99


cation of a stimulus, as readily as they do after apoplexy, and
after removal of the brain or division of their nerves. In torpid
brutes, after division of the nerves and removal of the brain,
cold and warmth destroy and restore the excitability of mus-
cles, as usual. The ligatures act immediately by depriving the
nerves of the power of stimulating them; for a constant supply
of arterial blood is necessary to the functions of the nervous
system4, and the ligature of the abdominal aorta, repeated by
Courten and Haller", cuts off this from the lower part of the
spinal chord and what originate from it,—the nerves of the
hind legs.s Another source of loss of motion must ultimately
arise, — the loss of excitability and vitality from the want of cir-
culation in the muscle.

In regard to its composition, muscle is said to be essentially
fibrine, but to contain also albumen, gelatine, lactic acid, fat,
salts, &c. .and a substance termed osmazome, upon which
the peculiar taste and smell of soup depends, and which is a
yellowish brown substance, soluble in water and in alcohol hot or
cold, and not forming a jelly when concentrated.

Raspail properly points out that muscle has thus been analysed
on the large scale, with its blood-vessels, lymphatics, nerves,.and
fatty cellular membrane; but that the analysis should have been
limited to the muscular cylinder. Gelatine is produced from
cellular texture, skin, tendons, ligaments, cartilages, and bones
by boiling only: osmazome by boiling from muscle, serum, and
mushrooms, and, according to him, is only an impure compound of
albumen and acetic acid: lactic acid he declares to be merely
acetic acid and albumen: and leucine, a white matter obtained
from muscle by Braconnot through the means of sulphuric acid,
to be only a mixture of oil, and even albumen rendered soluble
by an acid, with sulphite of ammonia. By repeatedly boiling
muscle, and holding it in the air between each boiling, Berthollet
found it at last acquire the smell and taste of old cheese. The


1 Le Gallois, Sur le Principe de la Vie.

r « W. Courten, Phil. Trans. No. 335. p. 500.” 1678.

“‘ Haller, Comment. Soc. Sc. Gotting. t. iv. p. 293.’’ 1754.

* Sir Astley Cooper has just published the result of obstructing the vertebral
arteries which supply those parts of the spinal chord from which the nerves
chiefly concerned in respiration arise. Dyspnoea instantly ensued, (Guy’s
Hospital Reports, No. iii.)

LU 3


500 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


same are perceptible in dried anatomical preparations; and Ras-
pail by repeated boiling effected them in fecula, converting it into
caseic acid. ‘If fresh muscle is exposed for some time to water,
or kept in moist earth, the fibrine disappears, and a white fatty
matter remains called adipocire: but this is usually ascribed to a
change of the fat in the muscle. Muscle may perhaps be changed
during life into fat, for we possess in University College diseased
muscles, in which each fibre is replaced by a string of fat. Fi-
brine abounds most in the muscles of the old.


Besides the vital movements which probably occur in the vessels and cellular
texture of plants, and those which occur slowly in the stalks and tendrils of
annuals which cling, and in leaves, we observe the flowers and leaves of many
plants stand up open in the day and fall or close at night. On the approach
of a storm, the leaves of most plants with delicate stamina become erect, so that
white flowered meadow trefoil is a barometer to the Swedes. Artificial light will
make the flowers and leaves of some plants expand at night, and removal to a
dark place in the day time make them droop; while the approach of hot iron to
their upper surface will make some leaves erect. Cold and narcotics lessen or
destroy, while all stimuli augment, these movements, which are more vigorous
in the young than in the old. Even mechanical irritation, perhaps a mere touch,
will cause motions in the leaves of mimosze ; and the motion will spread from
the one irritated to other leaves successively, and the petiole, and at last the
foot-stalk itself, descends. The lobes of the leaves of the dionzea muscipula have
stiff hairs on their edge, and close instantly upon a hapless insect which lights upon
them ; and, as each lobe of the leaf has three thorns, the poor thing is not only
imprisoned but impaled on the spot: and, what is still more cruel and corresponds
in design with the craftiness of animals, as that does with their destructiveness,
the leaf is supplied with glands which secrete sugar and thus tempt the instinct
of the poor thing. The small lateral leaves of the hedysarum gyrans and cus-
pidatum are in incessant motion. Some flowers contract on mechanical irri-
tation. The stamina and pistils of flowers, but especially the stamina, perform
many varieties of motion, and also obey external stimuli, and are influenced by
poisons. * }

The voluntary motions are the distinguishing characteristics of the animal
from the vegetable kingdom. For no plant has been discovered procuring. for
itself food by means of voluntary motion; nor any animal incapable of loco-
motion, or at least of procuring sustenance by the voluntary motion of individual
memberse

Muscles exist in animals of all classes, from the mammifera to the radiaria. _


* Consult Dr. Tiedemann, |. c. cccelxxiii. sqq-


VOLUNTARY MOTION. 501


They haye been discovered in agreat number of entozoa. Even in the actiniz,
some medusew, and other zoophyta, muscular fasciculi, interwoven with the
external skin, have been perceived ; and Professor Ehrenberg has detected them
in the infusoria.* Their fibres are not always red, but may be white, or
yellowish.

Minute and numerous hair-like processes, called cilia, are observed on the ex-
ternal surface of batrachian larvee, of mollusca, annelida, echinodermata, actinie,
medusa, polypi, and infusoria ; on the surface of the air passages of man and
other mammalia, birds and reptiles, as well as on the external gills of batrachian
larvee, and on the gills of mollusca and annelida; in other annelida, and in
echinodermata and actiniz, on the membrane of the external surface of the
viscera and its parietal portion to which water has access; on the surface of the
mouth and gullet of reptiles, and more or less on the whole of the rest of the
alimentary canal of mollusc¢a, actiniz, annelida, echinodermata, and polypi; in
the pores and canals of sponges ; on the mucous membrane of the Jfallopian tubes,
uterus and vagina of mammalia and fish, as well as on the organ of smell in the
latter, and the oviduct of birds and reptiles; on the surface of the embryo of
batrachia, mollusca, actiniz, polypi, and sponges. The longest cilia hitherto
measured have proved °005 of an inch, the smallest *000075 of an inch. The
motion of each cilium is commonly of a fanning character, though sometimes it
is rotatory, or, as the point revolves the most extensively, infundibuli-form ; and
separation of the part, and even death, does not arrest it for a few hours in
mammalia and birds, nor for upwards of a fortnight in the tortoise and river
mussel, — differences corresponding with the varied duration of muscular con-
tractility in the same animals. .The purpose of this vibration is to carry “the
animal through the fluid in which it lives, or to drive fluids along its surfaces.
For a full account of the cilia, see a paper by my no less excellent than able
colleague Dr. Sharpey, in Dr. Todd’s Cyclopedia of Anatomy and Physivlogy
Very recently Purkinje has discovered them on the linings of the cerebral cavi-
ties of the foetuses of some mammalia. Miuiller’s Archiv fiir Anatomie, Physio-
logie, &c. No. 1. 1836. p. 291. sq.

Sometimes, as in crustacea and insects, they are situated in hollow, calcareous
or horny parts; sometimes in earthy shells, as in bivalve and multivalve mol-
lusca.

A writer says that he ‘repeatedly placed a common dorr,” the occupation
of which beetle is to heave up the earth, “ under a weight equal to 4796 grains,
319 times its own weight,” the animal being but 15 grains, and the creature
‘‘ heaved it up and withdrew; and the same pressure, being placed on its leg,
was immediately disengaged by the power of the other.” (Journal of a Naturalist,
p- 305.)

Muscular power is no where more displayed than in some fish. ‘ I have
seen,” says Sir Gilbert Blane, ‘the sword of a swordfish sticking in a plank


* See Dr, Gardiner’s account of Professor Ehrenberg’s discoveries in the
Edin. New Phil. Journ. 1831.


Et


502 VOLUNTARY MOTION.


which it had penetrated from side to side; and when it is considered that the
animal was then moving through a medium even a thousand times more dense
than that through which a bird cleaves its course at different heights of the
atmosphere, and that this was performed in the same direction with the ship,
what a conception do we form of this display of muscular power!” (On Mus-
cular Motion. Select Dissertations, p. 281.) Muscular strength is proportion-
ally much greater in smaller animals. ‘ A flea can draw from seventy to eighty
times its own weight, whereas a horse cannot draw with ease more than three
times its own weight.” (l.c. Haller, Zi. Physiol. L. ix. S. iii.)

A flea weighs less than a grain, and will clear an inch and a half at a leap ;
and Americans have calculated that if a man, weighing about 150 pounds, could
leap in proportion, he would’ be able to spring 12,800 miles, and so jump with
ease from New York to Cochin China.

In some animals of very slow motion, as the tardipedes, the chief artery of
the extremities is found split into many parallel trunks, instead of remain-
ing as one and branching forth. (Sir Anthony Carlisle, Phil. Trans. 1810.)
In the fore leg of the lemur tardigradus, sixty brachial arteries exist. The con-
nection between this circumstance and slow motion is unknown.


503


CHAP. XXI.
VOICE AND SPEECH.


AN important operation of muscular motion is in producing
sounds by means of those parts through which the air passes in
respiration.

The vocal mechanism may be considered as consisting of lungs,
or bellows, capable of transmitting, by means of the connecting
windpipe, or trachea, a current of air passing through an appa-
ratus called the larynx, which is placed on the upper part of the
windpipe. This apparatus, though of very small dimensions, is
capable of producing sounds in great variation of pitch, quality,
and intensity, which are afterwards converted into the articu-
lations of speech by passing through a cavity consisting of the
pharynx, mouth, and nose.

The larynx is the organ of voice. It consists of several carti-
lages united together by ligaments and articulations, and supplied
with a variety of muscles, by which they may be moved together
or separately, according to the modifications of the voice.


Km C H, the thyroid cartilage ;

H, its upper horn ; ;

C, its lower horn, articulated to the cri-
coid ; :

An B C, the cricoid cartilage ;

A K, the crico-thyroideus muscle.


504 VOICE AND SPEECH.


Above the pile of cartilaginous rings which compose the wind-
pipe is placed the cricoid cartilage ; the thyroid cartilage embraces
the cricoid, and is articulated. to its sides so that its lower horn
turns round on a point as a fulcrum. Two small cartilages
called the arytenoids are articulated to the upper external
edge of the cricoid, and the vocal ligaments are stretched from
the thyroid to the arytenoids. The aperture between the edges


Bird's-eye view of the larynx from above.


eG
G EH, thyroid cartilage, embracing
the ring of the cricoid ru X w, and
capable of turning on the axis x z,
which passes through the lower
: horns C, seen in the preceeding

(< figure ;
‘Sipsncammaes* N F, N F, the arytenoid cartilages ;
SS} T V, T V, the vocal ligaments.
ye From N to X run the right lateral
‘ crico-arytenoid muscle, the left
having been removed.
TL


of the vocal ligaments is called the glottis; and in all the theo-
ries which have been advanced it has been admitted that the
vocal sound is produced by the breath passing through this
aperture, though different explanations have been offered of the,
way in which the voice is produced. Ferrein compared the vocal
ligaments to violin strings, and the current of air which puts
them in motion toa violin bow; the different sounds he attri-
buted to various tensions of the ligaments. Dodart found an
analogy between the glottis and the embouchure of a flute; the
pitch of the sound he supposed to depend on the size of the
aperture. Biot thought the way in which the sound of the voice
was produced more analogous to a reed, and particularly to that
kind of reed which has but lately been introduced into a variety
of musical instruments. Savart has lately endeavoured to prove
that the sounds of the voice are produced in the same manner
as in a lark-whistle, and that the pitch depends on altering the
tension of the elastic sides of the small conical tube formed by
the part of the larynx immediately before this aperture.

There can be no doubt as to the way in which the sonorous
vibrations are produced in the larynx. If a piece of silk riband,


VOICE AND SPEECH. 505


or a strip of paper, parchment, or any other flexible substance,
be stretched between the fingers or otherwise, and a current of
air either from the mouth or a bellows be directed against one
of its edges, a clear musical sound will be produced, varying in
pitch according to the tension given it; and, if a riband of thin
Indian rubber be employed, the sound will very much resemble
that of the voice, and be capable of an extensive range by varying
the tension. The itinerant exhibiters of Punch employ a silk
riband stretched between two arched pieces of tin, and, placing
this between the tongue and the palate, they without sounding the
voice pronounce all the articulations of speech by whispering, and
imitate the various inflexions of the voice by pressing more or
less on the thin sides, thus increasing or diminishing the tension of
the riband. Dr. Darwin was the first who appears to have re-
cognised the resemblance of this instrument to the ligaments of
the glottis.

The vibrations of an elastic ligament set in motion by the air
being thus sufficient to account for the production of the voice,
we have only to examine the particular disposition of these
ligaments in the larynx, and the precise way in which the air acts
upon them. Each vocal ligament, stretched between the aryte-
noid and the thyroid, presents a sharp edge turned upwards and
inwards. Mr. Willis of Cambridge® has shown that, if a current
of air be made to pass between two stretched surfaces, they will
vibrate only when their free edges are parallel ;—if they be turned
either outwards or inwards, the air will pass without producing
any sound. He hence infers that a certain position of the edges
of the ligaments is necessary for the air issuing from the lungs to
cause them to sound, and this vocalising position is determined
by the twisting motion of the arytenoid cartilages.

“ That every degree of motion in the glottis is directed by the
numerous muscles of the larynx is proved by the beautiful experi-
ment of tying or dividing the recurrent nerves, or the pneumono-
gastric >, and thus weakening or destroying the voice of animals.”


® Of the Mechanism of the Larynx. Camb. Phil. Trans. 1832.

b « Respecting this celebrated experiment, anciently made by Galen, consult
among others W. Courten, Philos. Trans. No. 335.

‘Morgagni, Ep. Anatom. xii. No. 20. P. P. Molinelli, Comment. Institut.
Bonon. tz iii.

J. Haighton, Memoirs of the Medical Society of London, t. iii.”


506 VOICE AND SPEECH. ; ’


But for the operation of the nerves I refer to my former obsery-
ations on the pneumono-gastric nerve at page 433.

«« Man and singing-birds have the power of whistling. In the
latter, it is accomplished by a larynx placed at each extremity of
the windpipe and divided into two portions. The former, though
possessing a single and undivided larynx, has probably learned to
imitate birds by the coarctation of his lips¢,” which, however, serves
only as an embouchure to the column of air contained within the
mouth and larynx. The varieties of intonation entirely depend on
the alterations of the tongue and on the corresponding motions of
the larynx. For the higher sounds the tongue is brought for-
wards and the larynx raised, and for the lower sounds the tongue
recedes and the larynx is depressed.

“ Singing, which is compounded of speech and a musical
modulation of the voice, I conceive to be peculiar to man and
the chief prerogative of his vocal organs. The power of whistling
is innate in birds; many of them may easily be taught to pro-
nounce words, and instances have been known of this even in
dogs. But it is recorded that genuine singing has once or twice
only, and then indeed but indifferently and with the utmost
difficulty, been taught to parrots; while, on the other hand,
scarcely a barbarous nation exists in which singing is not
common.4

“ Sneech is a peculiar modification of the voice, adjusted to the
formation of the sounds of letters by the expiration of air through
the mouth or nostrils, and in a great measure by the assistance
of the tongue, applied and struck against the neighbouring parts,
the palate and front teeth in particular, and by the diversified
action of the lips.¢


° «« The larynx, even among the most savage people, is capable of imitating
the sounds of brutes. Consult, v.c. Nic. Witsen, Noord en Oost— Tartarye,
ed. 2. Amst. 1705. vol. i. p. 165., respecting the inhabitants of New Guinea
of the southern hemisphere, called Papus. And J. Adair, History of the Ame-
rican Indians, p. 309., respecting the Choktah tribe of North America.”

« « J have in my hands the testimony of most respectable travellers, in regard,
for instance, to the inhabitants of Ethiopia,. Greenland, Canada, California,
Kamtschatka, &c., and therefore wonder at the assertion of Rousseau, — that
singing is not natural to man. Dictionn. de Musique, t. i. p. 170. Geneva,
1781. .12mo.”

© « See Rich. Payne Knight, Analytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet. Lond.
1791. 4to. p. 3.”


“VOICE AND SPEECH. 507


“ The difference between voice and speech is evident. The
former is produced in the larynx; the latter by the peculiar
mechanism of the other organs above described.

“‘ Voice is common to both brutes and man, even immediately
after birth, nor is it absent in those unfortunate infants who are
born deaf. But speech follows only the culture and employment
of reason, and is consequently, like it, the privilege of man in
distinction to the rest of animal nature. For brutes, natural in-
stinct is sufficient’: but man, destitute of this and other means of


I am indebted to the powerful Dr. Conyers Middleton for the knowledge of
two cases of distinct articulation with at least but little tongue. (dn Enquiry into
the Miraculous Powers, &c. Miscellaneous Works, vol.i. p.148. 4to.) In his
exposure of the piows deceptions of weak and wicked Christians during the first
centuries of the Christian era, he notices a pretty tale of an Arian prince cutting
out the tongues of some of the orthodox party and these being as able to talk as
before; nay one (0 hominum impudentia !), who had been dumb from his birth,
gained the faculty of speech by losing his tongue. Granting the fact, and even
that the tongues were completely extirpated, he refers, for the purpose of proving
there was no miracle in the case, to two relations of similar instances by medical
men, (Jussieu, On Speech without a Tongue, Mém. de U Acad. des Sciences.
1718. p.6.) Professor John Thomson found the speech little impaired after
bullets had carried away more or less of the tongue. (Report of Observations
made in the British Hospitals in Belgium, after the Battle of Waterloo; with some
Remarks on Amputation.) Louis, Richter, Huxham, Bartholin, and Tulpius
mention similar cases. An instance of good articulation after the loss of the
apex and body of the tongue quite down to the os hycides occurred in this
country, and was seen by the Royal Society. (Account of a Woman who spoke
fluently without a Vestige of Tongue. Phil. Trans. 1742. p. 143. Dr. Parson’s
Account of Margaret Cutting, who had lost her Tongue. Phil. Trans. 1747.
p- 621.

f Mr. Herbert, in a note to White’s Natural History of Selborne, p. 227.
says he saw Col. O’Kelly’s green parrot, about 1799, which sang, perfectly,
about fifty different tunes, solemn psalms, and humorous or low ballads, arti-
culating every word as distinctly as a man, without a single mistake, beating
time with its foot, turning round upon the perch, and marking the time as it
turned; if a person sang part of a song, it would take it up where he left off;
and, when moulting and unwilling to sing, turned its back and said, “ Poll’s
sick.” The dog to which Blumenbach alludes was seen and heard by Leibnitz
(Op. vol. ii. p. 180. ii.), who declares it pronounced all the letters of the
alphabet except m,n, x, and thirty German words; was three years old when
it went to school, and required some years for finishing its education. Locke,
however, goes farther than Leibnitz, for he relates a story in his Essay on Human


~


508 VOICE AND SPEECH.


supporting his existence independently, enjoys the prerogative
of reason and language; and following, by their means, his
social destination, is enabled to form, as it were, and manifest
his ideas, and to communicate his wants to others, by the organs
of speech.” |

The elements of which all the spoken languages of mankind
are composed consist of the modifications given sometimes to
the breath, and at other times to the voice, during their passage
through the cavity of the mouth ; these modifications are prin-
cipally effected by the altered positions of the lips and tongue
with respect to the fixed parts of the containing cavity.

The classification of these articulations into vowels and con-
sonants has been generally recognised.

The vowels are formed by the voice, modified, but not inter-
rupted, by the varied positions of the tongue and lips. Their
differences depend on the various proportions between the aper-
ture of the lips and the internal cavity of the mouth, alterable by
the different elevations of the tongue. The vowel aw (as pro-
nounced long in all, and short in got) is formed by augmenting
the internal cavity by the greatest possible depression of the
dorsum of the tongue, and, at the same time, enlarging the se-
paration of the lips. Departing from this sound there are two
series. In one the external aperture remains open, and the
internal cavity gradually diminishes by the successive alter-
ations of the tongue; in the other the positions of the tongue
are successively the same as in the first series, but the aperture
of the lips is diminished. The approximation of the lips produces
a more sensible effect as the inner cavity is more enlarged ; hence
two modifications.of.the first. sounds of the second series are
easily recognised, whilst only one variety of the others is readily
appreciable, as will be shown in the following tables Each of
these vowels may be long or short, according to the duration of
its sound in a syllable.


Understanding, (book ii. p. 27.) on the authority of Prince Maurice, and believes
it too, of an old parrot that held a rational conversation.

& For the more open sounds, the jaws are generally more cnuoinds but this
is not indispensable.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 509


TABLE OF VOWELS.


First Series. — The lips || Secorid Series. — Thelips || Third Series. —'The


fully open. partially open. lips nearly closed.
As pronounced As pronounced As pronounced
Long, in |Short, Long, in | Short Long, | Short,
in in in
1. aw | caught, fall | folly || 6.0 | coat 11. co | cool full
2. ah | father, car | dull 7.0 | court
3. ae | nae(Scotch) | man || 8. ew | bonheur (Fr.)
4.a | fair® met 9. ew | affrewx (Fr.)
5.e | feet, the fit 10. Expressed in


German by ii,
in Danish and
Swedish by 7,
in Dutch and
French by wu.


*‘pasn JON


The above table exhibits all the most usually pronounced vowel
sounds, but practised ears might distinguish others intermediate
in each series. When these vowels are sounded, the soft palate
is raised so as to prevent the voice from issuing through the nasal
channels; when, on the contrary, the soft palate is depressed,
the partial escape of the breath through the nostrils modifies all
the preceding sounds in a very evident manner. ‘To distinguish
these two modes of articulating the vowel sounds, we may adopt
Dr. Darwin’s terms, orisonant and narisonant vowels.

Consonants may be divided into continuous (sometimes called
liquids or semi-vowels) and explosive. For the latter, the breath
or voice is stopped in its passage through the mouth; for the
former, it is allowed a free passage, though the apertures are
more narrowed than for the vowels.

. But the most comprehensive and important division of these
articulations is into aspirates and sonants; the modifications of
the breath being meant by the former term, and those of the voice
by the latter. In ordinary speaking these are mingled together to
form the elementary syllables of language. ‘The aspirates, or
sounds indicated by the characters p, f, sh, s, th (in thing), tf,
k, ll (Welsh), differ from the sonants, or those represented by


h This vowel is much used by the Irish in pronouncing such syllables as bate
Jait, &c ., for our English words beat, faith, &c.


510 VOICE AND SPEECH,


b, v, 2 (in azure,) z (in puzzle), th, (in the), d, g (in gay), G pels
by the latter being accompanied with the vocal sound. ite

Every sonant has its corresponding aspirate, though many ‘of
the latter are unknown to the English language ; such are the
aspirates corresponding to the sonants 7, m, n, ng (in song), &c.

When forming the component parts of syllables, the aspirates,
as well as the sonants, are always articulated with sonant vowels.
An aspirate vowel, followed by its vocal enunciation, is always
represented by the character h, but it is never PRR LN oy se-
parately, except in whispering.

The consonants, like the vowels, are divided into neon and
narisonant. The only narisonant consonants in our language, are
those corresponding to the orisonant explosives 6, d, and g (in
gay),—viz.m, n, and ng (in song). By this mode of Paes
ciation the sounds are rendered continuous.


TABLE OF CONSONANTS.


Continuous. | Explosive. |
Aspirates. | Sonants. Aspirates. | Orisonants.|} Narisonants, |
Le f v 1.10. p b a
9: — y ii. t d hyoe ae
a sh s&s 12. k g ng
x in azure. in gold. in song.
4, 8 x
' in zany.
5. th th
in think in the
6. | (not used) r |
Ms il l |
8. lec  f | Sian
in fille (Fr. ) | erties
9: ch g
in loch | in sagen | |
(Scotch) | (German)
nach ( Ger.) | gemis (Sp. ) a
|


{ \
a


a


This table shows that, for all the consonants employed in the
English language, only ten positions of the mouth are required,
the modifications being effected by other means. Among the
modifications not already described, may be particularised the
reduplication of the 10th, 11th, and 12th sounds; the first occa-
sioned by the vibratory motion of pas pia the ‘others bY that of


the tongue.


VOICE AND SPEECHi . 511


- Observations. Sound, 1.—The lower lip presses on the upper
teeth, but allows the air to escape between them; a similar sound
is produced by allowing the breath to pass through the lips when
nearly closed. 2, 3, 4, 5.—These sounds may be considered as
the continuation of the first series of vowel sounds; for, by placing
the mouth in the position for e (5.), and continuing to elevate the
back part of the tongue, and, at the same time, to curl its tip,
these sounds will be successively produced. 6,7, 8.—These sounds
differ from the preceding four, inasmuch as that the back part
of the tongue does not approximate tothe palate ; the mouth being
placed for the second vowel, the front of the tongue is elevated
so as to touch the palate just above the teeth; for the 7, the
point is drawn back, so as to allow the air to escape; and for the
l; the point is firmly pressed against the palate, and the breath
escapes by the two sides; for the / (in fille), the air escapes with
more difficulty. 9.— These are used in the Gaelic and German,
_ but not in English. 10, 11, 12.— These sounds are produced by
the forcible escape of the breath, or voice, after a complete
obstruction by the lips or tongue. The obstruction by the lips
gives p, or b; that by the front of the tongue above the upper
teeth, ¢, ord; and that by the back of the tongue against the
palate, #, or g; these different articulations may therefore ‘be
distinguished as Labial, Dental, and Palatal. When the sound
escapes through the nostrils it becomes continuous; the m, n, and
ng are therefore not explosives.

The alphabetic characters, invented as visual and permanent
representations of the articulations of speech, are very inadequate
to effect the purpose intended. In the English language there
are but five characters to indicate all the varieties of the vowels,
viz. a, €, t, 0, ue Of these, one only is pronounced, when uncom-
bined, as a pure vowel; this is e, —the 5th sound in the table
of vowels: the other four are diphthongs or combinations of two
vowels; a is the 4th and 5th; z is the 3d and 5th; o is the 6th
and 11th; and wis the 5th and 11th. When constituting parts
of syllables, the same character represents many different vowel
sounds. — .

_ The consonantal characters are not quite so arbitrary, though

among these there are some simple sounds expressed by two let-

ters, and others which have no character to denote them; and on

the other hand there are several redundant letters representing
M M


512 VOICE AND SPEECH: P


two simple sounds: 7, », 7, 1, p, t, k, b, d, m, and n; are generally
constant in their signification. The simple sounds represented by
two characters are sh, th (in think), th (in the), and ng (in song). The
single characters representing more than one sound are sg (in sea,
his, sure, and vision); 2 (in zany and azure); g (in gay and George).
The redundant letters are, c (having the sound either of s or /);

q (k followed by the eleventh vowel) ; 7 (compounded of d and
i second pronunciation of the z,—the same as the ¢ in George);
and x (standing for ks, or z). Y, as generally pronounced, and
w, are not consonants ; the first represents the 5th, and the second
the 11th vowel of the table, when immediately succeeded by
another vowel.

The consonants will be best compared by articulating them all,
uniformly preceded or followed by the same vowel; as fe, she, sé,
the, pe, te, ke, &c. or ef, esh, es, eth, ep, et, ek, &c.

It is by no means improbable that the progress of modern art
may present us at some future time with mechanical substitutes
for orators and preachers. For, putting aside the magic heads of
Albert the Great and Roger Bacon, Kratzenstein actually con-
structed an instrument to produce the vowelsi, and De Kempelin
has published a full account of his celebrated speaking machine
which: perfectly imitated the human voice.‘ The celebrated
French mechanician, the Abbé Mical, also made two heads of
brass which pronounced very distinctly entire phrases; these
heads were colossal, and their voices were powerful and sonorous,
The French government refusing, it is said, in 1782, to purchase
these automata, the unfortunate and too sensitive inventor, in a
paroxysm of despair, destroyed these masterpieces of scientific
ingenuity. More recently, Mr. Willis of Cambridge has pub-
lished a very interesting essay on the vowel sounds, in which he
describes an instrument for producing them, and at the same
time explaining their physical causes. My excellent and highly
distinguished. friend Professor Wheatstone, to whom the analysis
of the elementary sounds I have above given is due, and whose:
valuable assistance in this section, as well as those on vision and
hearing, Iam proud to acknowledge, has also made many ex-
periments illustrating the mechanism of speech, and succeeded
in reconstructing and improving De Kempelin’s machine.


i Observations sur la Physique, par Rosier, Supplement, 1782. p. 758.
“le Ueben dén Mechanismus der Menschlicken Sprache. Vienna, 1791. -


ae VOICE AND SPEECH. 513


As I have now fully explained the various articulations used
in oral language, it only remains for me to investigate the dif-
ference between the inflexions of the voice in singing and in


speaking.

The various muscular adaptations of the larynx render it ca-
pable of producing every inflexion of musical tone within a certain
compass, seldom exceeding that of two octaves. In singing,
sounds, each constant in its degree of tune, follow each other
according to the rules of melody ; while in speaking, the voice
slides up and down, and “ does not dwell distinctly, for any per-
ceptible space of time, on any certain level or uniform tone,
except the last tone on which the speaker ends or makes a pause.”
Provincial dialects, and even individual modes of speaking, differ
much in the extent and nature of these slides. Steele has en-
deavoured to establish a system of notation for these inflexions,
and other modifications of the voice necessary to be observed by
the orator, and has by this means proposed to perpetuate the
most splendid specimens of histrionic, forensic, and senatorial
eloquence.! To proceed farther with this subject would be an
infringement on the province of philology.

«‘ We must just mention certain other modifications of the human
voice, of which some, as hiccup and cough, belong more properly
to pathology than to physiology, but are very common in the
most healthy persons; and others, as crying and laughing, appear
peculiar to the human race.

“ Many of these are so closely allied as frequently to be con-
verted into each other; most also are variously modified.

“In laughter there is a succession of short, and, as it were,
abrupt expirations.”™ In it, there is more or less noise at each
little expiration, from a mere sort of rustling sound to loud
peals; the mouth is more or less lengthened, and its angles
drawn up, and in extreme laughter it is opened still more by the
descent of the lower jaw; if hearty, the tears run over, the head,
and even the body, shakes, respiration is interrupted, and


1 Prosodia Rationalis ; or, An Essay towards establishing the Melody and Measure
of Speech, to be expressed and perpetuated by peculiar Symbols. 2d. edit. London,
1779.

m « Fr, Lupichius, De Risu. Basil. 1738. 4to.

Traité des Causes Physiques et Moralés dw Rire. Amst. 1783. 8vo.”

MM 2


514. VOICE AND SPEECH.


actual pain of the sides and diaphragm is felt.» Some of our
comedians have absolutely agonised me. It arises from drollery,
the anticipation of gratification, or actual gratification, or tick-
ling ; it is also common in hysteria and insanity. Smiling is the
first degree of the same changes of the mouth. |
“ Coughing is a quick, violent, and sonorous expiration, follow-
ing a deep inspiration.”° In coughing, the mouth opens that
the air may rush in that direction, since the current is not re-
quired in the nostrils as in sneezing, and these would not afford
sufficient vent. The glottis lessens just before the expiration,
and the transverse muscular fibres of the trachea Jessen its
diameter and thus increase the force with which the expelled air
rushes.P Coughing is induced by the very slightest irritation of
the larynx. But irritation of any part of the respiratory appa-
tatus may occasion it, as well as irritation of a distant part
influencing the respiratory apparatus sympathetically. It some-
times arises from a morbid sensibility of the nerves, so that I have
known it occur for months at the full distension of every in-
spiration, except during sleep; and in other instances on the
slightest touch of the outside of half the chest. . There are many
varieties of the sound and respiratory actions of cough. ‘4
“« Snoring is ” said by Blumenbach to be “a deep, sonorous,
and, as it were, tremulous inspiration, from the vibration of the
velum palati during deep sleep.” We can, however, snore volun-
tarily while awake; and, by allowing a portion of the tongue to
rise into contact with the velum, I can snore so that the sound
_shall proceed from vibrations of the nose as well as of the velum,
evident both to the ear and to the fingers placed upon the nose.
I can also increase the proportion of the nasal vibrations at plea-
sure, by allowing more of the tongue to rise into contact with the
velum and palate, and cause them only to take place, even if the
mouth is closed: and, if it is closed, snoring is always more or
less nasal. In sleep, snoring may be palatal or nasal, or both in
various proportions. The sound, as well as its situation, varies
accordingly as it is palatal or nasal, or more one than the other.


" « Sport that wrinkled Care derides,
And Laughter holding both his sides.”
LD’ Allegro.
° «J, Melch. Fr. Albrecht, (Pres. Hallero) Experimenta in vivis animalibus
circa tussis organa exploranda instituta. _Gotting..175]. 4to.” 6%
P Sir C. Bell, Phil. Trans. 1832. =p, 300. sqq.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 518:


“ Sneezing, generally the consequence of an irritation of the
mucous membrane of the nostrils,” though the glare of the sun
upon the eyes will produce it, “is a violent and almost con-
vulsive expiration, preceded by a short and violent inspiration.”
In sneezing, the opening of the fauces is lessened, and the head
bent back, that the current may be directly through the nostrils,
in which the irritation generally exists.

“ Hiccup, on the contrary, is a sonorous, very short, and
almost convulsive, inspiration, excited by an unusual irritation of”
the stomach, and Blumenbach says only of * the cardia.” In
hiccup, I think that, after the inspiration has proceeded a certain
length, the glottis closes, and the diaphragm endeavours in vain
to contract farther.
© In crying there are deep inspirations, quickly alternating
with long and occasionally interrupted expirations.$

i" Signing is a long and deep inspiration, and the subsequent
expiration is sometimes accompanied by groaning. t

“‘ Nearest in relation to sighing is gaping, which is produced
by a full, slow, and long, inspiration, followed by a similar ex-
piration, the jaws at the same time being drawn asunder, so that
-the air rushes into the open fauces and the Eustachian tubes.”
We gape chiefly during fatigue or hunger; when we are but half
awake, either before or after sleep; and in ague and hysteria.
* It occurs from the blood passing through the lungs too slowly:
v. c. when the pressure of the air on the body is diminished, as
upon very high mountains.” A peculiar feature of gaping is the
propensity it excites in others to gape likewise. This is uni-
versally remarked. But the fact is included.in the more general
fact of gaping being excited by merely thinking of it, whatever
be the means of association by which it enters into our thoughts,
whether by seeing it represented in a picture, by reading of it, or
having it mentioned to us. If this is the case, the view “of others
gaping may well be supposed sufficient to excite it.


‘a «¢ Marc. Beat. L: J. Porta, De Sternutatione. Basil. 1755. 4to.”
“« C. J. Sig. Thiel, De Singultu.. Gotting, 1761.-4to.”
« J. F. Schreiber, De Fletus. Li Bo:1728-. 4to.’>
t « Dav. C. Em. Berdot, De Suspirio. Basil. 1756. 4to.”
+o BAT aste- Bode Giinz, (Preside Walthero) De Oscitatione.. Lips. 1738.
4to.” Be heh oe OWING SHAG NS Odie
‘MMS


~~


516 VOICE AND SPEECH.


Dr. Brachet contends that the muscular power of the extreme
bronchial twigs and air cells operates both in these violent and in
the ordinary degrees of respiration. He divided the spinal chord
in the neck of cats so that respiration ceased and was continued
artificially. He then applied hellebore to their-nostrils, and little
expiratory shocks took place, very evident and necessarily inde-
pendent of the respiratory muscles. *

Haller is well worth reading on these subjects.¥

Most authors assert that the opening of the glottis enlarges at
inspiration and lessens at expiration; but Dr. H. Ley makes it
probable that, in simple and undisturbed breathing, the glottis
remains open.? In strong muscular efforts the glottis closes, that
the chest may be immovable. Swimming and leaping are shown
by M. Bourdon to be impossible unless it is closed; for he pre-
vented them by inserting a tube into a wound made by him in
the trachea of poor brutes.


a
~~ : 2


Although, with the exception of mocking birds, brutes make no articulate
sounds, they have a language perfectly intelligible to one another. ‘They
make one noise to express joy, another terror, another to summon their
young, &c., and comprehend the meaning of sounds made by us, not only
of an inarticulate kind, but also articulated. The sagacity of some dogs in
this respect is astonishing. ‘* They learn to understand not merely sepa-
rate words or articulate sounds, but whole sentences expressing many ideas.
I have often spoken,’ continues Gall, ‘intentionally of objects which
might interest my dog, taking care not to mention his name, or make any
intonation or gesture which might awaken his attention. “He, however, showed
no less pleasure or sorrow, as it might be; and, indeed, manifested by his be-
haviour that’he had perfectly understood the conversation which concerned him.
I had taken a bitch from Vienna to Paris; in a very short time she compre-
hended French as well as German, of which I satisfied myself by repeating be-
fore her whole sentences in both languages.”* An accurate observer of nature,
and one familiar with brutes, Hogg, the late Ettrick shepherd poet, to substan-
tiate the same opinion, relates the following anecdote. He was going to visit


* lj. c. p. 298. sq.

y El. Physiol. lib. viii. sect. iv. p. xxx—xl.

* London Medical Gazette, June 27, 1834.

* Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, t. Ve Po 49. 8g.


VOICE AND SPEECH. 517
a friend for a fortnight, but was desirous that a particular dog should not ac-
company him, as it was always “ breeding some uproar.”” While the animal was
near him he mentioned his intention to his mother in the evening. The dog
was to be locked up till some time after he had started. But in the morning,
when the time came, it was not to be found. ‘* The d—’s in that beast,” said
he, “ I will wager that he heard what we were saying yesternight, and has gone
off for Bowerhope as soon as the door was opened this morning.” A great flood
had taken place in the night, so that the Yarrow was impassable, and Hogg had
to go by St. Mary’s Loch, and cross ina boat. But though it appeared impas-
sable by any living creature, the dog had swam it early in the morning, and was
found by Hogg, “sitting, ‘like a drookit hen,’ on a knowl at the east end of his
friend’s house, awaiting his arrival with great impatience.” >

“As the exertion of every power is a gratification, brutes take an intense
pleasure in making the noises of which they are capable. The singing of some
birds, and the chattering and squalling of others, are examples of this.

The voice of some small brutes is, like the muscular powers of others, far
greater than in large animals proportionally, and of some even absolutely. A
grasshopper, weighing an eighth of an ounce, may be heard at the distance of the
sixteenth of a mile; and Americans have calculated that a man, weighing as
much as 1600 grasshoppers, were his voice in proportion, would be audible at
the distance of 1000 miles, and when he sneezed would cause the house to be in
danger of falling, as the walls of Jericho tumbled at the sound of the trumpet.


> Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine. Feb. 1824.


MM 4


618


CHAP. XXII.


‘THE pia secigiees SENSES IN GENERAL, AND TOUCH IN
PARTICULAR.


“ Tue other office of the nerves we found to consist in com-
municating to the sensorium” (or organ of the mind) the, im-,
pressions made by external objects. This is accomplished by the.
external senses, which are, as it were, the watchmen of the body
and informers of the mind.” .
The external senses are usually considered to be five :—Touch,
taste, smell, sight, and hearing. But our feelings referrible to
sensation, or consciousness are very numerous. Besides our .
strictly mental feelings, we have a great variety, of feelings in the...
body.at large. To say nothing of hunger and thirst, we may, ©
feel,weak orstrong. The sensation of weakness is very distressing, »»
and often complained of in the epigastric region. The removal.
of this makes us cognisant of a feeling of which otherwise
we think.but little,—a feeling of general support and mutual
elastic. resistance, as it,.were,.between.all.the particles of \the ..
frame : and.exhaustion makes us conscious of .what was the come . .
fort of this feeling... We feel the state of our muscles, whether
they are relaxed or contracted, or at least the position of the...
parts which they move.- We feel the state of tone or exhaustion
of muscles.,.We feel heat and cold in their various degrees, ..
pains, and endless uneasy sensations of, distension, weight, prick- q
ing, smarting, &c. &c.,.a large number. of which are usually
referred.to the-sense. of. touch. But, the sensation induced me-.
chanically by the contact of something with us is properly called __
touch. Forms of sensation may be peculiar to certain parts. f
_«-The-five external senses alone belong to our present subject.
For to regard, with piorten, the stimulus which inclines us to
relieve the intestines,” &c., as so. many distinct senses, is unne- —
cessary minuteness, as Haller long since obseryed*. . . ys


L piifh&


8" J De Gorter, ‘Exercitationes Medica, iv. Amst. 1787. 4t0,% "°° ”


EXTERNAL SENSES. 519


By means of the external senses only do we learn the existence
of the world around us. ‘* With every sense an animal discovers
a new world; thus creation is to it increased or diminished ac-
cordingly as its senses are more or less numerous.” ‘ Provided
with senses, it enters into communication with the university of
nature, and associates with surrounding beings ; a continual action
and reaction are established between animate and inanimate na-
ture.”> They are the seat of almost constant gratification. Without
them, indeed, we should not only be ignorant of the surrounding
world, but our mental faculties would never come into operation.
We could not judge of objects of sight, hearing, or touch,
by our lower intellectual faculties; nor would our higher
intellectual faculties come into play, nor our various inclinations
be called forth. Some writers, hardly deserving the name of
philosophers, have been misled by these truths, and declared that
the external senses give rise to our intellectual and moral powers.
Were this the case, persons of acute external sense, and those
numerous savages and brutes which surpass us in one external
sense or other, would be the most eminent in intellect. Gall
found it necessary to refute these errors at length.¢ Not. even
can an organ of external sense give rise to a sensation, except in
the brain, or what is tantamount to brain in every brute.

Gall observes that,

“1, Every nerve of sense has its particular origin: no one
arises from the brain, or from another nerve; but the filaments
of each proceed from particular masses of pulpy substance.

‘© 9. Each nerve of sense differs from the others in size, struc-
ture, colour, and consistence. |

«© 3, The apparatus of some nerves are more or less compli-
cated, more or less numerous in the different kinds of animals.

‘4. There is no proportion, either direct or constantly uni-
form, between the size of the brain and of the nerves.

“5. There is no fixed proportion between the nerves of
sense in the different kinds of animals, nor in individuals of the
same species.

' «© 6. The female has not nerves of sense larger or smaller


than the male.


> Gall, 1. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 149.
«© Ibid, ll. ce. 4to. vol. i. p. 228. sqq. 3 also p. 149. sqq- 8vo. t. i, p.114, sqqe.


520 EXTERNAL SENSES,


“7. In different species of animals, and in individuals of the
same species, the nerves of sense are developed and decline at
very different periods. |

‘8. No decussation of any other nerve than the optic is at
present known, and its decussation is not found in all species of
animals.

9. The corresponding nerves of each side communicate toge-
ther by commissures, and in other parts of the brain by branches.”

“Again, that,

«1. To the functions of the senses, material instruments are
indispensable. ,

«2. ‘That the nerves merely communicate the impression of
the external world to the brain that it may be modified by this.

3, Every nerve of sense can receive but certain impres-
sions, and the functions, of one sense cannot be performed by an-
other,

“4. The delicacy of every sense is ordinarily proportionate to
the perfection and development of the apparatus, and probably
also to the number of apparatus.

“5. The particular functions of the senses have not the same
force in different species of animals, nor in different animals of the
same species: the animal which has acute sight may have dull
hearing.

«6, Thenervous system of the senses may, like other systems,
acquire a higher activity by unusual irritants, from inflamma:
tion, &c.

_ «7, The derangement of the functions of the senses that follow
lesion of the brain do not affect the opposite side any more
than those of the spinal chord, at least according to my present
experience.

. © 8, The functions of the different senses manifest themselves
at different periods, according to the development of these organs.
Tt is asked how, and for what purpose, some animals are born
with senses perfectly developed, at least with the eyes and ears.
open, and others with them closed. This peculiarity is not
always in relation to the power of using the extremities more or
less promptly ; for the new-born child is as incapable of loco-
motion as the new-born puppy.

~“« 9, All the functions of the senses gradually decline in old
age.” Accordingto some physiologists this is the result only of the


TOUCH. 521


ergans of the senses becoming habituated to external impressions,
so that these are continually less and less strong. But in old age
the functions of the senses grow weak, because the organs of the
senses diminish. The nervous filaments, and their nutrient sub-
stance, waste, as well as the pulpy substance in general, and all
_the nerves begin to atrophy. Hence Pinel did not find, in the
labyrinth of deaf old men, the soft substance which exists in men
who hear. Hence the nerves of old persons are much smaller
than of those in the vigour of life. As this diminution does not
occur at the same time in all the nervous system, it follows that all
the functions do not decline equally at the same time, as would
be the case if they declined more and more only by habituation.
to impressions. Some even explain by habit the fact of our having
in health no sensation of what is passing within us in our organic.
or automatic life. I should ascribe this rather to an original de-
sign of nature, which probably accomplishes it by the tenuity of
the filaments that communicate between the nervous. system of
the chest and abdomen and the nervous system of the vertebral
column, the senses, and the brain.

‘“10. The doubleness of any sense does not prevent our. sen-
sation of objects from being simple: in the same manner. our
consciousness is single, notwithstanding the five different functions
of the senses.” 3

A sensation lasts a certain time after the exciting cause has
ceased. Thus, if a piece of wood, with one end ignited, is whirled
round, we see a luminous ring; the sensation produced by the
wood in each point of the circle continuing till the wood arrives at
that point again: arocket formsatrain. A sensation is sometimes
renewed, as when, after having looked at the sun, we close our
eyes and its figure returns. According to the law of all vital excite-
ment, sensations are more acute the less they have been excited,
and vice versa. Thus, after having been in a strong light, we at first
see nothing on entering a darkened apartment, but gradually dis-
tinguish objects in it, and, on returning into the light, find the
glare very disagreeable: the same som water feels warm to one
hand previously immersed in cold water, and cold to the other
previously placed in warm water.


. Touch merits our first attention, because it is the first. to
manifest itself after birth, its. organ is most extensively spread


522 TOUCH.


over the whole surface, and it is affected by many properties of
external objects.”

“Tt is less fallacious than the rest of the senses, and by culture
capable of such perfection as in some measure to supply pi:
deficiency of others, particularly of vision. 4

“The direct pleasure of the sense of touch is far more exquisite
than of any other sense, and is therefore employed by nature for
the raptures of sexual intercourse.

~The skin, whose structure we formerly examined, is the
general organ of touch.e The immediate seat of the sense is the’
papillae of the corium, of various forms in different parts, com=
monly resembling warts, in some places fungous’, in ‘others
filamentous. The extremities of all the cutaneous nerves as Pe
minate in these under the form of pulpy penicilli.” =

“The nerves of general sensibility, and as far as we know of
touch in particular, are the ganglionic portion of the trigeminum
and the ganglionic or posterior spinal nerves and all their ramifi-


cations.

~The hands are the principal organs of touch, properly so.
called, and regarded as the sense which examines solidity; and
their skin has many peculiarities. In the palms and on each
side of the joints of the fingers, it is furrowed and free from
hairs, to facilitate the closing of the hand: and the extremities


d-«<-Consult Rol. Martin, Schwed. Abhandl. vols xxxix..1777.

G. Bew, Memoirs of the Society of Manchester, vol.i. p. 159.

Ch. Hutton, Mathematical Dictionary, vol. i. p. 214.” .
_ Lecat speaks of a sculptor, Ganibasius de Volterre, who, being blind, felt
faces, and then modelled them in clay. The man of Puiseaux, born blind,
estimated: the distance of the fire by the degree of heat, and of bodies by the
attion of air upon his face. Saunderson, by exploring a series of medals with
his hands, distinguished the genuine from the spurious, although the latter were so
well counterfeited as to deceive a connoisseur with good eyes ; and he judged of
the accuracy ‘of mathematical instruments by passing the ends of his fingers upon”
their divisions. Like the blind man of Puiseaux, he was affected by the least
vicissitude of the atmosphere, and could perceive, especially in calm weather, the
presence of objects not more than some paces distant.” Gall. 1. 4to. vol. i. p. 292.

“ese F. De Riet, De 4 ag Tactus. LL.B. 1743. 4to. reprinted in eihitnics
Anatomical Collection, t. iv.’ ai. -

f « Dav. Corn. de Courcelles, Icones Musculor. Capitis. Tab. i. fig. 2, 3

5, 4 B. S. Albinus, Annotat. Academ. 1° iii. tab. iv. fig. I, Ptbaip ; : “

nee ‘Ruysch, Thesdur. ‘Anat, iii. tab: iv. fig. Ly. Thes. vis tabeiis fig. ad

“B. S.- Albinus, Ic. L. vi. tab. ii, fig. 3, 4.” las


TOUCH. . 528


of both fingers and toes are ridged internally. by very. beautiful
lines more or less spirali; and are shielded externally by nails,

“ These scutiform zaz/sk are bestowed upon man and a few
other genera of mammalia only (we allude to the quadrumana
which excel in the sense of touch)!, for the purpose of resisting
pressure, and thus assisting the action of the fingers, while exa-
mining objects. .

«« They are of a horny nature, but on the whole very similar. to
the epidermis. For under them lies the reticulum, which, in
negroes is, black™; and under this again is found the corium,
adhering firmly to the periosteum of the last phalanx. These
constituent parts of the nails are striated lengthwise. The pos-
terior edge, which, in the hands, is remarkable for a little lunated
appearance, is fixed in a furrow of the skin; and the nails, grows
ing constantly from this, are protruded forwards, so as to be per-
fectly renewed about every six months,” se

Dr. Breschet considers that the organ of touch is nota, mere
nerve, but that an apparatus exists as in the eye and ear: — that,
like the optic nerve entering the sclerotic, the nerves of touch
lose their neurilema on entering the cutis and derive a new
covering from its outer part, and then, terminating in a: round
extremity or projecting papilla, are covered by. a thin he of
epidermis indispensable to the sense of touch,”

Weber has shown that the tactile power of the skin is not pros
portionate to its sensibility. Thus the mamme are easily tickled,


i.“ Grew, Phil. Trans. No. 159.”

k « B.S. Albinus, dnnotat. Academ. 1. ii. tab. vii. fig. 4, 5, 6

1 « Namely, simiz, papiones, cercopitheci, and lemures, the apices of whose
fingers in their four hands are very soft, and marked, as in the human subject,
with spiral lines, Bi
- «* Physiologists have disputed whether the sense of touchis bestowed on any
besides man and the guadrumana.” ‘On one side, I would grant to both parties
that the snowy hands of a delicate girl must enjoy a much more exquisite sense.
of touch than what I call the fingers of brutes. But, on the other, I have
frequently seen simiz and papiones possessing much softer fingers, and using.
these fingers to explore surfaces much more dexterously, than many barbarous"
nations and innumerable persons pre the lower orders of Europeans whose
i have been hardened by labour.’

“ B.S, Albinus, De Habitu et Colore <Ethiopum, fig. 3.”

» Nouvelles Recherches sur la Structure de. la Peau, par. M. G, _Breschet..

Paris, 1835. rghit sonidfA Bw


524 rovell.


and susceptible of great pain when ifritatéed, and yet aré very mo-
derately endowed with the sense of touch. Thé armpits, flanks,
Soles, and other ticklish parts have a comparatively slight power of
distinguishing objects by touch. ‘“ Who was ever made to laugh
by tickling the ends of his fingers? and yet they are possessed
of a tactile accuracy far exceeding that of any other portion of
the skin.” Mere sensibility exists in all the surfaces and solids,
and’ under disease may give sensations; and in some internal
parts, as the upper and lower part of the alimentary canal, we
continually have sensation: but, whatever be the irritation of the
stomach. or bowels or larynx, substances within silent are aad
very indistinctly. AIO

The different parts of the skin vary excdedinglyo® in their
tactile power. Weber remarks that, if the skin of ‘@ person
whose eyes are shut is touched with the two points of @ coni-
pass an inch asunder, he at once perceives that he is touchéd
in two places. But, by moving the points nearer and nearer to
each other, the skin feels at length as if touched by simply one
body, and this body feels as if rather longer in the line of junction
of the points of the compass. There is, however, the greatest
difference in different parts as to their power of still feeling that
there are two bodies when these are approximated. ‘The tips of
the fingers and of the tongue distinguish the bodies at the simall-
est distance; while the middle of the arm and thigh, the centre
of: the cervical and dorsal spine, cease the soonest to  distin-
guish at large distances. In himself Weber found the tip of the
tongue distinguish two bodies, as well in their horizontal as per-
pendicular direction, till their distance from each other was with-
in-half a French liné; the inner surface of the tips of the fingers
within one, &c. :

He lays it down as a law, that, the more gifted with touch are
any portions of the skin, the greater will the distance appear of
any. two bodies from each other though placed at the very same
distance.» Thus, “if the points of a compass, distant fron each
other one or two lines, applied to the cheek, just before the ear,
be then moved successively to several parts of the cheek, we
shall find, on approaching the angle of the mouth, that the points +
will appear to recede from each other;” or, if the ends of the
forefinger and thumb are held together, and their tips passed in a


s


TOUCH. 598
line from the ear to the upper or under lip, they will feel more
and more distant from each other as they approach these.

If the points of the compass, kept at the same distance from
each other, are applied to two contiguous surfaces, enjoying vo-
luntary motion, as to the two lips, they will appear more distant
than when applied to one surface: in fact in the case of the lips,
though, when distant from each other half a line, they appear as
two, yet, if applied to one lip only, they appear as one. Nay
the points, though at the same distance from each other, will seem
more distant when applied to two portions of the skin differing in
structure and function, than when applied to portions resembling
each other, even though more sensible. Thus, if the points are
placed one upon the inner surface, and one upon the red outer part
of the lips, they appear more distant from each other than when
both are applied, though at the same. distance, on the outer red
surface which is so much more sensible. | ;

When the points of the compass are placed horizontally on the
axis of a limb, they are distinguished as two more clearly than
when placed vertically. But the reverse occurs, if they are Lain
on the trunk.°

He finds the left hand more sensible of temperature than -
the right in most persons, probably from its epidermis be-
ing thinner through less use. When the hands, being of' the
same temperature, were plunged into separate vessels of hot:
water, as the person lay in bed, the left hand was believed’ to
be in hotter water, though the temperature was two degrees:
lower than that of the water in the other vessel. <A difference of
one third of a degree is readily detected by the hand if placed
successively in two vessels of water. The judgment is more ac-
curate when the temperature is not much above or below the
usual temperature of the body ; water at 98° being more readily
distinguished from water at 100°, than water at 120° from water’
at 118°; just as souhds are best discriminated when neither very:
acute nor base nor loud. A large surface receives stronger impres->
sions than a smaller. If the forefinger of one hand is)\immersed:


° [have always been struck with the erroneous judgment I form of the spot
of the trunk, or arms, or legs, in which an itching or tingling is felt. So
satisfied in general am I that I cannot put my finger on the spot where T feel
the tingling, unless I use my eyes, that I have frequently oe mye with i
observing what # blunder I was sure to: make. '


526 TOUCH.


in water at 104°, and the whole of the other hand in-watér-at!
102°, the cooler water will be thought the warmer: and water,
borne by a forefinger, will seem to scald the whole hand.
Minute differences are appreciated by plunging the whole hand:
successively into two vessels of hot water, which are impercep-
tible to a single finger.

Differences of temperature and weight are best ascertained
when the perceptions are not arnt fesse but successive; just
as is the case with differences in objects of taste, smell, and hear-
ing. Ifan acid and a sweet substance are applied to the tongue:
with pencils in rapid succession, they are nicely distinguished :
but not if applied together. It is the same if two vials of odorous
fluids are applied to the nostrils ; and two notes are always better:
distinguished if struck in succession than together. Vision is no
exception, because, although we compare two lines best when
placed side by side, we in fact do not view them simultaneously,
but in rapid succession; since nothing is seen accurately unless
its image falls on the retina at the extremity of the optic axis.

Persons differ greatly in their power of estimating weight, and
practice increases it considerably. Men accustomed to estimate
weights by poising them will distinguish a difference of a thirtieth
part in two bodies. ‘They use the same hand for each weight in
instant succession. ‘The intervention of a few seconds does not
prevent accuracy. A true estimate may be made although the
second weight is poised twenty seconds after the first ; but an in-
terval of forty seconds prevents accuracy. The sense of sight is
more accurate, for a well-practised eye will distinguish a differ-
ence of a hundredth part in the length of two lines: and the ear
surpasses the eye, for_a well-practised musical ear will distinguish
between two sounds differing only 54,5,— the number of vibrations
being calculated that are made by the sounding bodies in a given
time. If two lines differ only ;'; in length, the difference may be
perceived although the one is tnaked at fifty.or sixty seconds:
after the other. If they differ =, an interval of thirty-five se-
conds may elapse. If they a (,. an interval of three seconds
is the longest compatible with Hin ie judgment.P

Not only does touch appear too general an expression for the’

P De Pulsu, Resorptione, Auditu et Tactu. -Annotationes Anatomice et Physion


logice, auctore Henrico Ernesto Weber. Lipsiw, 1834.; and Dr. Graves’s
Analysis of it, in the Dublin Journal of Medical Science, March 1836.


TOUCH. 527


endless feelings of which we are susceptible, but some feelings,
‘apparently referred with justice to this sense, are considered by
many writers as referrible to other modes of sensation. Dr.
Spurzheim 4 says, “ It may still be asked whether feeling g produces
ideas of consistency, of hardness, of softness, of solidity and
fluidity, of weight and resistance? I think it does not. For the
‘mind ‘to examine these qualities employs the muscular system-
‘rather than the sense of feeling properly so called.” This opi,
nion accords with that of Dr. Brown', who states, ‘‘ The feeling
“of resistance” (of which he considers the qualities enumerated
above as modifications) “is, I conceive, to be ascribed, not to
‘our organ of touch, but to our muscular frame, to which I have
already directed your’ attention, as forming a distinct organ of
‘sense; the affections of which, particularly as existing in com-
bination with other feelings, and modifying our judgments con-
cerning these (as in the case of distant vision, for example), are
not less important than those of our other sensitive organs. The
senSations of this class are, indeed, in common circumstances, so
‘obscure as to be scarcely heeded or remembered by us; but there
is probably no contraction, even of a single muscle, which ‘is not
attended with some faint degree of sensation that distinguishes it
from the contractions of other muscles, or from other degrees of

contraction of the same muscle.” .
This opinion was originally advanced by the profoundest phy-
sician among my predecessors at St. Thomas’s Hospital,—Dr.
Wellss, in the following words : — “ What is there within us to
indicate these positions of the body? To me it appears evident,
that, since they are occasioned and preserved by combinations of
the actions of various voluntary muscles, some feeling must.attend.
every such combination, which suggests, from experience, per-
haps, the particular position produced by it. But in almost. all
the positions of the body, the chief part of our muscular efforts
is directed’ toward sustaining it against the influence of its own
gravity. Each position, therefore, in which this takes place,
must be attended with a feeling which serves to. indicate its re-

lation to the horizontal plane of the earth.” _

sir C. Bell has renee these opinions, but without any refer-


“4 ‘Phrenoloay.


"Lectures on the Philosoph Yy. x the pee Miaid. 2a edit.-1824; ‘ps 480, ;
> Essays, 1818. p. 70. ,


NN


~


528 TOUCH.


ence to Dr. Wells or the other two physicians, although he shows
himself acquainted with Dr. Wells’s writings.

«¢ Why are nerves, whose office is to convey sensation, profusely
given to muscles, in addition to those motor nerves which are
given to excite their motions? To solve this question, we must
determine whether muscles have any other purpose to serve
than merely to contract under the influence of motor nerves.
For if they have reflective influence, and if their condition is to
be felt or conceived, it will presently appear that the motor nerves
are not suitable internuncii betwixt them and the sensorium. I
shall first inquire if it be necessary to the governance of the mus-
cular frame, that there be a consciousness of the state or degree
of action of the muscles? That we have a sense of the condition
of the muscles appears from this: that we feel the effects of over-
exertion or weariness, and are excruciated by spasms, and feel
the irksomeness of continued position. We possess a power of
weighing in the hand; what is this but estimating the muscular
force? We are sensible of the most minute changes of muscular
exertion, by which we know the position of the body and limbs,
when there is no other means of knowledge opentous. Ifa rope-
dancer measures his steps by the eye, yet, on the other hand, a
blind man can balance his body. In standing, walking, and run-
ning, every effort of voluntary power which gives motion to the
body is directed by a sense of the condition of the muscles, and
without this sense we could not regulate their actions, and a very
principal inlet to knowledge would be cut off.’

Weber illustrates this opinion of Dr. Wells, by supporting the
hands of a blindfolded person on cushions, and placing unequal
weights upon them, Ifthe difference is great, it will be felt. But, if
it is small, it will not be noticed till the hands are raised, —till
the muscles feel what resistance they have to act against. Weber
found in most men a more accurate sense of the amount of pres-
sure on the left side than on the right. A minute substance in
contact with the skin is always judged to be perpendicularly
situated in regard to it, as rays of light are always seen in g


t The British Association has allowed the compiler of the report on the Phy-
siology of the Nervous System, to refer to Sir C. Bell alone on this point, with-
out any allusion to the previous writings of Dr. Wells, Dr. Brown, or Dr.
Spurzheim.

° Phil. Trans. 1826.


TOUCH. 529


direction perpendicular to the point at which they impinge on the
retina. It may be said, that, if a hair is pulled, we do not conceive
it to be pulled perpendicularly whatever be the direction. But
Weber replies that we judge here of the direction by the direc-
tion of the muscular effort necessary to keep the head steady at
the time. If muscles are not called into play, but the head is held
steady by one person while another presses firmly around the hair,
the direction, whatever it be, in which the hair is pulled, cannot
be judged of.

We have seen that Dr. Spurzheim thought he had established
a cerebral organ for judging of these sensations of weight or re-
sistance. *

Oe AE OS A TS TT

The varieties of the feelings both of consciousness and sensation in the animal
kingdom must be infinite. Brutes probably have sensations from the external
world of which we are insusceptible, and those especially which are minute
are no doubt sensible ‘to external circumstances, which are far too delicate to
produce an impression upon us. Every animal is destined for a certain pecu-
liarity and amount of sensation from certain substances and circumstances, in
accordance with the destination of its mede of existence. Brutes will feel the
approach of changes in the weather long before we are aware of what is coming ;
and know even the direction of a coming storm.


All brutes most probably have the sense of touch; and the more delicate
and soft the external parts which come in contact with surrounding substances,


* Gall is very philosophical and eloquent in overthrowing the doctrine of ex-
cellence of touch being the source of superiority of intellect, and of this sense
especially rectifying others and giving us a better knowledge of the external
world, ll. cc. 4to. p. 208. sqq. 8vo. t.i. p. 85. sqq. Those who have not read both
his large and octavo work may not be aware for what absurdities he had to oppose
Buffon, Condillac, Cuvier, Herder, Richerand, Vicq d’Azyr, blind followers of
Anaxagoras and Galen.

As philosophers have ascribed the superiority of man’s intellect to his hand, and
of the elephant’s to its trunk, the constructiveness of the beaver to its tail, and the
ferocity of the tiger to its teeth and claws, the poor man may be excused who was
lately executed at Chelmsford, and left the following directions: — “I, Edward
Clarke, now in a few hours expecting to die, do sincerely wish, as my last re-
quest, that three of my fingers be given to my three children, as a warning to
them, as my fingers were the cause of bringing myself to the gallows and my
children to poverty.” The request was complied with by the surgeon. L£x-
aminer. April 23. 1837.

Nn @


530 / TOUCH.


the more delicate and acute, with an equal supply of nerves, will be the sense.’
Many without hands, as organs of touch, have other organs to compensate for-
their absence. ‘* We observe, even from the polygastric animalcules, that organs
are developed at the anterior part of the body, which appear to be adapted to
communicate sensations corresponding with those of touch in the higher animals.
They have long cilia, almost already developed into tentacula; and those ten-
tacula, so common in the class of zoophytes, appear to be endowed with great
delicacy of feeling. ' ‘Those fleshy and sensitive tentacula and tubular feet of the:
radiated animals continue up through many of the succeeding classes of animals,’
becoming jointed in the articulated classes, where they form palpi and antenne ;:
and in: the soft molluscous classes they again assume the form and name of
tentacula, —soft, sensitive, and fleshy, without any jointed appearance. We ob-
serve remnants of those sensitive organs even in the class of fishes in the form of
processes or filaments still disposed as organs of touch around the mouth.” :
«* Many fishes and higher animals are covered with dense scales which must
deaden the general sense of touch over the Surface of their bodies: other fishes
have the lower part of the head, the lower part of the abdomen, the circum-
ference of the mouth, and other exposed parts, covered with a naked, delicate, :
and soft integument, which will compensate for the want of development of the~
arms and hands as organs of touch. But in the land amphibious animals, and’
in all the higher vertebrata, we observe the anterior extremities to become more *
delicately organised, and fit for communicating delicate impressions of the forms,
densities, and other physical qualities of external bodies; and in proportion to
the high nervous sensibility, the vascularity, the flexibility, and the softness of the ’
hands and other external cutaneous parts, will that common sense of touch become *
increased as we pass up through the vertebrated classes to man, who surpasses’
all inferior animals in the exquisite and equal development of all his organs of
sense, and in the perfection of all those higher organs of relation by which”
animals are more immediately connected with outward nature.’? (Dr. Grant’s
Lectures. Lancet, No. 569.) .

I presume that the tongue must be considered as an organ of touch as well as of
taste; and the snout in the mole and pig ; the moist upper lip in the rhinoceros ;
the proboscis of the elephant ; and the lower end of the tails of apes called sapajous.
The whiskers of the ‘feline and other mammalia probably serve to make the
proximity of bodies known to the animal. The seal has a very long infra-orbital
branch of the fifth pair, with about forty branches, which are distributed to.
the upper lip, and many of which have been traced by Blumenbach to the roots.
of the strong whiskers.” (Manual of Comparative Anatomy, translated by Messrs.
Laurence and Coulson, p. 259. sq.)


da


CHAP. XXIII.


TASTE.

‘W E perceive tastes by the tongue, and in some degree,” says
‘Blumenbach, in conformity with the tommon opinion, “ by the
other neighbouring internal cutaneous parts of the mouth, espe-
cially by the soft palate, the fauces, the interior of the cheeks,
and lips; by them, however, we taste only what is acrid and very
-bitter* :” and Dr. Vimont says that, on touching the lips, inside of
the cheeks, and the palate, with a very concentrated solution of
common salt, with strong vinegar, and pure alcohol, their respec-
tive tastes were not:experienced, while he instantly had the taste
of each when brought in contact with the upper surface of the
tongue. >

The most careful and extensive experiments have been made
by M.M. Guyot and Admyrauld¢, and they declare the lips,
the internal surface of the cheeks, the hard palate, and the pha-
rynx, to be utterly destitute of taste; the soft palate to be also
destitute, except at one spot, commencing about a line below its
-union with the hard palate, descending to within three or four
lines of the base of the uvula, and extending indefinitely on each
side till lost insensibly ; and the tongue to be destitute at its lower
part and all its dorsal surface. So that the only seats of taste
are the small space in the soft palate, that portion of the base
of the tongue behind a curved line drawn with its concavity, for-
wards and passing through the blind foramen, and the whole of the
circumference of the organ, on the upper part of which the sense
extends a little farther towards the middle. of the organ, espe-
cially near the apex, than on the lower; and the portion at the


a « Grew, Anatomy of Plants, p. 284. sq.
- Petr. Luchtmans, De Saporibus et Gustu.. L.B. 1758. 4to. p. 58. sqq. _
J. Gottl. Leidenfrost, De sensu qui in faucibus est, ab eo qui in lingua seed.
diverso. Duisb. 1771. 4to.”
» Traité de Phrén. vol. ii. p. 138. sq.
° Mémoire sur le Siége du-Gout, chexl’Homme, Paris, 1830.
NN 3


532 TASTE.


apex has a more acute taste than the rest of the circumference.
These gentlemen remark that the seats of taste, as ascertained by
them, are the most favourably placed for the exercise of the sense.
Substances have the apex of the tongue applied to them as soon
as they are moistened by the lips; the softer portions fall during
mastication, some within the alveolar arch in contact with the cir-
cumference of the tongue, and others without it, but these are im-
mediately pressed over to the circumference of the tongue by the
cheeks; while the food is compressed between the dorsum of the
tongue and hard palate, going through a kind of mastication for
which the firmness and moderate sensibility of the dorsum render
it peculiarly fit, the fluid portions are expressed and run over to
the circumference; and, finally, the bolus, when properly moistened
and fit for deglutition, is pressed between the base of the tongue
and the central gustatory space in the soft palate.

‘The chief organ of taste is the tongue‘, agile, extremely
ready, changeable in form; in its remarkably fleshy nature, not
unlike the heart ; and endowed with far more excitability than any
other voluntary muscle.®

‘“‘ Its integuments resemble the skin. They are, an epithelium,
performing the office of cuticle; the reticulum Malpighianum® ;
and a papillary membrane, but little different from the corium.

“ The integuments of the tongue differ from the skin chiefly
in these respects — in the epithelium being moistened, not by the
oily fluid of the skin, but by a mucus which proceeds from the
foramen cecum of Meibomius& and the rest of the glandular ex-
pansion of Morgagni 4, and, secondly, in the conformation of
the papille, which are commonly divided into petiolated, obtuse,
and conical.i The first are in very small number and situated in


4 « Sommerring, Icones Organorum Humanorum Gustus. Francof. 1808.
ol.” :

¢ « This fact, contrary to the opinion of others, I have proved by dissection
of living animals, and by pathological observation. Specimen Historie Naturalis
ex auctoribus classicis illustrate. Gotting. 1816. 4to. p. 4. sqq.”

f «¢ In dogs and sheep with variegated skin, I have commonly found the reti-
culum of the tongue and fauces also variegated.”’

& « Consult Just. Schrader, Observat. et Histor. from Harvey’s book De Gene-
ratione Animalium. p. 18F.”

h « Morgagni, Adversar. Anat. Prima. Tab. 1.”

i «¢ Ruysch, Thesaur, Anat. 1. tab. iv. fig. 6.

B. S. Albinus, dnnotat. dead. 1. i. tab. 1. fig. 611.”


TASTE. 533


a lunated series at the root of the tongue; the others, of various
magnitudes, lie promiscuously upon the back of the tongue, and
chiefly upon its edges and apex.k The tongue is furnished with
nerves by the lingual branch of the fifth pair !,” by the hypoglossal,
and the glosso-pharyngeal. ‘The first gives common sensibility ;
the second, motion; the latter, the sense of taste: as is shown by
Dr. Panizza.™

The glosso-pharyngeal or gustatory nerve commences by two,
three, or more filaments, from the chorda oblongata, at a part
of Sir C. Bell’s respiratory tract, unluckily, and emerges between
the corpora olivaria and restiformia.” It has no communication
with the other nerves of the tongue: and gives off no muscular
filaments. It is distributed to the mucous membrane of the
tongue, epiglottis, tonsils, and upper part of the pharynx. It com-
municates both with the vidian or recurrent pterygoid nerve of
the spheno-palatine ganglion, or at least a branch of it runs some
way with a branch of this, and with a branch of the facial, or
at least runs also with this; for I cannot conceive nerves of sen-
sation and motion really to mingle in their course and form a
third nerve, however they may mingle in ganglia or the en-
cephalo-spinal mass or in plexuses, in order that the nerve of
sensation may influence the nerve of motion, which must still run
on, I imagine, afterwards distinct, as before: it communicates
with the pneumono-gastric, superior cervical ganglion, and with
the pharyngeal plexus, in all probability for influencing these
parts: and we know how great is the sympathy of the organs
of taste with the pharynx and stomach, &c.

Blumenbach correctly states that ‘the ninth pair®,” «which also
supplies the tongue?, appears intended rather for the various move-


& < Consult Haller’s excellent description of the tongue of a living man, in
the Dictionn. Encyclopédique. Yverdon, vol. xxii. p. 28.”

1 « J. Fr. Meckel, De Quinto Pare Nervorum Cerebri. Gotting. 1748. 4to.
p: 97. fig. 8. n. 80.”

™ Ricerche sperimentali sopra i nervi. Lettera del Professore Bartolomeo Panizza
al Professore Maurizio Bufalini. Pavia, 1834.

™ Gall, l.c. 4to. vol.i. p. 102.

° «J. F. W. Bohmer, De Nono Pare Nervorum Cerebri. Gotting. 1777.
4to.”

P “ See Haller, Icon. Anatom. fasc. ii. tab. 1. letter g.

Monro, On the Nervous System. Tab. xxvi.”

NN 4


-


534 TASTE.


ments of the organ, in manducation, deglutition, speaking, &c.4
But, like most others, he believes that the lingual branch of the
fifth pair is for taste ; and the glosso- kdemcion|, as well as hype:
glossal, for motion.

- Professor Panizza has lately demonstrated that the lingual is
for common sensibility, and the glosso-pharyngeal for taste.
When the hypoglossal was divided by him in a dog or sheep,
the tongue instantly lost all motion, If milk was offered, the
animal hastily advanced and made the movements of lapping
with the head and lower jaw, but the tongue lay motionless
in the mouth, and the animal at last gave up all attempts to lap.
If soaked bread was offered, he took it into his mouth, and
attempted to masticate, but» suddenly laid it down, .scarcely
divided into two pieces, one of which he tock up again, subdivided,
and treated in the same way, till the fragments were on the ground
and abandoned by him. If his tongue rolled out of his mouth,
it-so remained, and was bitten till he howled again. The tongue
no more assisted in the process of deglutition than of mastication.
If solid. food was placed on the tongue, and did not fall off into
the pharynx, between the tongue and the teeth, or out of the
mouth, by the motion of the head and lower jaw, it was found
there after many hours. If by these: motions it tumbled into the
pharynx and was swallowed, deglutition was still imperfect, because


1 Besides the well-known ganglion petrosum of the glosso-pharyngeal nerve,
Dr. Muller of Berlin has discovered another ganglion on this nerve in the human
subject. He describes it as situated within the cavity of the cranium near the
jugular foramen, as being very inconsiderable in size (not more than a milli-
metre, is inch, in length), and as belonging, not to the whole root ‘of the
nerve, but only to one of its*fasciculi, which fasciculus, he adds, arises from the
same region of the chorda oblongata as the rest of the nerves,

Dr. Mayer of Bonn has observed two small ganglia on the root of the glosso-
pharyngeal nerve of the ox. Each is placed on a separate fasciculus of the nerve
near to but within the place where it pierces the dura mater.

‘Dr. Mayer has also discovered that the hypoglossal in the ox, dog, and pig
has a posterior as well as an anterior root. The posterior root, which is
very delicate, arises from the posterior surface of the. chorda oblongata, passes
over the accessory nerve (without, however, being connected with it) forms a
small ganglion, from which it emerges augmented in size, and joins the anterior
root. Dr, Mayer has once, but only once, observed this posterior root and its
ganglion in the human subject. Dr. Muller could never discover it in man, but
has seen it distinctly inthe ox. “See Miiller’s Handbuch der Physiologie, p.589.,
and Dr. Mayer in the Acta dcad. Ces. Leop. Nat. Cur. vol. xvi. p. Ii.


TASTE. 535


the mass, when squeezed by the superior pharyngeal muscle,
partly returned into the mouth from the tongue being unable to
close the isthmus of the fauces. and thus compel it to take alte-
gether a downward course. There was the same difficulty if fluid
was poured into the fauces. If the sheep took vegetable substances
between its teeth or lips, he could not draw them into his mouth,
and his bleat became hoarse and feeble. That the sensibility of
the tongue was unimpaired, was shown, if it was pricked near the
tip, or base, or at the centre, by the animal howling if he bit it,
by the efforts, already mentioned, to dislodge a morsel placed
upon it, by his shaking his head with his mouth open to reinstate
it if in making the experiments it had been folded back, and by
his efforts to vomit, as well as by his expressions of pain, whenever
the tongue was pricked at the base. That taste continued, was
shown by the disgust expressed whenever a solution of colocynth,
which is neither acrid nor odorous, was placed upon the tongue.

When the two lingual branches of the fifth pair had been di-
vided, the animal licked, lapped, ate, and drank as before; and colo-
cynth placed upon its tongue carefully, so as to touch no other part,
instantly excited disgust; so that motion and taste were unim-
paired, but the tongue might be burnt and wounded in all ways
without the animal expressing pain.

« If both the hypoglossal and lingual branches were divided,
motion and sensibility were lost, but taste still remained perfect.

' If the glosso-pharyngeal pair was divided, motion and sensibility
were unimpaired, but colocynth and any other nauseous sub-
stance that had no smell produced no disgust, and was swallowed
with the same avidity as the most agreeable, and the vessel which
contained it was licked out clean. A dog, in which the lingual
nerves only had been divided, and which was swallowing some
meat, swallowed hastily also a piece made bitter, but was seized
with vomiting and compelled to disgorge it as soon as it reached
the gullet: but the dog in which-the glosso-pharyngeal had been
divided, ate up the very piece instantly, and gave no sign of
finding it disagreeable. Yet this same dog expressed great suffer-
ing if his tongue was pricked with a needle.

If the hypoglossal was pinched immediately after death, the
tongue moved: but no such effect resulted from pinching the
lingual or glosso-pharyngeal nerve. The glosso-pharyngeal,
Professor Panizza observes, both in man and brutes, gives no


536 TASTE.


filaments to the muscles among which it passes, but is wholly
distributed to the nervous membrane of the tongue and other
parts which are likewise the seat of taste; and its filaments are
the most abundant at the base of the tongue, where taste is the
most acute. ;

We are thus gratified at witnessing an uniformity with the other
organs of sense. They have one set of nerves for their muscles ;
another for their common sensibility or touch, and this is the same
as that possessed by the tongue, or the trigeminus ; and a distinct
nerve for their specific sense. Sir C. Bell, having found the glosso-
pharyngeal arise in his respiratory tract, called it a respiratory
nerve, and made it preside over deglutition; while he considered
the lingual to be the nerve of the specific sense, though it does
not arise distinctly like the olfactory, optic, and acoustic, but is
a mere branch of a nerve of touch — of the trigeminus, which he
very properly classes with the double spinal nerves. ‘* The extra-
ordinary part of this speculation is,” Dr. Panizza remarks, “ that,
among the arguments by which the various opinions were sup-
ported, the anatomical distribution of each nerve was uniformly
adduced ; so true it is that prejudice obscures the observation as
well as warps the judgment.”

“ For the tongue to taste properly, it must be moist, and the
substance to be tasted must,” according to common opinion, “ be
liquid. For if either is in a dry state, we may perceive the presence
of the substances by the common sense of touch, which the tongue
possesses in great acuteness, but cannot discover their sapid
qualities.” It is by no means proved, however, that the moisture
indispensable for taste is requisite to dissolve the substance tasted,
and not to fit the papille for their office; for moisture is secured
to the nerves of every sense.

“ When the tongue tastes very acutely, the papillz around its
apex and margins seem to be in some degree erected.”

Dr. Nehemiah Grew, in a discourse my before the Royal So-
ciety in 1675 8, endeavoured to show that there are at least sixteen
different simple tastes, which he enumerates. All these, he avers,
have various degrees of intensity and weakness, and may be


“it Belling Gustus Organum novissimé deprehensum. Bonon. 1665. 12mo.”
* A discourse of the diversities and causes of tastes, chiefly in plants, published with
all his Lectures, by the Royal Society, in one folio volume.


TASTE. 537


combined together in an innumerable variety of proportions.
Many of these have other modifications ; “in some the taste is more
quickly perceived upon the application of the sapid body, in others
more slowly; in some the sensation is more permanent, in others
more transient; in some it seems to undulate or return after cer-
tain intervals, in others it is constant. All these, and other va-
rieties of tastes, Dr. Grew illustrates by a number of examples.” t
The various parts of the organ, as the lips, the tip of the tongue,
the root of the tongue, the fauces, the uvula, and the throat,
are some of them chiefly affected by one sapid body, and others
by another.

Taste is rendered stronger by pressing the tongue firmly against
the sapid substance and moving it. The impression made by a
sapid substance is often much influenced by the taste just expe-
rienced. The taste of a second substance may be improved or
spoiled by the impression of the first: the taste of malt liquor
is greatly improved by first tasting cheese. Gall argues against
the common opinion, that indulgence deadens the taste, and
contends that this renders it more discriminating. He asks if our
cooks distinguish sapid articles less perfectly than savages; and
if the instances of poisoning among peasants by eating hemlock,
belladonna, or poisonous mushrooms, do not prove that their
taste is not superior to that of voluptuous citizens? It varies
in different persons; at least what is agreeable to one person is
disagreeable or indifferent to another; even in regard to mere
taste, it is true that ‘“‘ one man’s meat is another man’s poison.”
It differs in the sexes, at different ages, and under the influence of
habit and of diseases : — men like stronger articles of taste than
women; children love sugar more than adults, and dislike fat, which
is agreeable to adults ; the lower orders enjoy food which would
make the higher sick; and chlorotic girls are often fond of
mortar and cinders.

Taste is not an unerring index of the wholesomeness of food :
for noxious articles are sometimes eaten with pleasure, and whole-
some substances disliked.


* Dr. Reid, Inquiry into the Human Mind, c. 3.

M. M. Guyot and Admyrauld have just published a second memoir in which
they illustrate Dr. Grew’s remark respecting the effect of different savours on
different parts of the gustatory apparatus, and show that its different, parts are
affected differently by the same sapid body.


538 TASTE.


_ When the tongue or interior of the mouth or throat is rather
dry, we experience thirst. But, ifthe dryness is extreme, the
nerves may not feel the want of fluid, being apparently disquali-
fied for their office; and merely the roughness of the parts may
be complained of... The most intense thirst is felt when the ex-
terior of the tongue and interior of the’ mouth and throat are
covered with a sticky substance : — viscid secretion or jelly will
give intense thirst, there being insufficient fluidity. and yet no
disqualifying aridity.


All animals having a mouth and stomach have probably taste. To disprove
a common opinion that birds have but little taste, Gall mentions that Blumen-
bach finds the organ much larger proportionally in the duck than in the goose ;
that the palate of many are supplied with very strong and large nervous papille ;
that many birds bruise insects and grains; and many, if different kinds of food
are given them, select the most agreeable ; that, if whole ants are given to fresh
caught nightingales, the birds usually reject them, but if they are bruised they are
swallowed with avidity ; that those birds which swallow their food whole: dis-
tinguish different berries and grains with their beak, so that, although all may be
taken into the mouth indifferently, the unsuitable are presently rejected ; that’
swans will crush and greedily swallow rats and frogs, but instantly refuse to
swallow toads ; and that swallows, and all birds that feed on insects, devour bees
and large flies, but reject various insects: he reproves M. Duméril for supposing,
before the Institute of France, that Nature has supplied fishes with a tongue
possessed of a fine membrane, and not given it the sense of taste. Different
ahimals are differently affected by sapid substances: what is disgusting to some
is delightful to others; what would make us sick is often a dainty to certain
brutes, Gall refutes the absurd opinion of Professor Akerman, that the per-
fection of man’s intellect arises from the perfection of his senses and that man
has a finer taste than brutes, by stating that the papillz of the tongue, pharynx,
palate, &c. are proportionally larger and more numerous in brutes; that, to
increase the surface of taste, many brutes have the membrane of their palate
furrowed and sprinkled with a multitude of nervous papille; and that the
eating apparatus is in most of them larger than in man; that the dog, bear, and
monkey have their tongue covered with as fine a membrane as that of man; and
that the enjoyment of taste appears the greatest and most enduring of all in
many, as they are eating and ruminating almost constantly while awake.


lc. 4to. vol..1. p. 151. sqq.


539


CHAP, XXIV.
SMELL.


“‘ WHILE taste and smell are closely related by the proximity of
their organs, they are not less so by the analogy of their stimuli
and by some other circumstances. For this reason they have
been generally classed together under the name of chemical or
subjective senses. 3

‘* By smell we perceive odorous eflluvia received by. inspiration
and applied principally to that part of the Schneiderian* mem-
brane which invests both sides of the septum narium and. the
convexities of the turbinated bones.

*« Although the same moist membrane lines the nostrils» and
their sinuses‘, its nature appears different in different parts.

** Near the external openings it is more similar to the skin
and beset with sebaceous follicles, from which arise hairs known
by the name of vibrissz. _

**-On the septum and the turbinated bones it is fungous and
abounds in mucous crypte.

“ In the frontal, sphenoidal, ethmoidal, and maxillary sinuses,
it is extremely delicate, and supplied with an infinite number of
blood-vessels which exhale an aqueous dew.


#.« Conr. Vict. Schneider, De Osse Cribriformi et Sensu.ac.Organo Odoratus.
Witteb. 1655. 12mo..

This classical work forms an epoch in physiological history, not only because
it was the first accurate treatise on the function of smell, but because it put an
end to the visionary doctrine of the organ of smell being the emunctory of the.
brain.”

b « Sommerring, Icones Organorum Humanorum Olfactus. Francof. 1810.
fol.” .

© « Haller, Icones Anat. fasc. iv. , tab. ii.

Duverney, @uvres Anatom. vol. i. tab. xiv.

Santorini; Tab. Posthum. iv. we

C. J. M. Langenbeck, Newe -Dibl.. fiir Chirurgie, vol. ii. P. ll. p. 318,
tab. ii.” oie wiarid wil a2


ce


540 SMELL.


‘¢ It appears the principal, not to say the ‘sole, use of the si-
nuses4, to supply this watery fluid, which is perhaps first con-
veyed to the three meatus of the nostrils and afterwards to the
neighbouring parts of the organ of smell, preserving them in that
constant state of moisture which is indispensable to the perfection
of smell.

‘«‘ The sinuses are so placed, that, in every position of the head,
moisture can pass from one or other of them into the organ of
smell.

‘“‘ The principal seat of smell, —the fungous portion of the
nasal membrane, besides numerous blood-vessels, remarkable for
being more liable to spontaneous hemorrhage than any others in
the body, is supplied by nerves, chiefly the first pair ¢, which are
distributed on both sides of the septum narium, and also by two
branches of the fifth pair. The former appear to be the seat of
smell‘: the latter to serve for the common feeling of the part,
that excites sneezing, &c.”

The olfactory nerves arise from the pulpy substance at the
anterior part of the internal convolutions of the middle lobes,—of
course at the base ofthe cerebrum. The filaments are surrounded
along way with pulpy substance, approach each other, and usually
form three roots, which also unite, and where they unite’ trian-
gular enlargement is produced: but the nerve soon contracts
and runs in a triangular groove at the inferior surface of the an-
terior lobe on the upper surface of the sphenoid bone. The
two nerves converge as they approach the ethmoid, and at last
form an oval bulbous expansion, containing a great deal of grey
pulpy substance on the cribriform plates. From this soft bulb


4 « In my Prolus. de Sinibus Frontal., Gotting. 1779. 4to.,, I have brought
forward many arguments from osteogeny, comparative anatomy, and pathological
phenomena, to prove that these sinuses contribute indeed to the smell, but little
or nothing to voice and speech, as was believed by many physiologists.”

e « Metzger, Nervorum Primi Paris Historia. Argent. 1766. 4to. reprinted
in Sandifort’s Thesaurus, vol. iii.

Scarpa, Anatomic. Annotat. 1. ii. tab. i. ii.”

f « This is shown by pathological dissection and comparative anatomy. Thus
in Loder’s Observ. Tumoris Scirrhosi in Basi Cranii reperti, Jen. 1779. 4to. isa
case of anosmia, following a compression of the first pair by a scirrhus. We
learn, from comparative anatomy, that in the most sagacious mammalia, v. c.
elephants, bears, dogs, bisulcous ruminants, hedgehogs, &c., the horizontal plate
of the cribriform bone is very large, and perforated by an infinity of small.eanals,
eath of which contains a filarhent of the olfactory nerve.”


SMELL. 541


numerous fine branches proceed through the foramina of the
bone.

«“ The extreme filaments of the first pair do not terminate
in papille, like the nerves of touch and taste, but deliquesce, as
it were, into the spongy and regular parenchyma of the nasal
membrane.

« The organ of smell is very imperfect and small at birth.
The sinuses scarcely exist. Smell consequently takes place but
late, —as the internal nostrils are gradually evolved; and it is
more acute in proportion to their size and perfection. 8

‘¢ No external sense is so intimately connected with the sen-
sorium and internal senses, nor possess such influence over them,
as the sense of smell,»

‘¢ No other is so liable to idiosyncrasies, nor so yea ig In €X-
citing and removing syncope.

‘«‘ Nor is any other capable of receiving more delicate and de-
lightful impressions; for which reason, Rousseau very aptly called
smell, the sense of imagination. '


& « While animals of the most acute smell, as those just mentioned, have the
nasal organs most extensively evolved, precisely the same holds in regard to some
barbarous nations.

Thus, in the head of the North American Indian (a leader of his nation, and

executed at Philadelphia about fifty years ago), which I have given in my
Decas prima Collectionis Craniorum diversarum Gentium illustrate, tab. ix., the
internal nares are of an extraordinary size, so that the middle of the ossa spon-
giosa, for example, are inflated into immense bullz, and the sinuses, first de-
scribed by Santorini, which are contained in them, Jarger than I have found them
in any other instance.

The nearest to these, in point of magnitude, are the internal nares of the
Ethiopians, from among whom I have eight heads, now before me, very different
from each other, but each possessing a nasal organ much larger than we find it
described to be in that nation by Sommerring, tiber die kiirperl. Verschiedenh.
des Negers, &c. p. 22.

These anatomical observations accord with the accounts given by most respect--
able travellers concerning the wonderful acuteness of smell possessed by those
savages,

Respecting, v. c. the North American Indians, consult, among others, Urls-
perger, Nachr. von der Grossbritann. Colonie Salzburg. Emigranten in America,
vol. i. p. 862.

Respecting the Ethiopians, Journal des Sgavans. 1667. p. 60.”

h « See Alibert on the ae rae Sa of odours, Meme de la Soe. iMtdicales
t.i, p. 44.”

i «< Botte, t.i. p. 367.”


542. SMELL.


“No sensations can be remembered in so lively a manner as
those which are recalled by peculiar odours.” *

Haller mentions that less than the two billionth part of a grain
of camphor has been distinctly odorous. !

The causes of the sensation of smelling are, as yet, unknown,’
and in the absence of positive knowledge on this subject philo-
sophers have either avowed their ignorance or contented them-
selves with hypotheses destitute of proof. Among the opinions
respecting these recondite phenomena which have at various
times been advanced, three may merit our consideration. The
advocates of the first designate by spiritus rector, or aroma, a
principle independent of the substances which contain it, very
volatile and expansible, imponderable, and imperceptible to every’
sense excepting that of smell: and to the various modifications of
this immaterial substance they attribute the varieties of odour.
The second, and most generally received theory, is that odours
are particles which evaporate from the odorous substance itself,
and that the cause of the sensation of smell is therefore inherent’
in, and inseparable from, the odorous body. The third opinion,
which is maintained by Professor Walther, is, that olfaction is
independent of the emanations of material particles and is a simple
dynamic action of the odorous body upon the organs of smelling,
similar to the action of sound on the hearing. )

However this may be, odours, to become objects of sensation,
must pass the pituitary expansion of the olfactory nerve during
the ‘respiratory process. When the breath is held, the most
odorous substances may be spread in the interior of the nostrils
without their perfume being perceived; this observation was first
made by Galen. It-has been frequently remarked that odours are
smelt only during inspiration, the same air when returned through
the nostrils always proving inodorous.. But this is true only when
the odour has been admitted from without by the nostrils, for,
when it is admitted by the mouth, as in combination with.
articles of nutrition, it can be perceived only during expir-:
ation. A proof of this may: be readily obtained by placing
the open neck of a small phial, containing an essential oil, in’


x « Respecting the power of smell over morals an® propensities, consult peer.
Rush, Medical -Inquiries and Observations, vol. ii. p. 34.”
1 El Physiol.,.-vol. v. p. 157.


SMELL. 543


the mouth during the acts of inspiration and apebeent expir-
ation.

It was first observed by Willis ™ that, on placing a sapid sub-
stance in the mouth, and at the same time closing the nostrils,
the sensation of taste is suspended. This observation has since
been frequently repeated, and has given rise to the generally
prevailing opinion that a very intimate relation exists between
the sensations of smelling and tasting, and that the same qualities
of bodies simultaneously affect both these senses. The fact is that
the causes of taste and smell are totally distinct in their nature.
Tastes, properly so called, affect only the gustatory expansion,
and are, consequently, unaltered by closing the nostrils; but, as
most sapid substances have also an odour, and expiration takes
place frequently during mastication and generally directly after
deglutition, the odorous emanations are made to pass over the pi-
tuitary membrane. Odour, which thus accompanies taste, is
termed flavour.

Sugar, salt, and vinegar, have each a real taste, which can be
affected neither by catarrh, palsy of the olfactory nerves, nor by
stopping the nostrils ; but the flavour and odour of roast meats, of
spices, of liqueurs, &c., are identical, and they are affected equally
by the same conditions.

Dr. Prout, I believe, was the first who pointed out the distinc-
tion between taste and flavour.» He conceived, however, that
flavour was intermediate between taste and smell.

I have seen instances of the loss of smell from a fall on the
head, and other violent causes. Whatever had no odour could be
tasted as usual: but the mechanical and pungent qualities only of
simply odorous bodies habitually taken into the mouth could be
perceived ; and bodies both odorous and sapid were tasted only,
and therefore but imperfectly judged of.° .

Some tribes of uncivilised men far surpass us in the power of
smell. The American Indians have distinguished men of differ-
ent nations by this sense. Dogs readily distinguish individuals
by its means, and in many brutes of prey it is very powerful.


™ De anima brutorum. By Thos. Willis, M. D. 1672.

™ London Med. and Physical Journal. 1812.

° I was consulted by a tea-broker who lost his smell from a fall on his head,
and could no longer judge of teas. He went through the form of tasting teas
at the East India House, that his inability might not be suspected, but he was
totally insensible to their flavour. He tasted salt and sugar as well as ever.

00


544 ; SMELL.


Angelo: Poliziano says..that iafter.a-battle a. flock of famished
vulturesarrived the: next day from ‘a distance’ of 166" leagues
to devour the’bodies» But'Mr. Audubon relates two experiments
to show that vultures are ‘indebted to acuteness of sight rather
than of smell. He stuffed a deer’s skin with hay, allowed it to.be-
come as, dry.as leather, and placed it ina fields. in afew minutes
a-vulture made. for it, attacked it, tore: open-the® stitches, and
pulled out the hay. He-then put a large dead hog into'a’ tavine,
and concealed it with cane; it putrefied and gave forth an intoler-
able stench, but the vultures which were ‘sailing about, in, call
directions i in search of food never discovered it, although , several
dogs had been attracted and had, fed plentifully on it, -He-next
stuck a young: pig and. covered it» closely ‘with leaves: vultures
soon’saw the blood, descended to it, and by its means ‘discovered
the pig, which they devoured while still fresh. saat arte
Whenever smell is naturally powerful, ‘the, organ. and ‘olfac-
tory. nerves are greatly, developed... In. disease. it. may,.become
surprisingly acute. .T. Bartholin mentions an. individual, labour-
ing under dre pays who could name the’ individuals’in'the next
room’ by smell.?.» The boy Mitchel, deaf‘and blind from his’ birth,
is ‘described by’ Mr. Wardrop ‘as having, probably from great ‘use
and attention, so powerful a sense of smell, that, ¢ “when a ‘stranger
approached him, he eagerly began to. touch some, part of his
body, commonly taking holdof the arm,.which. he held.near-his
nose;~,and-.after-.two.orthree strong inspirations, appeared to
form a sudden opinion regarding him.’ If this was favourable;’he
showed ‘a disposition to become’ nore intimate, exainitied 7 mére
minutely his dress, and expressed by his countenance more or “Tess
satisfaction : but, if it happened to be unfavourable, he suddenly
went off to.a distance, with expressions. of carelessness: or of His,
gust.”4 . + ep


. IH USES

PActa Hafniensia. However, in the same work (vol.i.) it is’ related bya
Di. Marcus Marci, on his own testimony, that a priest at Prague could distinguish
incorrect from correct ladies by his nose. Yet this was not worse’ than’ the declar- -
ation in* London, afew years.ago, of a once ‘extensively employed insanity
doctor; that he could distinguish ‘madmen _ his ‘nose, — that» rx cong not
smell like:other people: Sint

4) History of James Mitchel, &c.\\\ By James 5 Wardrop ‘Landon, T8132


SEMTE EG, EES


SMELL. 545


Allanimals exposed’ to’ the:air have perhaps the sense of smell. Its seat has
been. referred) in jthe air-breathing annelides.and insects to the mouths: or lateral
_pores of the air.sacs;, or,in thelatter, “ topthe delicate extremities of their long

flexible antenne, and the i inner pair of those organs inthe crustacea have been
considered as the seat ‘of the same sense, The labial appendices of the conchi-
féra} the entrance ‘to: the respiratory sacs of pulmonated gasteropods, the highly
sensitive téiitaéula covered with a delieatél mucous: membrane}. and ‘even ‘the
»whole: surfaces of (the skin) in ithe more ‘elevated molluscous ¢lasses, have been
considered.as, the, organs | through which, thesejanimals receive impressions from
odorous emanations. . In the class; of, fishes,, we, observe the organ, of smell to. be
coaly a depression excavated on the. anterior, part, of the face, but it does not
‘communicate behind with the mouth, or the respiratory organs, or the interior of
‘the body. ake By the motions of fishes’ through the water they are sufficiently
‘exposed to receive ‘impressions of? odorous’ substances diffused’ through: that
medium, without) drawing dense water through those delicate’ organs. for: the
‘purposes of, smell... Perhaps the.volumes of water necessary to. be carried, con-
tinually through the mouth» of, fishes, for respiration are, too great, and would
prove too powerful a stimulus, to have passed through such an organ of smell,
and to have allowed that organ to preserve its necessary delicacy, and _ therefore
it is quite apart from the passage through which that element is taken for re-
spiration in all water-breathing animals.’ ‘It is, obviously, however, in fishes an
‘organ-of ) great delicacy and importance; and is .of great size, provided) with very
large;olfactory nerves, and large. olfactory tubercles, coming: off, alone; from, the
hemispheres of the brain.” ‘ In. the; amphibious animalsy where, the, respiration
of air begins to take place through the nostrils, the olfactory apparatus begins to
be more complicated and concealed.” In fish a plate of cartilage sometimes
dividea the i impervious olfactory cavity into two: in the amphibia this begins
to dssamie now the moré compact and cotivoluted form which the osseous’ plates
dn thevhigher animals: present. » The! surface of ‘thé ‘organ’ thus increases) in
#xtent,/as, we ascend through the reptiles and-through the birds to the mam-
malia. | In the perenni-branchiate amphibia the nostrils, form. still on each, side
a simple sac, scarcely complicated internally, and having their posterior. opening
so far formed in the mouth as to be immediately under the upper lip. In the
salamanders and frogs the nostrils are still, m‘ the larva state, confined to the
exterior of the head, as‘in fishes’ ; but in the adult form, the posterior openings,
though within the cavity of the wee are still much advanced in their position,
and remote from the median line.’’ ‘In the serpents the internal surface is
extended by the rudimentary turbinated bones, and by an enlarged nasal cavity,
opening. posteriorly by a common. orifice jon; the median line.’’s:“<In the:sauria
the turbinated bones begin to be .strengthened. by ossific matter atid) to: assume
a more complicated. form,:. both the anterior and:posterior: openings of the nares
present enlarged, dimensions, and;the. whole-organ >is more internal! and more
protected by) the expanded.nasal boness> ‘Fhe organs of smell.are more protected
and concealed in the solid head of the chelonian reptiles, |where their surface is
increased in extent and.their: posterior openings are placed» further, back’ from
their primitive anterior aspect. The anterior openings of the nostrils are here


oo 2


546 “SMELL.


very small. -The olfactory nerves, and the whole organs of smell, are small in
birds. The anterior openings are large and oblique for respiration during their
rapid movements, and the various forms and positions of these apertures present
useful characters for the distinction of species. ‘The turbinated bones are larger
than in reptiles, though still but partially ossified, and the olfactory nerves pass
through the orbits into the nose. . The defective development of this organ is ©
compensated for in some by the extensive distribution of its fifth or trifacial
nerves, on the upper and lower jaws, and in most by the great development of
the organs of vision. All the internal parts of the organs of smell become more
complex and elaborate in quadrupeds, new cavities open into their interior, as
the frontal, maxillary, and frontal sinuses, and the exterior nares assume a more
lengthened and expanded form. Most of these animals we observe to have all
the nasal cancellated bones of great size and presenting an immense surface,
both on the ethmoid and turbinated bones, for the distribution of the olfactory
nerves, and we perceive in them a corresponding increase of power in their sense
of smell.” (Dr. Grant’s Lectures. Lancet, No. 569.) Gall refuted the asser-
tion of Cuvier and others, that carnivorous brutes have a more acute smell and
larger olfactory nerves than the herbivorous; and thus replies to M. Duméril’s
opinion of odours not being transmissible by water, and of the organ of touch
occupying that of smell in the cetacea. ‘“ Nature then has made a mistake in
placing one of the special organs of animals that live in water, and amused her-
self with this prank when she formed otters, seals, and all fish, and henceforth
all attempts to catch fish and crabs with odorous bait will be fruitless.” 1. c. 4to.
vol. i. p. 158. sq. Se


CHAP. XXV.
HEARING. °


By Hearing we are able to appreciate the vibratory motions
of elastic bodies, when their frequency is within cerfain limits.
Some experiments by Dr. Wollaston prove that these limits
vary in different individuals ; but the average extent of the scale
of sounds perceptible to the human ‘ear has been estimated to
be between 30 and 12,000 vibrations of the sonorous body per
second. -

The undulations to which these vibrations give rise may be
transmitted through any substance, either aériform, liquid, or
solid: but the air is the ordinary medium by which they reach
the ear. The velocity of transmission depends on the specific
elasticity of the substance; according to the latest experiments,
sound travels through air at the rate of about 1142 feet per
second. ,

With regard to the sensation of sound, three independent qua-
lities must be distinguished : @

Ist. The tune, or pitch ; which depends on the frequency with
which the vibrations succeed each other. -

2d. The loudness, or intensity; which is determined by the
amplitudes of the vibrations.

3d. The timbre: — For this word, adopted in France to express
the specific differences of sound which are not comprehended in
any of the preceding definitions, there is nu analogous term in
our language; nor have we at present the least idea of the true
causes of these modifications of sound. In some cases the inde-
finite expression quality of tone is employed.

When two or more sounds are heard simultaneously, or succes-
sively, the mind by a peculiar faculty perceives the relative fre-


* C. Wheatstone, Experiments on Sound. Annals of Philosophy. New Series,
vol. vi. p. 81.


00 3


548 HEARING.


quency ‘and coincidences” of the’ vibrations.) “'"Twosounds :are
regarded as ‘consonant; ‘when the ratio‘of’ their vibrations aswery
ine and as dissonant; when the ratiovis mote complex:i::The
rules which’ determine the’ most‘ agreeable’ successions: andiicom-
binations of sounds constitute the scienceofmusicis io ox 229g
The power of appreciating “musical ‘combinations; andieconse-
quently the pleasure°of listening’ to them; ‘depends upon acmental
faculty seated in a particular'portion ‘of othe® brainyrand mot upon
the'acutenéss of heaving? A’ person of the quickest:ears may! have
no musi¢? in’ his soul, and persons of “dullears haveoftemacgood
ear for ‘music. - Many authors ‘have ‘ascribed perception: ofthe
musical qualities of sounds to the ‘earj:although there is:novrelation
between acuteness of hearing’ and‘musicals talents: .Thesear
mefely ‘présents’ the sounds; ‘ano‘inward sense perceives their
musical qualities. “This inward ‘sense‘resides in @ particular: por-
tion of the brain, and ‘is’ proportionate: to:‘the <perfectiony.of sits
organisation andsizee): Im albthe: cases,:whichI have ‘examined,
of flatness or depression ‘of thesparty sof the” ‘foreheads cérre-
sponding 'to°this,'the' perception of music has beensdefective ;
and, in’all ‘instances°of ‘good’ musical ‘talent, this ‘partshasisheen
full oF prominent. s°The*examination of singing bird provesothe
same thing. Others have ‘with equalabsurdity ascribed the idiotism
of some persons born deaf to their defect of hearing. Persons
may be both idiotic and deaf : but the defect ‘ofintellect depends
upon the’ “defect of the superior anterior ‘parts: of the! _brain, in
quality, or. quantity, abe 3 a ee
The organs.of; hearing. are. ‘situated, at eve two. ‘ides Wri the. head,
ina portion of the: temporal bone, which: is, considered. the hardest
in the human’ body-° ~The: parts: which «constitute: these:sergans
are the external’ ear, ' the méatus auditorius, the: tympanum, and
the Jabyrinth. e The Jast ‘named ‘part * is,” there’ ean be" Tittle
doubt, the seat of sensation, and the other parts. ‘serve only to
communicate, to the. selnaeiat the i ABDRSSEIONS from the. ‘sonorous
agitations of the air. >. | iit. .noleiv bre
The externabear >is a  shielforiheds Late ‘hastings various
elevations’ and: OAS iad ee apres aii ne to-collect and


im MOLISE ii 03 Josorvreedie ai
-b On Sait si ‘errors, “see \ Gall; it Cs sds take in 16. sdralanegied false I.c.
8v0» & vil p.QGuisqqgigo Jasisiih on 0 DEES EC OE o stutitesb ais doin


* .« Sommerring; Tbthed Kiketndr Humanor. Audits uFremesba 1806.. re if
4 « B.S. Albinus, Annotat. Academ. ). vi. tabsiv.’ “Ot 1. wi LE


HEARING. 549


reinforce the sound. It is. furnished. with several. muscles for the
purposerof changing its form.;, but few individuals have the power
of using them. =It is generally supposed,that.the habit has, been
lostyii most persons from the earliest, infancy,;on; account, of, the
pressure of the coverings of, the head.;. Be. this as,it.may,,some
persons /preservethe power) of, controlling, these, muscles, and I
‘havermyself;seen-an, individual in-whom the motions arising from
theiriaction: were perfectly voluntary.® .,
veThe meatus auditorius is partly-cartilaginous aaa ‘add heat It
‘usdinedibya:bitter-cerumen:f, The-external ear. becomes tubular,
sand ‘thus continues)to the-osseous: part, where it is terminated by
othe membrane of the tympanum; the office of which is, to receive im-
‘pressions from the agitations,of the-air,/in order to transmit,them
‘to’ thesinternal ear. ‘The :;membrane, of the: tympanum is of an
irregular ‘conical: form,:something: like: a; Chinese hat.;;its con-
ecavitynis ‘on! ithe coutside, and jits; projecting: point-on the -inside.
is:fixed :tosa bony rim -whichcis;called its-frame.,, }
The eavityoof the tympanum occupies the: space between the
whinabibihes and the labyrinth. »Itiis:anarregular ;cayity, nearly
shemispherical ; it is filled | with ,ait) and }\communicates. with, the
sback) part of the mouth by means of a:canal called the Hustachian
sian ‘The side»which is sea ai the:»membrane presents, an..ob-
ebro ff OY. Ja Rhodius ad Sosthen eee p 44. <q. . : .
J. Alb; Fabricius, , De. Hominibus, ortu non differentibus. Opuscul. p, 441.
Ch. Collignon, Miscellaneous Works. "Cambridge. 1786. 4to. p. 25. sq.”
f « Consult J. Haygarth, Med. Obs. and Inquiries, vol. iv. p. 198. sq.”
The’ cerumen consists, ‘according to Vauquelin, of albumen, which, when
‘burnt, yields soda and ‘phosphate ‘of lime, ‘a: colouring matter, and) a very bitter
inspissated oil’ strongly resembling the peculiar matter .of bile... Cicero,explains
sone use, of the,cerumen ;—,“ Proyisum etiam, ut, si. qua minima. bestiola co-
naretur irrumpere,. in, sordibus aurium, tanquam in _visco, inheeresceret. iy (De
Natura Deorum, 1. ii.) The same applies to particles of ust. Its extreme
bitterness, too, deters insects from advancing. ak
“Bt See the distinguished Himly’s acute comparison of the organs of hearing
and vision, Bibliothek fiir Opthalmologie, vol.i. p.6. sqq.”’
21s Saunders, Anatomy of the; Human Ear. «Lond. 1806. fol. tab. is ii.”
he‘ Comparative) anatomy »renders. it most probable that,theustachian tube
is subservient to the action of the membrana tympani. It is found in all red-
blooded animals which’ possess a !membrana tympani;:but is: wanting in fishes
which are destitute of this membrane. ‘The different opinions ofthe moderns
ei its use: may be found in» Reil’s\« Archiv fiir die ears &,di.*p. 18
. p. 165., iv. p.105., viiis pe 67..:1x. pes20.”
: oo 4


550 HEARING.


lique projection, called the promontory; above this projection
there is an opening of the labyrinth called the fenestra rotundai,
and which is shut by a membrane; below, there is another aper-
ture of the labyrinth, the fenestra ovalis, where the impressions of
the vibrations upon the membrana tympani are communicated to
the labyrinth, by a very flexible intermediate apparatus, consist-
ing of a chain of four small bones *, —the malleus or hammer, the
incus or anvil, the lenticular bone, and the stapes or stirrup.

The hammer consists of a long and thin handle, the extremity
of which adheres to the membrane of the tympanum; and of a
head, which forms an angle with the handle and is articulated with
the anvil. It is united to the bony rim of the membrane by its
spinous process, which may be regarded as the fixed point of the
lever. The anvil is on one side articulated with the head of the
hammer ; and the opposite part has two processes, one of which
serves as a resting point, and the other is articulated by means of
the lenticular bone with the stirrup. The stzrrup, which is so
called from its close resemblance in form to that object, makes
almost a right angle with the anvil, and its moveable base closes the
fenestris ovalis of the labyrinth, the interior of which it agitates


. External ear.

. A part of it called concha; and orifice
of the meatus externus.

. Meatus externus.

Membrana tympani.

. Malleus.

Incus.

Stapes and os lenticulare.

Vestibule.

Three semicircular canals.

. Cochlea.


bo


SH HPIAM AY


i «¢ Scarpa, De Structura Fenestre Rotunda, &c. Mutin. 1772. 8vo.”

k « The existence of a fourthbone (called lenticular), commonly admitted
since the time of Franc. Sylvius, I have disproved at large in my Osteology,
p. 155. sq. edit. 2. It is wanting in the greater number of perfect examples
from adults,”


HEARING. 551


by its pressure. The hammer is provided with three muscles
the stirrup only with one, and the anvil has none.!


There can be no ‘doubt that the use of this apparatus is to
enable us to hear more perfectly: but there are instances in which
the hearing has remained after the destruction of these organs. Sir
A. Cooper has recorded such cases ™; and deafness has even been
suspended, fora short time, by perforating the membrana tympani-
In these cases the sound appears to be transmitted to the laby-


‘


aaa, first turn or gyration of the cochlea.
bb b, second turn.


c, third turn.

d, very short canals for the entrance of nerves.

e e, other holes for the passage of nerves and blood-vessels to the internal ears.

Jf; canal in the base of the cochlea for the passage of a nervous twig to the
infundibulum.

g, portion of the aqueduct of the cochlea.

h, canal for the passage of the nerves of the elliptic vesicles of the superior
vertical and horizontal semicircular canal.

i, opening for the passage of the nerves of the inferior semicircular canal, and
the nervous flabelliform expansion.

k, aqueduct of the vestibule.

i, superior vertical semicircular canal.

n, inferior vertical semicircular canal.

u, canal produced by the junction of the two vertical semicircular canals.

o, horizontal semicircular canal.


1 « B.S. Albinus, Tabule Muscul. tab. xi. fig. 29.”
™ Phil; Trans. 1800.


552 HEARING.


rinth by the immediate actionsof :thee air: upom the! membranerof
the fenestra rotunda, which’ pra Gils the ee
of.the tympanum, ))5° 15m OS Vt iD ot, 902° at
~The labyrinth, so cabled én account fi its) s complicated: canals,
nee internal part: of the organs) of, hearing; and is -hewnooutof
the hardest portion, of the stemporal bone. [t:contains| the:sub+
stance of the auditory nerves, variously spread as layersand fibres
ina, gelatinous» waters [ts :parts saressthes three: semicircular
canals, the vestibule; andthe cochleas! }; (9: .o jevoos edt diow
(The semicircular canals,. two of; which) are; worticehiqasl'the
third, nearly horizontal, contain‘similar: membranous: canals,each
of which; has a swelling at its extremity. «These: canals:terminate
by. their, extremities) in >the vestibule» or centrahicavity: o.\The
cochlea,’ in | ‘part osseous and:partly membranous, winds) roundya
conical jaxis;;in a: spiralowhich makes otwo: turns :andsathalfyand
which diminishesiso that the cochlea: approaches:to!the, globular
form. | One,of \itstwo gyrations terminates at the fenestra rotunda,
which communicates with the cavity: of thestympanums theother
proceeds tothe vestibuley which itself, oho inigel ae aenemae
«ayity by; means-of theofenestra Ovalis.c>;| 30 ansagre eli to nor
© The, vestibule and, semicircular’ canals ; oocelye »containsvery
delicate membranous, bags, discovered by theicelebrated{ Scarpa:
viz.;-two-saes which lie pup eeree and thnbersemiaineulds
ducts in the canals. of the same namely so09i08 aitenooe to oust
.& These sacs, .as.well-as the cavity. of are dhe blaaseonnatieattery
limpid fluid, bearing. the name: of; Cotugno;-who: showed) it+io-be
absorbed. by, two canals, which are) by himodenominated:agne-
ducts°, and by Meckel. diverticula:?, : thecone arisesfrom the:vesti-
bule,,the other from-the inferior: seala of the:cochleaisd? af
«The portio mollis of the seventh” pair or acoustie nerve arisés
from the fore- =part of the floor;of; the fourthsventriele} is»atofirst
soft, but soon'becomes firmer:and more ‘fibrous, and,'*$ having; to-
gether withthe portio: dura (which jafterwards oruns along the
aqueduct of Fallopius 4), .entered=the: internal !acoustic opening,
transmits, its; medullary filaments intonthe: lower andy ‘cribriform


i


“82 & Scarpa, Disquisitiones “Anatomice de ante et ‘Ol yet tab _ ny eae

tab. vii. figs: B03 > Hn yalyerk sx tuenoD »* x
0.4 Cotunni, De Agittedwctibus auris. Sibel Napa DMG IsMtoatise od
P « Ph, Fr. Meckel; De Labyrinthi; auris contentis..Argents:1777204t0.” *
1 « Fallopius, Observ. Anat, p. 27. b. sq. © Venet, 1561. a8vo0.% eine


HEARING. 553


partiofiit° These filaments:run partly to the vestibule and semi-
circular canals, but especially toithe base ‘ofthe cochlea; where,
in the form of a medullary zonula, marked «by ‘very’ elegant
plexiform stritej‘they: pass between the two: lamina of ‘the sep-
tum cochlez 8,” » forming according to Mr. Swan;\a net:work, ‘and
beautifully: terminating in a still:more aurees sit ener sete the
optic nerve. \. . 0 99M8:
io 'The facial x nerve enters the invernal hassiogey canal in company
with the acoustic, which it leaves,;and passes through the aqueduct
of Fallopius:to:come out:at the foramen stylo-mastoideum. ‘In the
aqueductiit) gives! a’ filament: to\'the little musclesowithin the ‘ear.
‘The posterior branch'or Vidian‘nerve of the superior maxillary
of ithe trigeminum) after entering the aqueduct ‘of’ Fallopius and
lying iv contact, but not‘anatomosing with,the facial, gives Offa
herve which’ traverses the tympanum under) the name of chorda
tympani, and°leavessthecraniumat ‘the glenoidal ‘fissure, «Thus
tlie: ear; likethe eye and the: mpoepune has nerves?of Spee arHive,
‘of simple sensibility;;and of motions!) Giiw eoscoinuminoo fain)
smNotwithstanding the'scrupulous ‘examination oft the construe-
tion of the organs of hearing’ by anatomists,' very little that*is
certain is known with *regard'to'the uses of ‘the various parts. It
istrue*that’ many theories have’beew advanced, but'they have for
the! mostpart» been founded upon analogies which in'the pases
state of acoustic science will not bear investigation:
i¢Fhet hypotheses of) M. Savart,’ which ‘have in general been sug-
gested by accurate’experiments; are the most rational which have
hitherto been! proposed, andthe following’ are the conclusions at
whichshe has' arrived from his experiments. '© 1 DE "
Ist. Thatiit isnotonecessary to ‘suppose; as? Aithdie02 His ech
done, theexistence ‘of a peculiar mechanisnyto bring’ the: mem-
brane:of the tympanum continually in ‘unison with°the sonorous
bodiesi which,‘act .upon’ it;"since: it: is’ obviously always ‘in’ those
conditions awhich! render it ‘capable‘of being influenced by ary
number) of\-vibrations 9 whatever.o: Qdly. . That) cits tension‘ pro-
bablyconly! varies\to augment oridiminish«the amplitude of* its
excursions, as Bichat had conjectured : this eminent physiologist,


re Consult Brendel, dnalecta de Concha auris humane. Gotting. ote 4to.

The same; :De! Auditu:inapice.conche,y Ibs eod.: 4to.’

* « Gonsult Zinny:Obdserv: Botans. Gottings 1753. 4to.°p. 31. sq. >
Scarpa, }.c. tab: viii. figs, 2.”¢ Sof 8h vt qo!


554 HEARING.


however, supposed that it was stretched for intense impressions,
and relaxed for the weaker, which is contrary to what is de-
monstrated by experiment. 3dly. That its vibrations are com-
municated without alteration to the labyrinth by means of the
chain of small bones, in the same manner as the vibrations of the
belly of a violin are communicated to the back by means of the
sound post. 4thly. That the small bones have also for their func-
tion to modify the amplitude of the excursions of the vibrating
parts of the organs contained within the labyrinth. And lastly,
That the cavity of the tympanum probably serves to maintain,
near the openings of the labyrinth and the internal surface of
the membrana tympani, an air the physical properties of which
are constant.

Weber has endeavoured to explain the use of the cochlea.
He remarks that sound is propagated through, not only the meatus
auditorius externus, but the bones of the head; and, indeed, more
distinctly through them. If both ears are stopped firmly with the
fingers, our own voice becomes more loud and distinct. If we re-
move one finger immediately, we hear our own voice stronger with
the other ear. Ifa musical sounding fork under vibration is placed
between the teeth, the lips closed and both ears stopped, its
tones are heard louder than if the ears were open: open one
ear, and the sound is lessened to that ear. If the fork is applied
to the left temple and the right ear only closed, the sound is
louder to the right ear than to the left which is open. Now
sounds propagated through one uniform medium, fluid or solid,
lose but little of their force ; whereas in passing from one medium
to another, as from a fluid to a solid or vice versd, they lose much
of their force. In the shaft of a mine the sound of a hammer in
a neighbouring shaft is heard very well if the ear is placed in con-
tact with the rock; if this is not done it is heard less, and the
sound of voices in the other shaft not at all. Sounds transmitted
through water may be heard at great distances if the head is under
water ; and are inaudible as soon as the head emerges. The effect
of a window in lessening the noises of the street is a similar instance
Now the sonorous vibrations which pass from the air through the
bones of the head to the internal ear will act on the cochlea, be-
cause it is the nearest and has its share of the acoustic nerve in
intimate contact with itself, and is both osseous and forms a portion
of the osseous communication between the mouth and the internal


HEARING. 555


ear. The vibrations proceeding from the air within the mouth
cannot be transmitted so easily to the branches of the acoustic
nerve distributed to the vestibule and semicircular canals, because
these, spread out as a sacculated and tubular membrane, are stu-
diously separated from the bones by a liquid secretion or loose
cellular membrane. Weber therefore concludes that the cochlea
is intended to place the extremities of the acoustic nerve in con-
nection with a vibrating solid. On the other hand, he concludes
that the use of the semicircular canals is to be in connection
with a vibrating fluid and receive the impulses of the air through
the meatus auditorius. Because, 1. the vestibule and semicircular
canals have a solid communication by the chain of bones with the
membrana tympani, whose vibrations are at once imparted by
them to the membrana of the fenestra ovalis ; whereas there is no
such direct communication between the membrana tympani and the
fenestra rotunda. 2. The membrane of the semicircular canals
and vestibule seem more easily thrown into vibrations by the fluid
around them than the lamina spiralis of the cochlea. The latter
also, however, is enabled to receive impulses from the air, by the
membrane of the fenestra rotunda communicating the vibrations
which occur in the tympanum, and by the opening of the cochlea
into the vestibule causing the vibrations of the fluid of the vesti-
bule to be at once propagated to the cochlea.

Weber states that Scarpa was the first to discover the remark-
able difference in consistence and texture which exists between
that portion of the acoustic nerve which supplies the cochlea, and
that which is distributed to the vestibule and semicircular canals.
The latter, surrounded on all sides by a fluid, are soft and pulpy,
evidently fitted to receive impulses from a fluid: the former, on
the contrary, fine and ramified, as evidently adapted to the re-
ception of vibrations from a solid.

I must state that Professor Wheatstone above ten years ago
made experiments similar to those of Weber and with the same
results.t His views respecting the functions of the semicircular
canals differ from those advanced by Weber. He maintains that


* See his Experiments on Audition in the Journal of Science, New Series,
vol. ii.. p.67. 1827. Some curious and original observations and experiments
will be found in a paper by Dr. Wollaston, Phil. Trans. 1820; and some inter-
esting facts in Savart’s Memoir.


556 HEARING.


sounds are’ transmitted'to the internal organs of ‘hearing *in two
manners ; first, in the manner ordinarily understood, and ‘Secondly
by ‘the solid part of the head. Spvatry
,, The perception that we have of the direction of. ‘ani sup-
poses to arise.solely from the portion which is transmitted; through
the solid parts of; the head,and, which, affecting the! three:isemi-
circular canals, situated’in planes at right‘angles with each: other,
with different degrees of intensity according to the ‘direction’ in
which the sound is transmitted, suggests to the mind the corre-
sponding direction. If the sound is. transmitted i in the. plane, of
either of the semicircular canals, the nervous matter in, that. canal
will:be more‘ strongly-acted on thanothat' in-either, ofthe other
two; and if it be transmitted in’ any plane intermediate between
any two of the rectangular planes; the relative intensities in these
two canals corresponding therewith will vary with the direction of
the intermediate plane. The ordinary notion respecting our per-
ception..of, the. direction. of sound.i is that, we.compare the. relative
intensity. of the sensation inethe:twojears, and:thus judge, ofits
direction. Werethis | true, a sound: produced \any:whereqimthe
prolongation of the ‘mesial plane, whether «before; behind, sor
above thé head; should suggest no difference of direction ;
whereas we know from experience the contrary to be ‘the: case.
The views. of Professor Wheatstone. were first announced in ‘Mr,
Mayo’s lectures: at the: Collegeof Surgeonsicno: bus sole Yo snort
g > 5 i? gi ateixs gyudouz nee odd miusasi ued te ylac
ms. ont asthy id . estogbs? es .sisidonard


MIiSEAMGHMUVGe Di


7 .meteqgmys.s
DE > Oe ! S fo lnsqory? snetdatsot g envi}

“AS most of the lowét invertebrate’ aniiials livé ‘in water, the: pereussions of
which must® pow erfully” “effect” ‘their’ surface; ‘naturalists’ donot” find’ a special
organ for’ hearing’ among ther, till’ they ascend as \high’ as” the air-breathing
insects, In these it ‘is more complicated than in any other invertebrata,* for
many of them emit Sounds intended to’be heard by their kind. ° Some have hard
instrutients for ‘this purpose Which’ they rub’against each other, and’ thus’ the
male‘and female correspond in the dark for their atiours.’ Insects have not only:
the first ‘elements of an ear, the ‘auditory’nerve and vestibule; ‘but: the! rudi=
ments of two semicircular canals : fluid “exists within, andthe vestibule haga
fenestra ovalis covered with a thin membrane: “But in the aquatic invertebratay
as the lobster, cray-fish, and crab, the nerve and vestibule with its fenestra’ ovalis'
and membrane only are found. “In those which have long tails and:swint briskly,
like the’two former, the membrane is delicate and vibratile, whereas in °thase


HEARING. 587


which move slowly and have-all their, organs of sense, dull, like, the latter,, it, is
dense, and in the crab distinctly ossified....The fixed and)slow moying mollusca,
as the oyster, barnacle, muscle, slug, snail, have dull senses in general ; and their
organ of hearing has not been detected, but some appear to hear, and one, — the
tritonia arboréscens, emits audible sounds, intended no doubt to be heard by its
own Kind.’ >The’ cephalopods, however,’ as ‘the ‘cuttlefish and nautilus, ap-
proaching) to fishes in’complexity of structure, quickness of motion, and acute+
ness of sight,-have also.a:higher development of the organ of hearing, + We-first
finda, calcareous, substance inthe fluid of, the vestibule, acting probably like the
clapper ofa bell.‘ In passing up through the vertebrated classes, we observe
the organ gradually developing the semicircular canals and cochlea, and becoming
enveloped in the solid ‘parietes of the cranium; it acquires a tympanic cavity
communicating with the fauces by'the Eustachian tube, and containing the ossicula
auditus,’ which convey the vibrations of the membrana ‘tympani to the vestibule
and) the whole internal labyrinth; and in the highest, forms, of: the organ a still
more exterior meatus auditorius, and complicated moyeable concha are added. to
complete the instrument,” Thus, although in the lowest cyclostome or cartilagi-
nous fishes, as the lamprey, the ear is of no higher order than in the cephalepodous
mollusca, without canals or calcareous’ substance, the osseous fishes have cal-
careous bodies in the’ vestibule, and‘large semicircular canals ending in considerable
ampulla.) Still-the organ is‘in the common cranial cavity, and not enclosed in
the ‘temporal ‘bone; nor are there usually a meatus and. external opening.» In the
large cartilaginous,fishes, .as’ the; sturgeon and the. rays, the ear is imbedded in
the cartilaginous temporal bone : in the former the semicircular canals only, the
vestibule being still in the cranial cavity ; in the latter the whole: and the
vestibule ‘has sacs which are the rudiments of a cochlea. The lowest reptiles
resident in water, the perenni-branchiate species, as the newt, have ears like
those of fishes, and sounds: are equally communicated through the ‘solid walls
only of their cranium. The same structure exists in the larva of the caduci-
branchiate, as tadpoles ; but, when the animal loses its gills and becomes a frog,
the semicircular canals-are imbedded in a distinet-cavity of the temporal bone,
a tympanum, Eustachian tube, and three soft ossicula united are seen, and the skin
forms a membrana tympani ona level with the surface of the head, In the serpents
the.ear is, much the same. ,, In the.saurian reptiles the tympanum is much larger,
In:-the. crocodile, there isan appendage like a rudiment of a cochlea, and on the
margin, of the membrana tympani two folds of skin, like eyelids, are found, which
appear like,.the,; rudiments of a..concha,., In the chelonia, as the tortoise, the
tympanum and united bones.are of greater. length, and a cochlea is more dis-
tinctly, developed.,, In birds, the organ is. greatly advanced, and large in. pro-
portion to.the head... It is completely enveloped in, bone of rocky hardness;_ the
semicircular canals are smaller than. in) fishes, but with larger ampullz; the
vestibule is lengthened; the cochlea.begins,to assume a spiral form, though it
still: has & remnant of the calcareous bodies found in the labyrinth of fishes ; the
tympanum is’ lengthened, and. numerous cranial. cells. communicate with. it;

a short meatus externus.appears; and in nocturnal predaceous birds, which uel
require the sense of hearing, a high crescentic. fold of skin is found at the upper


558 _ HEARING:

-and back part,—as a rudimentary concha ; and the feathers are so arranged around
as to serve the purpose of a concha: and this feature is very characteristic in owls.
In mammalia all the parts acquire their full development. The cochlea, the
‘size of which bears a pretty constant proportion to the acuteness of hearing, is
greatly developed, turbinated, and divided: the ampulle are often small; the
ossicula are first completely developed, are articulated, and supplied with
muscles: the Eustachian tube is lengthened; so likewise is the meatus externus,
and provided with hairs and a disagreeable secretion for defence; and the

-concha, the size and mobility of which indicate acute hearing, is developed in this
class only, though frequently small or absent in the inferior species and the
aquatic, as whales, beavers, and seals. In the timid, which are to be pursued,
both it and the meatus are directed backwards ; in the predaceous, which are to
pursue, forwards: in the former too it is large, and the brain is small; in the
latter small, and the brain is large: in the quadrumana, and especially in the
‘oran-outang, it becomes short, round, and motionless as in us. In the aquatic
mammalia, in order to prevent the entrance of water, the meatus is narrow and
winding, and the orifice very small ; and in quadrupeds which dive or burrow,
a double membrane is provided, which can accurately close it. ‘The hippopo-
tamus, which feeds at the bottom of rivers, has an apparatus for the same
purpose. (See Dr. Grant, Lancet, No. 569., and Outlines of Comparative Anatomy.
Dr. Roget, Bridgewater Treatise.)

Many. animals surpass-us in acuteness of hearing. The common birds about
us hear the faintest sound. ‘ Not only,’ says Gall, ‘ are the vestibule and
semicircular canals proportionally larger in many brutes, but the acoustic
nerve and all its apparatus are more perfect. This nerve originates in a more
considerable mass of grey substance, and is consequently considerably larger, as
any one will find in the sheep, ox, horse, &c. The external concha is much
more developed in most brutes, and the great osseous cavities surrounding the
labyrinth in many produce a similar effect in augmenting the sound of the solid
and elastic vaults. These cavities, which must not be confounded with the mas-
toid processes, contain, in many brutes, for instance, in the calf, concentric canals
which unite into a common ‘cavity, and must evidently increase the sound.”
(1. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 161.)


CHAP. XXVI.
SIGHT.


“THE instruments of vision, —the eyes®, are two moveable
globes, fixed to the optic nerves, whose decussation we formerly
noticed, as it were to stalks, in such a manner that their insertion
is not exactly opposite the centre of the cornea and iris, but on
one side of this imaginary axis, — rather nearer to the nose.

«‘ They consist of various coats containing pellucid humours
of different densities, so placed that the rays of light can pass
from the transparent anterior segment of the bulb to the opposite
part of the fundus.

« The external coat is called sclerotic. It is deficient in the
centre, and that part is filled up by the cornea, which is_trans-
parent, lamellated (lined internally by the membrane of the aqueous
humour, or of Demours), more or less convex, and projects like
the segment of a small globe from one of rather larger size.»

“‘ The interior of the sclerotic is lined by the chortozd, which
abounds in blood-vessels¢*, especially vorticose veins, and is
covered on each side by a black pigment, which adheres but
loosely to its concave surface in the form of mucus.!


a « Sam. Th. Sommerring (the father), Icones oculi humani. Francof. 1801.
fol.

Detm. W. Sommerring (the son), De oculorwm sectione horizontali Comment-
arius. Gotting. 1818. fol.”

b«G. H. Gerson, De forma cornee deque singulari visus phenomeno.
Gotting. 1810. 4to.

Al. Clemens, Tunice cornee et humoris aquei monographia.  Gotting.
1816. 4to.

M. J. Chelius, Ueber die durchsichtige Hornhaut. Carlsr. 1818. 8vo.”

* «Sam, Th. Von Sommerring, in the Denkschr. der Akad, der Wiss. su
Miinchen. 1817. tab. 1.”

ont Mundini, in the Comm. Instit, Bononiens. t. vii. p. 29.

H. F. Elsaesser (pres. G, C. Ch. Storr), De pigmento oculi nigro. Tubing.
1800, 8yo,”’


ek


560 SIGHT.


“The chorioid is internally coated by the retina®—an ex-
pansion of the optic nerve after this has passed through the
sclerotic and chorioid ‘, of most beautiful texture ¢, and per-
forated, in the imaginary axis of the eye, between the two prin-
cipal twigs of the central artery, by the singular central foramen
of Sommerring!, which is surrounded by a yellow edge.” « -

A delicate transparent membrane has been discovered by Dr.


Jacob of Dublin between the retina and chorioid, and adherent
to both.!


‘<¢ The anterior edge of the chorioid is terminated by a cellular
belt, called orbiculus ciliaris, by which it adheres firmly to a cor-
responding groove in the sclerotic, and from which two other
membranes of a different kind, viz. the iris and ciliary processes,
are expanded in a circular form.


e« B.S. Albinus, dunotat, Academ. 1, iii. p. 59. sq. liv, p.'75. sq 1. v.
p- 66. sq.”

f « Walter, De venis oculi, &c. Berol. 1778. 4to. tab, i. fig. 2. tap. ie
ci ya

& « The extremely beautiful blood-vessels of the retina were first discovered by
J. Mery to be visible in a living cat plunged under water, Mém. de?’ Acad. des
Sc. de Paris, avant 1699, t. x. p, 650.3; and 1704, p, 265,

The most beautifully radiated surface of the retina in the hare was displayed
by Zinn in an admirable engraving. Comm. Soc. Scient, Gotting. t. iv. 1754,
tab. viii. fig. 3.

By Fontana, in the rabbit, Sur le vénin de la vipére, vol. ii. tab. y. fig. 12.”

h «¢ A plate accurately representing the course of these branches will be found
in the @uvres de Mariorre, p. 527. fig. 1.”

‘ « Sommerring, De Foramine centrali limbo lutee eineto retine humane + in
the Comment. Soc. Reg. Scient. Gotting. t. xiii.

Ph. Michaelis, Journal der Erfindungen in .der Natur-und Arzneywiss,
ROay. 3

k « As I have discovered this central aperture in the eye of no animal besides
man, except the guadrumana, the axes of whose eyes are, like the human, parallel
to each other, I think its «se connected with this parallel direction of the eyes,
and have endeavoured to explain the connection at large, in my Handbuch der
vergleichenden Anatomie, p. 402. sq. 2d edit.

As, on the one hand, this direction of the eyes renders one object visible to
both at the same time, and therefore more distinctly visible; so, on the other,
this foramen prevents the inconvenience of too intense a light, if there is a pro-
bability that it expands and dilates a little under this circumstance, and thus
removes the principal focus from the very sensible centre of the retina.”

1 Phil. Trans, ¥819. Also, on various other points in the anatomy of the eye,
Med. Chirurg. Trans. vol. xii. P. 2.


SIGHT. 561


« The iris (whose posterior’ surface is lined by a brown pig-
ment, and termed wvea) lies anteriorly to the ciliary processes,
is flat, and washed on all sides by the aqueous humour; narrower
towards the nose, broader towards the temples. Its texture is
dense and cellular; and contains no vestige of muscular fibre.
We must regard it, with Zinn™, as a membrane sui generis, and
not as a prolongation of the chorioid. The anterior surface is
differently coloured in different persons, and, during life, has a
flocculent appearance.2

« The blood-vessels of the iris run chiefly on its anterior sur-
face, and in the foetus are continued into the membrana pupillaris®,
which begins to open in its centre at the seventh or eighth month
of pregnancy,—when the eyes have acquired some degree of size,
and when, probably, the elliptic arches of its vessels begin to be
gradually retracted into the inner ring of the iris, which ring I
have never been able to perceive distinctly before that period.

“The posterior of the two circular membranes bears the
name of ligamentum or corpus ciliare ; and, inclining backwards,
lies at a distance from the iris. Its external edge is thick? and
adheres to the ciliary circle: the internal is thin, and, to-
gether with the adjacent zonula of Zinn4, surrounds the margin
of the capsule of the lens. The brown pigment is copiously dif-
fused over it. |

“‘ Its anterior surface, lying opposite to the uvea, is striated.

‘¢ The posterior, lying upon the vitreous humour, is marked
by about seventy plicz, which are beautifully flocculent, and re-
markable for a set of indescribably minute and elegant blood-


‘
m <¢ Comment. Soc. Scient. Gotting. t. iv. p. 199.”


n « On the remarkable mutual relation.of the arteries and nerves of the internal
parts of the eye, and especially of the iris, see Diet. G. Kieser, De Anamorphosi
oculi, Gotting. 1804. 4to.”

° « This beautiful membrane was first discovered by. Francis Sandys—a cele-
brated maker of anatomical preparations: it was first described and exhibited in
an engraving by Ever. J. Wachendorf, Commerc. litter. Nor. 1740, hebd. 18.”

P « The ciliary canal, discovered by Fel. Fontana, (Sur le vénin de la vipére,
vol. ii. tab. vii. fig. 8, 9,10.) and afterwards described more accurately by
Adolp. Murray (Nov. act. Upsaliens. vol. iii.), runs, in bisulcous animals, along
this thick edge.” : :

4 ¢ Doellinger, Nov. Act. dc. N. C. t. ix. p. 267. sqq. tab. vii.

C. J. M. Langenbeck, Neue Bibl. fiir die Chirurgie, iii. B, 1, St. tab. 1.11.”

PEP} Z


562 SIGHT.


vessels. These flocculi are named ciliary processes, and their use
is still an object of inquiry. *

“In the bulb of the eye, whose coats we have now described,
are contained the humours, of three principal kinds.

“ The posterior, and by far the greater, part of the globe i is
filled by the vetreous humour, which is in larger quantity pro-
portionally in the human subject, especially after puberty, than
in other animals, and so dispersed in innumerable drops through-
out the cells of the delicate hyaloid membrane that this membra-
naceo-lymphatic body has the singular appearance of a tremulous
jelly.

“ Anteriorly it adheres to, and the zonula just mentioned sur-
rounds, the capsule containing the crystalline lens, immediately
around which lies the water of Morgagni.”


a, point of junction of the sclerotic and cornea.

6, c, d, the sclerotic; growing thicker and thicker posteriorly.

e, opening of the sclerotic through which the optic nerve runs.

f, anterior surface of the crystalline lens, bounding the anterior chamber of the
eye.

g, iris.

h, anterior chamber of the eye.

i, posterior surface of the crystalline.

kk, anterior termination of the retina.

i,m, fibrous covering of the optic nerve, continuous with the sclerotic.

m, proper covering of the optic nerve.

0, section of the optic nerve.


“ The lens, itself also very pellucid, is cellular, but so much
more dense than the vitreous humour that in the hand it seems


* « Consult, among others, Brandis, Pathologie, p. 253.
And J. Aug. Hegar, De Oculi partibus quibusdam. Gotting. 1818. 8vo.
p: 25. sqq.”’


SIGHT. 563


like a very tenacious, although an amazingly clear, glue. Its
nucleus is more dense than the exterior lamina. The laminz may
be reduced into extremely delicate fibres, converging from the
circumference to the centre.

«Tn an adult man the lens is proportionally to the whole body
smaller than in quadruped mammalia ; also less convex, rite
on its anterior surface.

“ The remaining space of the eye is filled by the aqueous hu-
mour, which is very limpid, and divided by the iris into two cham-
bers : — the anterior and larger separating the cornea and iris;
and the posterior, in which the uvea lies towards the cerpus ci-
liare, so small as scarcely believed by some to exist.

«< These most valuable parts are defended from injury both by
the depth of their situation in the orbits and by the valvular
coverings of the eye-lids,

‘In the duplicature of the palpebra, lie the sebaceous follicles
of Meibomiust, thickly distributed: and their edges are fringed
by atriple or quadruple series of cilia": the cartilaginous tarsz
serve for their support and expansion, and also facilitate their mo-
tion upon the eye-ball.

“« Above the eyelids, to use the language of Cicero, are placed
the supercilia, which preserve the eyes from the sweat flowing
from the head and forehead, and in some measure screen them
from too strong a light.

_ “ To lubricate the eyes, to preserve their brightness, and to’
wash away foreign matters, is the office of the tears; the chief
source of which is a conglomerate gland placed in the upper and
exterior part of the orbit. It has numerous but very fine excre-
tory ducts, which are said to discharge about two ounces of
tears upon each eye during the twenty-four hours: the tears are
afterwards absorbed by the puncta lachrymalia, the function of
which may, in a certain sense, be compared to that of the lacteals
in the villous coat of the small intestines ; from the puncta they
are conveyed through the snail’s horns, as they are called, into


* «Th, Young, Phil. Trans. 1795, tab. xx. fig. 2, 3.

Dav. Hosack, ib. 1794, tab. xvii. fig. 4.

J. C. Reil, De lentis crystalline structura fibrosa. Tal. 1743. 8vo.”

t « A. Meibomius, De vasis palpebrarum novis ep. Helmst. 1666. 4to.””
u « B. §. Albinus, Annotat, Academ. 1. iii, tab. iii, fig. 4.”


PP 3


564 SIGHT.


the lachrymal sac, and thence pass into the lower meatus of the
nostrils,”’*

The tears appear to me to pass over the ball of the eye as
low as the edge of the superior tarsus, which is so applied to the
ball as not ordinarily to allow of their ready escape under it.’ As
the upper lid descends and nearly covers the front of the eye
during sleep, for the lower has but little motion and the fine inner
edges of both meet, the whole of the ball is at this time readily
preserved moist. But, when the eyes are open, the front of the
eye between the lids would not be moistened unless the upper
tarsus occasionally descended with the fluid contained behind it.
A portion of the fluid, thus brought down upon the front of the
eye, remains after the upper lid rises again after winking, and
trickles by its gravity as far as the inferior tarsus, which, ascend-
ing a little as often as the superior descends, raises it somewhat.
Winking thus preserves the front of the eye constantly moist
during the waking state. The under eyelid in rising moves te-
wards the nose, as Sir C. Bell pointed out, and thus directs the
tears towards the puncta, and extraneous matters are both pushed
and.washed towards the inner canthus, where the tears are always
seen to run over first.

It may be also observed that, when the tarsi approximate, as
they drive before them the moisture of the front of the eye-ball,
and the lower at the same time moves it somewhat towards the nose,
they quite inundate the puncta lachrymalia, by which circumstance
the puncta are, of course, enabled to carry off a large quantity of
the secretion, and ordinarily to prevent its overflow, which would
occur at the centre of the lower tarsus. ‘During sleep the puncta
are not so copiously supplied, as they have only the same share
of tears as the eye in general; and there is less occasion for it,
because the removal of the stimulus of air and light by the closure
of the eyelids lessens the secretion.


x «J, Chr. Rosenmuller, Organor. lachrymalium partiumque externarum
oculi humani Descriptio Anatomica. Lips. 1797. Ato.

Y The object of this firm application of the tarsi to the. eye must be the exclu-
sion of foreign matters from the orbit. Sir C. Bell says that the margins of the
eyelids touch at their outer edges only, and leave a gutter between them and the
cornea. I cannot conceive this, as the inner edge of the tarsi appears firmly
applied to the eye. Phil. Trans. 1823.


SIGHT. . «B65:


Dr. Magendie has found the matter of the tarsal or Meibomian
glands to be not sebaceous but albuminous, and soluble in the
tears : hence we discover why, during sleep, it accumulates on
the tarsi, —because its solvent, the tears, are not sufficiently
abundant to remove it.


‘


“ Thus much it was necessary to premise upon the structure
of the organ of vision. We now come to the function of the
organ, — to the explanation of vision.”

Sir D. Brewster, the best authority upon this subject, gives
the following data respecting the dimensions, motions, and re-
fractions of the eye. The total length of the axis of the eye
is about 0-91 inch; the principal focal distance of the crystal-
line lens is 1°73; and the range of the moving eyeball, which
determines the field of distinct vision, is 110°. The eye be-
ing stationary, its field of vision is 120° in the vertical plane,
50° being above the horizontal line and 70° below it. In the
horizontal plane its field is 150°, having 60° inwards and 90°
outwards.

The refractive powers of the different humours of the eye are
as follows ; the ray of light being incident upon them from air :—


Aqueous Crystalline Lens. Vitreous
humour. Surface. Centre. Mean. humour.
1°3386 1‘3767 1:3990 1°3839 1°3394,


The refractive index of the aqueous humour, it will be ob-
served, is almost precisely that of pure water; and the indices of
the other media do not greatly differ from it.

As the rays refracted by the aqueous humour pass into the
crystalline, and those from the crystalline into the vitreous hu-
mour, the indices of refraction of each separating surface of these
humours will be


From aqueous humour to outer coat of the crystalline - - 1:0466
From ditto to crystalline, the mean index being used s+ - 1°0353
From vitreous to crystalline outer coat - - - - 1:0445
From ditto to ditto, the mean index being used - - 1:0332


“ Rays of light, falling upon the cornea at an angle more acute
PP 4


566 SIGHT.


than forty-eight degrees, pass through it, and, from both its den-
sity and figure, are considerably refracted towards the axis of the
eye, and on entering the aqueous humour they expenenge rather
a less degree of refraction.

‘¢ Those rays which penetrate the pails and are ocr by
the lens, are still more refracted on account of the greater ASR:
sity of this medium.

‘“‘ The less density of the vitreous humour prevents the focus
of rays from being too short, and allows it to fall upon the retina
and exhibit the image of objects, though, from the laws of light,
necessarily inverted.”

By means of the indices of refraction above given, and the
known dimensions of the eye, it is easy to determine the path
which the rays of light travel through the humours of the eye,
whether they fall upon it in a parallel or a diverging condition.

Let a 6 c be the eye, and d e an object at a considerable


This figure shows how the images of external objects are formed on the retina.


This figure shows how the rays of light issuing from a point fall divergingly on
the cornea, and are afterwards refracted so as to meet again in a single point on
the retina,


SIGHT. 567


distance from it. The rays which diverge from d and e will,’
after undergoing the various refractions, converge to the points:

e’ upon the retina, and will there form an inverted image of it,
precisely in the same manner as a convex lens forms an image
upon a sheet of white paper placed at its focus.

That an image or picture is actually thus formed on the retina,
may be shown by scraping away the sclerotic coat of the eye of
an ox, until it is sufficiently transparent for the image to be seen’
through it.

“ Although the whole of the retina is sensible, it is not thiouahe


out equally calculated to receive the images of objects.

“In the first place, the true axis of the human? eye, where
the optic nerve enters, is proved, by the well-known experiment
of Mariotte, to be nearly insensible to light.

“« The ikcipat focus of the rest of abs retina, and which must
be considered as the chief instrument of distinct vision, falls upon
an imaginary axis of the globe, corresponding with the’ centre
of the cornea and of the whole eye. This, however, as Kaestner,
observes in opposition to Boerhaave, is not to be understood as
if only one point of an object could be seen distinctly at once,
the eye being fixed, and that, to behold another point, the axis.
of the eye must be changed; for the sensation of an entire object.
is simple and complete.»

‘¢ The habit of directing the axes of the eyes rapidly towards
objects is acquired by practice. This is proved by the example.
of persons who were born blind but recovered their sight after
puberty ¢; and of children, who seldom Aca this facility of
motion before the third month.

«¢ An object can never be seen unless the pay of vision ex-
ceeds 34 seconds. This was proved by the very beautiful expe-
riments of the acute Tob. Mayer, who formerly was one of our
number: and he demonstrated the great perfection of the human


z « T gay the human eye; for in some animals now before me, the seal and
porcupine, for instance, the true and imaginary axes are the same, the optic nerve
lying exactly opposite the centre of the cornea and pupil.”

@ « Tyoxler speaks of this at large, l.c. t. ii. P.ii. p. 1.”

b «& In Optica Quedam Boerhaavii et Halleri Commentatur Abr. Gotth.
Kaestner. Lips. 1785. 8vo. p. 7.” :

© & See Giov. Bortolazzi, Sopra una cieca nata guarita. Verona, 1781. 8yo.
p- 99. sq.”


568 SIGHT.


sight, by showing that this still remained the limit of vision in
any light, —in the splendour of the meridian sun and the faint
light of a lantern; so that vision remains almost equally distinct,
although the light be considerably diminished. ¢

«¢ We may hence infer the extreme minuteness of the images
of objects projected upon the retina ®, and nevertheless impressed
so forcibly upon it, that, under certain circumstances, their ves-
tiges remain after the removal of the objects from before the
eye.f

It has frequently been a question among philosophers, why
objects are seen erect, when the images which suggest them to
the mind are thus inverted. Some have supposed that infants at
first see objects upside down, and afterwards learn to correct
their erroneous sensation by comparing the information acquired
by touch with that obtained by sight. This opinion, held by Locke,
Lecat, Diderot, Buffon, &c., as well as that of our originally seeing
objects double and all as at the same distance and correcting these
errors by experience and the sense of touch, was amply refuted by
Bishop Berkley, and subsequently by Gall and others. The law
of visible direction affords the true explanation. The simple state-
ment of this law is that each point of an object is seen in a line
perpendicular to the point of the retina on which its image falls.
The surface of the retina being concave and nearly as possible
spherical, these lines of visible direction meet and cross at a point
within the eye which is called the centre of visible direction: the
lines from the upper part of the image go to the lower part of
the object, and those from the lower part of the image proceed
to the upper part of the object. An inverted image thus neces~
sarily produces an erect object, and the external object is the


a Tob. Mayer, Experimenta circa visus aciem, in the Commentar. Soc. Scient.
Gotting. t.iv.”’

© « De la Hire, Accidens de la Vue, p. 375.”

f «‘ Gassendi, Vita Peireskii, p. 175. sq. Hague, 1655. 4to.

Franklin, Letters on Philosophical Subjects, at the end of his a on Elec-
tricity. Lond. 1769. 4to. p. 469. sq.

Rob. War. Darwin, Experimenta nova de spectris s. imaginibus ocularibus, que
oljectis lucidioribus antea visis, in oculo clauso vel averso percipiuntur. Lugd. Bat.
1785. 4to.

Dr. Darwin, Zoonomia, t.i.

C. Himly, Biblioth. Ophthalmolog. t.i. P. ii. p. 1.”

& ]. c. 4to. p. 180. sqq.


SIGHT, 569


thing to which the mind attends, and not the picture on the
retina. The mind is not placed behind the eye to look at this
image, as an observer is placed behind a camera obscura:
neither does it in this case, more than in any other concerning
perception, attend to the sensations themselves, which serve solely
to suggest to it the causes which produce them.

‘«¢ Since many conditions are requisite for distinct vision, the
Creator has wonderfully ordered the functions of these organs.

‘“‘ A sufficient, but, at the same time, a definite, quantity of
light, not too intense for distinct vision, is provided in two
modes: — First, according to the greater or less intensity of
the rays, a greater or less number of them pass to the lens; —
Secondly, that portion which is superabundant and injurious to
vision is absorbed.

‘“‘ The first point is effected by the motion of the iris; the se-
cond, by the pigmentum nigrum.

“‘ The iris is endowed with remarkable mobility, and thus ac-
commodates itself to the intensity and distance of light, so that,
when exposed to a strong light or to near objects, it may ex-
pand itself and contract the pupil, but, when to a weaker light
or more remote objects, it may contract itself and dilate that
opening.!

‘‘ Physiologists have given different explanations of this mo-
tion. Some ascribe it to the varied impulses of blood into the
vessels; others to contraction of the imaginary muscular fibres
of the iris. I have shown, in a particular treatise, that both
these circumstances are impossible, and that its proximate cause
may. be sought for with more probability and reason in the
vita propria of the iris; the more remote cause, as we formerly
hinted, can be solely the reaction of the sensorium. i

‘“‘ The function of the dark pigment, so frequently mentioned,
viz, to absorb the superfluous rays, and, consequently, its im-
portance to the perfection of vision, are demonstrated, among
other modes, by the dissection of different kinds of animals, and
by the diseased condition of Albinos, whose eyes are very


h « Zinn, De Motu Uvee, 1757, in the Comment. Soc. Scient. Gotting. t. i.
Fel. Fontana, Det Moti dell Iride. Lucca. 1765. 8vo.”


‘ « For other explanations consult Troxler in Himly’s Ophthalmol, Biblioth, t. i.
Ps 21.”


570 SIGHT,


tender and impatient of light from the” absence of this pig-
ment.” k |

Adaptation of the eye.— When the eye is directed to objects at
a distance, it is unable, at the same time, to see distinctly objects
which arenear. Some change is therefore requisite to accommo-
date the eye to see perfectly at different distances. That the eye
thus adapts itself to distinct vision by a voluntary act, is evident
from the following simple experiment. If you hold a pencil near
the eye and direct the attention steadfastly to it, distant objects
will appear confused; but if, without changing the position of the
eye, the attention be transferred to these distant objects, they will
become distinct and the pencil will appear confused. Many hy-
potheses have been proposed to explain the actions by which this
adaptation of the eye is effected, but none yet advanced has been
deemed entirely satisfactory. Kepler supposed that the eye
elongates itself in the direction of its axis in proportion as the ob-
ject to be viewed is nearer. Dr. Jurin, Sir E. Home, Ramsden,
and others, regarded the cornea as capable of changing its form
and curvature, — becoming more convex when the eyeis adjusted
to see nearer objects. Descartes, Pemberton, Albinus, Hunter,
Olbers, and Dr. Young have endeavoured to prove that the crys-
talline lens is capable of moving in the direction of the axis of the
eye so as to vary its distance from the retina, — that it advances
to see near objects, and recedes to become fit for seeing distant ob-
jects. La Hire and Le Roy supposed that the mobility of the
pupil is alone sufficient to account for the phenomena. “Dr. Ma-
gendie hastily denies that any adaptation is necessary, “‘ because,”
says he, ‘‘ the picture seen at the back of the eye of an ox, when
the sclerotic is scraped away, is equally distinct at whatever dis-
tance the object is placed before it.”

On paying attention to the phenomena, it will be observed that
the effort of adapting the eye to a near object is invariably at-
tended by the contraction of the pupil. Several eminent writers
have hence considered the motion which causes the adaptation to
be a consequence of the mobility of the iris. Dr. Knox thinks
that the contraction of the iris. alters the curvature of the crys-
talline lens; Sir D. Brewster, that it displaces the crystalline;


k « T have spoken of Albinos at large in my work, De Generis Humani
Varietate Nativa, ed. 3. p. 274,; and in my dissertation, De Oculis Leuce-
thiopum.”


SIGHT. 57]


and Prof. Mile of Warsaw, that it changes the curvature of the
cornea. |

Prof. Mile, by a great number of accurate and satisfactory
experiments, for which I refer the reader to the original memoir},
has arrived at the following conclusions. Their truth is inde-
pendent of his hypothesis of the dependence of the curvature of
the cornea on the contraction of the iris, and the opinion of Sir
D. Brewster or Dr. Knox might be substituted for it with equal
propriety.
-- The eye does not see with equal distinctness objects at all dis-
tances, but only when they are within a certain distance. This
does not depend on external causes, such as the diminution of the
optic angle, and the obscuration of the object by the intermediate
air; for, to see clearly and to see distinctly are not identical.
The causes of distinct vision are internal, and situated in the eye
itself. They are two in number: one disposes the eye for the con-
tinuous distinct vision, and the other for the transient distinct
vision of objects at different distances ; but neither of them can
act except within certain limits. ‘These limits are greater for
the presbyope, or shortsighted, than for the myope, or long-
sighted, person. These adaptations both depend on the action
of the iris, which can at the same time act in two ways to pro-
duce two effects: first, by the contraction of its aperture, and,
secondly, by the flexion of the cornea; the alteration of the size
of the pupil only, however, is visible. The adaptation of the eye
for the continuous distinct vision of objects contained within
certain limits is owing to the diffraction of the rays of light near
the edge of the aperture of the iris, in consequence of which there
are formed, by a single external luminous point, several foci instead
of one successively ranged in a line of a certain length; so.that
the object may change its distance within certain limits, and’ yet
one of its foci shall always fall on the bottom of the eye.. This
focal length is inversely as the magnitude of the pupil. The
borders of indistinct objects appear radiated, and to the pheno-
menon of confusion is added the motion and multiplication of the


1 Dela cause qui dispose (Vail pour voir distinctement les. objéts places & dif-
féerentes distances : par Jean Mile (traduit du Polonais). Magendie, Journal de


Physiologie, t. vi. p. 166.


572 SIGHT.


image when the edges of bodies are brought near the side of the
fasciculus of rays which enter the eye: prismatic colours also
appear. All these phenomena, which are observed in an eye
performing its functions, may be produced by an apparatus, the
structure of which resembles that of the eye ; and even by a com+
mon lens, if we substitute for the motion of the pupil diaphragms
of different sizes. The nature of all these phenomena proves that
diffraction is their common origin, and they may be considered as —
constituting a separate kind of optical illusions resulting from
diffraction. ‘The second cause which adapts the eye for the mo-
mentaneous distinct vision of objects depends neither on the
action of the external muscles of the eye, the advancement of the
bottom of the eye, nor on any alteration of the form or position
of the crystalline lens; but appears to be owing rather to the
change of the curvature of the cornea by the contraction of the
iris, which occurs only when the eye adapts itself to see very
near objects, as is proved by the simultaneous approximation of —
the pupil.

Besides the motions of the pupil which accompany the adapt-
ation of the eye to different distances, it also varies with the in-
tensity of the light to which the eye is exposed, contracting in a
strong light, and dilating in a faint light. This effect is particularly
observable in persons whose pupils are large. The sympathetic
action of the pupils of both eyes is worthy of remark: while the
same light is regarded, the pupil of one eye will dilate imme-
diately the other eye is covered, and again contract when the
hand is removed and both organs are equally exposed to the
light. °

Correction of spherical aberration in the eye. — In ordinary lenses
the rays which pass through them at different distances from the
centre are not refracted to the same point or focus, and the images
they form are consequently indistinct. This defect, which is
called spherical aberration, is, according to Sir D. Brewster, re-
medied in the eye by means of the variable density of the crys-
talline lens. ‘The refractive power of this body being greatest at
its centre, and decreasing towards its circumference, the central
and extreme rays are both refracted to the same point. Ac-
cording to the experiments of M. Chossat, the ellipsoidal figure
of the cornea is sufficient to effect this correction.

Chromatic aberration. —- In consequence of each differently


SIGHT. 573


coloured ray possessing a different index of refraction in the same
medium, a lens refracts these variously coloured rays to different
points or foci. This effect, which is called chromatic aberration,
is another cause of indistinctness in images formed by lenses, for
from this cause they appear surrounded with coloured fringes.
When the eye, however, is adjusted to the proper focal distance,
an object appears perfectly colourless. It is evident, therefore,
that either the eye, when thus adjusted, is by some contrivance
rendered achromatic, or that the aberration is so small as to be
insensible. Sir D. Brewster is of the latter opinion, which was
also held by Dr. Maskelyne. Of those who maintain that there
exists a correction for chromatic aberration, Euler, Coddington,
and Professor Powell assert that a compensation takes place be-
tween the refractions of the different media of the eye, each giving
a different explanation ; while D’ Alembert supposes that the agita-
tion, occasioned at any one point of the retina, extends itself into
the adjacent points, and, each point being thus influenced by the
sum of the effects due to all the coloured rays at once, perfect
vision is the result. When the rays do not converge accurately on
the retina, the dispersion is sensible ; and, from this cause, objects,
seen either within or beyond the proper focal distance, are seen
with coloured borders.

Single vision with two eyes.— When we look at an object, an
image is formed on the retina of each eye, and yet we see only a
single object. ‘Two different opinions have been maintained re-
specting the cause of this singleness of vision with both eyes.
Several distinguished philosophers, and among others Dr. Reid,
suppose that there is a physiological connection between certain
points of the two retinz, and that objects are only perceived as
single when their images fall on corresponding parts of the re-
tine: the decussation of the optic nerve is brought as an argu-
ment in support of this opinion. Others, including Dr. Smith and
Sir D. Brewster, do not admit this supposed necessary connection
between corresponding points of the expansion of the optic nerve,
but assert that objects are scen single merely because they are
seen by both eyes in the same place; single vision is, according
_to this opinion, a necessary consequence of the law of visible
direction.

Insensible spot of the retina.— The retina, from its being an
expansion of the optic nerve, has generally been regarded as the


574 ; SIGHT.


seat of vision. But Mariotte, having found that images which fall
on that part of the retina where the optic. nerve,enters,it are
invisible, concluded, because where there is no chorioid there, is
no vision, that the chorioid performs the HincHons iekteRBtReaaD
most physiologists to the retina. ;, »..« Fae Ped Se
Mariotte performed his well- known. ‘experiment. in ‘the following
manner :—— He made two spots in the same, horizontal line. upon the
wall of a room, and, having closed. the left eye; placed. the, right
eye opposite the left spot, and gradually moved backwards until the
right hand spot disappeared, — a.circumstance which oceurs when
thé? image falls on the place where the optic nerve enters the retinas
The experiment. succeeds very well when two.wafers are placed.
on the wall about three inches apart, and the observer commences:
to recede when at the distance of twelve inches from. them. «A
very ready mode of trying this experiment is the following : —
Place two coloured wafers upon a sheet of white paper, close
one eye” and fix the other ab eae one of the wate theg: move


right, to ‘the left, above, or beneath, it is again seen.

Purkinje has remarked that the spot of the retina is not insensi-
ble to the stimulus of light, as it is generally stated to be; for, if a
candle be substituted for the moving wafer.of the preceding. expe-
riment, though the flame is not seen, ared glare is perceived. It ean.
scarcely be doubted that the insensible point is the. place, occus.
pied by the central artery of the retina, and the chief, vargument;
for the chorioid being the seat of vision. therefore, falls. tothe:
ground. re met


HIGgss OF su

We are indebted _to Purkinje for : a most, heautivials ieee F
by which a person may see the blood-vessels of his. own, retinas;
The experiment succeeds best in a dark room, when, one, seyenis.
shaded from the light, and the flame of a candle is placed, by, the,
side of the unshaded eye, but so as not. to occupy any:of the.
central part of the field of view. So long as the flame.of, the.
candle remains stationary, nothing further occurs | than, a-diminu-,
tion of the sensibility of the retina to light: but, after. the fame.
has been moved upwards and downwards, through a small. space,»

for a length of time, varying with the, susceptibility, of the person

on whom the experiment is tried, the phenomenon presents itself.
The blood-vessels of the retina, exactly as represented in the


SIGHT. 575


engravings of Sommerring, are distinctly seen greatly magnified
and projected apparently on a plane before the eye. The image
continues only so long as the flame is in motion: when the flame
becomes stationary, it immediately dissolves into fragments and
soon after disappears. Prof. Wheatstone finds that the sus-
ceptibility of seeing it depends upon the size of the pupil: the
image readily appears to those whose pupils are large, while,
on the contrary, the experiment rarely succeeds with a person
whose pupil is smail. I can see the blood-vessels of my own
retina and the blood circulating through them, just as in a frog’s
web under the microscope, by merely closing my eyes and ex-
cluding the light by placing my hand before them. The phe-
nomenon occurs in this way more readily at one time than at
another: and some persons say they never perceive it.


A view of the retina, with the ramification of its central
artery. In the centre is seen its central hole, surrounded
by a circle. To one side of this is the bulb of the optic
nerve.


Purkinje has attempted no explanation of this phenomenon, but
contented himself with simply stating the fact. Prof. Wheat-
stone considers that it is a shadow, resulting from the obstruction
of light by the blood-vessels spread over the retina. The difficulty,
he observes, is not to account for the appearance of the image,
but to explain why this shadow is not always visible. He adduces
a number of facts observed by Pictet, Sir D. Brewster, and others,
which tend to prove that an object, either more or less Juminous
than the ground on which it is placed, becomes invisible when
continuously presented to the same point of the retina, the ra-
pidity of its disappearance being greater as the difference of
luminous intensity between the object and the ground is less:
but, by continually shifting the place of the object on the retina,
or by making it act intermittingly on the same point, the object
may be rendered permanently visible. To apply this explanation to
Purkinje’s experiment, Prof. Wheatstone observes that, whenever
the flame of the candle changes its place, the shadows of the
vessels fall on different parts of the retina; as is evident from

QQ


576 SIGHT.


the motion of the figure, which, while the eye remains at rest, is
always in a contrary direction to that of the flame. Hence the
shadow, being thus made to change its place on the retina, re-
mains, according to the law above stated, permanently visible ;
but, instantly the flame is at rest, the shadow also becomes sta-
tionary and consequently disappears.

Sir D. Brewster offers a different explanation. He considers that
the light is propagated from the luminous image of the candle to
other parts of the retina, and that, though the retina, in contact
with the blood-vessels, is sensible to direct light, it is insensible
to propagated light, and therefore the blood-vessels are delineated
in obscure lines. This explanation does not agree with the fact
that the vessels continue to be seen only 6 the flame is in
motion. %

Prof. Wheatstone has described several original and instructive
variations of the ecoueey for which we must refer to his own
account.™

Duration of luminous impressions on the retina. — The effect of
light upon the eye continues for some time after the light itself
has ceased to'act. Ifa red-hot coal be rapidly whirled round so
as to return to the precise point from which it started, it’ will
produce a perfect ring of light, although the coal can be at one
point only of the circle at the same instant. Chevalier D’Arcy
was the first who made this experiment the subject of philosophical
consideration: he ascertained that the impression on the retina
remained about the eighth of a second. Prof. Wheatstone has
devised a very instructive experiment to illustrate this: property
of vision. A narrow slit is made in a disc from the centre:to the
circumference: when this disc is stationary and held before a
window blind or a strongly illuminated picture, a very limited
portion only of the object is seen through the linear aperture ;
but, on causing it to revolve rapidly on its centre, the different
portions of the picture, which are seen through the disc in Jits
successive’ positions, remaining on the eye, the entire object is
visible at the same time and the solid disc appears perfectly
transparent.

The stationary appearances of moving wheels as observed by
Drs. Roget and Faraday, Dr. Paris’s thaumatrope, Professor


™ Contributions to the Physiology of Vision. Journal of the Royal Instttution,
Nos. 1, and 3.


SIGHT. 577


Plateau’s well known optical illusion — the phantascope, Prof.
Wheatstone’s kaleidophone, and the revolving mirror by which
he has measured the velocity of electricity and the duration of
the electric spark, are all applications of this physiological law.

Ocular spectra. —When the eye has been fatigued by looking
at any particular kind of coloured light, and is afterwards directed
to a white surface, the. surface will not appear white, but of a
different colour, which is called the accidental colour of the colour
which was first, regarded by the eye. This fact may be proved
by placing a red wafer on a sheet of white paper, and fixing the
eye for some time steadily to a dot at its centre: when the eye is
turned aside to an uncovered part of the paper, a circular spot of
the same size as the wafer will be seen, but its colour will be
green. ‘This image changes its position as the eye moves, and is
called an ocular spectrum.

To determine the accidental; colour of any colour originally
presented to the eye, the following remarks must be attended to.
There are three, primary and distinct colours, red, yellow, and
blue; and all the compound colours that exist in nature are dif-
ferent combinations of these.» Orange is a compound of red and
yellow; green, of yellow and blue; purple, of blue and red; and
white is'a neutral,combination of the three primary colours.. An
accidental colour is always found to be that which, added to the
original colour, produces white; and these two colours are hence
said to be complementary.

The theories which have been advanced to account for the
phenomena of ocular spectra may be reduced to two.

The most usual theory in its most. general form supposes that,
when any simple or compound colour is continuously presented
to the eye; the part, of the retina where the image falls becomes
less sensible to impressions of the same kind, but retains its sus-
ceptibility for other kinds of impressions: if, therefore, while the
retina is in this state, the eye is\ transferred to a white surface,
the spectrum will appear as if the colour originally seen were
subtracted from the white... This explanation agrees with a great
many observed facts, but there is one which seems in direct con-
tradiction to it. A complementary. spectrum is seen when the
eye is shut, and when, consequently, there is no white light to
furnish the complementary colour. This phenomenon has given
rise to another explanation as to the origin of ocular spectra,

QaQa2


578 SIGHT.


which assumes that any colour presented to the retina stimulates
it and. excites it to a reverse action which produces; the comple-
mentary colour. -Professor Plateau, has,,supported, this, theory
with much ingenuity, but there are numerous nifAESE which de net
accord with it. |

Longsightedness and sbi tiene: — ‘That case a dakectine
vision which is called. longsightedness. arises.from the. crystalline
lens being too flat; the rays, proceeding from-near, objects, instead
of converging \to-distinct, foci on the;retina, converge behind. it,
and. therefore, form no; distinct image. ,, This, defect, which 1 Js.an
ordinary. effect of -old.age, may be. remedied, by the, use.of a
convex lens, which enables,the,eye.to PRAPEERS DF a So as\to
form.a perfect image on, the. retina..,. AER, vreey oe

Shortsighted: persons are, unable to. see} at, a =dintapael and , are
obliged to bring.small., objects. very, near jthe eye, to. see them
distinctly. This,defect,; which,.often occurs in. young persons,
arises from the eye being too ,convex,.,from which, cause the, Tays
of, distant objects; converge to, foci: before they fall on ‘the retina.
The imperfection, may.-be/remedied, by, using a,;concaye, lens,
which renders, the rays, less converging and enables. them.to;form
a distinct picture at. the. bottom;of, the.eye...There are, other
cases of defective vision,-arising ., from, the; anal OAT of the
organ, but. these,are of: the, most, FUT PSA TOR ot ‘yifel


n wr Pemaler, a sense sometimes becomes morbidly Dente. 1g Heperden
(Comment. p- 292.) mentions a hemiplegic person whose smell” became greatly
heightened. Frequently we find such’ patients sensible "t6' the’ ¢rawl ling ‘of! the
minutest insect ‘on’ the arm! I lately attended a géentlemaw about: forty years of
age, who had‘suddenly' been attacked with hemiplegia, and in,bed hejheard, the
least sound at the-bottom.of. the house with.an, acuteness, which surprised, him,
and, could tell, the hour by .a watch placed on a table at such a distance from his
bed as to have rendered it impossible: for him to distinguish the hands when he was
in health. Dr. ‘Brachet relates that, when he was interne at the tt catrl in’ 1811,
the infirmier ‘of the surgical ward one day astonished him by the’ ‘extent which
his vision had acquired since the day before. The man could distinguish the
most’ minute objects’at an enormous: distance. 0Five hours,afterwards he felt a
slight headach,\and in:a few, hours more, was seized with a,thundering, apoplexy
(une apoplexie foudroyante), and died the next night. A fresh coagulum was
found in the right optic thalamus. The inflammation which had preceded this
effusion had irritated by its proximity a part of the brain. concerned in vision,
These were instances of longsightedness; but not of mere, longsightedness, but
general acuteness of sight, as the persons saw well not only at great distances,
but at small distances likewise.


SIGHT. oe


‘Optic nerves. — Such facts have’ been thought a reason for be-
lieving the decussation of the optic nerves partial, and some say
that the outer portion of the tractus optici goes to the*outer part
of the corrésponding nerves, and the inner to the inner portion of
the opposite. But Dr. Magendie divided from before backwards
the junction of the optic nerves, and found blindness induced. °
*’'The decussation of the optic ‘nerves is shown by blindness of
one eye being induced if ‘the nerve on ‘the same’ side is divided
anteriorly to the union;'and°of the opposite eye if the division is
made posteriorly to the union‘! or-by destruction of ‘an-eye’ caus-
ing the nerve of thé same’ side to’ waste'as'far as ‘the union, and
of the opposite side beyond the-union.? © Yet cases’ are on'record
where the wasting of the nerve’in loss of sight continued through-
out ‘on’ the'same’side} but’ such are probably suspicious.

The thalami optici are improperly named, as they do not give
origin to the optic nerves: ‘These may be’traced''to the anterior
corpora quadrigemina,” presstire’ or “disease of which’ produces
blindness, and’ which waste ifthe nerves waste. © ‘Sommerring

first noticed this in’ blind horses: Gall°confirmed his observations.
Dr. Vimont ‘states ‘that, on examining fourteen old ‘blind’ horses,
‘he found “the ‘anterior quadrigeminum' opposite ‘the blind eye
‘lessened ‘inal, ‘and °completely' atrophied’ in’ two.’ He then
cruelly took out the’ left eye of four’rabbits, the right of four
others, and both eyes of another. At the expiration of ten months
he killed them all, and found the right anterior quadrigeminum
much. smaller than.the left in the first four, the reverse in the

‘second *foéur;-and: both:the anterior, and posterior, much smaller in
the rabbit deprived of both eyes than the healthy tubercles of the
other eight. The optic nerve of all ‘the blind eyes had lost 3 of

‘its volume, and looked like the horn of a lantern. ” Dr. - Magendie
informed. Dr. Vimont that the atrophy of the tubercle occurs
much, more quickly in birds, and Dr. Vimont, found this to be the
fxating | | :

*-Drs. Carus nari satis nica EE sion Gall where bh posterior
alae einai ‘as’ thé roots of’ the olfactory pair, whereas he’ has


° ‘Précis de Physiologie; ta, p.'71.
/P Dr, Magendie, ‘1.\c.' ibid.
+ 9° Qn'the optic nerve consult Gall, 1c. Ato. t.is p. 113, sqq:
Ort. J. D. 290. Si.


QQ 3


580 SIGHT.


declared the opposite opinion on account of the existence of the
posterior quadrigemina in animals apparently destitute of olfac-
tory nerves. He believed that the posterior reinforced and pro-
tected the optic nerve as well as the anterior, but in a different
manner, since in different animals they are in different propor-
tions, and the posterior scarcely perceptible, if not absent, in
some whose vision is perfect. Nay, he believed that the greater
part of the corpora quadrigemina have: other offices relating to
the spinal chord below and to other cerebral parts than those con-
cerned in vision above. If the surface either of their anterior part,
of the bulb of the olfactory nerve, of the grey band on the'sides
of the fourth ventricle, or of the ganglion of the acoustic nerve, is
touched, no contraction ensues ; but injure them to a certain depth,
and convulsions take places The optic nerve is certainly not
derived, he says, from the tubercles only; the internal and ex-
ternal corpora geniculata, &c. give it many filaments.

Many recorded cases, as well as many in my ‘own practice,
prove that one half of the retina may be paralysed, while the
other half remains unaffected; and this effect may be common
to both eyes, or peculiar to one. Dr. Wollastont relates that
it twice occurred to him not to be able to see but on one side
of the axis of vision. The first time, the left side of each eye
was affected; he saw but the half of a man’s face or of any
object he looked at; and, in attempting to read the name JOHN-
SON over a door, he saw only.... SON, the commencement
of the name being totally obliterated from his view: the com-
plaint was of short duration. About nineteen years afterwards
the phenomenon recurred: this time, the right side of the eye,
about three degrees-from the centre of the retina, was affected,
and its duration was ten minutes. Two analogous cases are also
mentioned by Dr. Wollaston. Desmoulins™ states that M. Arago
has experienced this affection of vision three times: the first two
times, objects situated to the right of the axis of vision were in-
visible; the third time he saw objects on the right only of this
axis. The same author notices also the following remarkable
case. In consequence of a cerebral fever, the external side of the
left retina of M. de M became insensible: with this eye he


§ lic. 8vo. vi. p. 253. t Phil. Trans, 1824,
u Anatomie des systémes nerveux des antmaux @ vertébres, t.ii. p. 672»


SIGHT. 581


saw objects only situate to the left of the centre of vision, and,
as at the same time there was an outward deviation of the axis of
this eye, through a paralysis of the nerve of the third pair, when
he employed both eyes, he saw objects double; but, what was
still more singular, the right eye being closed, he saw with the
left eye the objects removed from twenty to twenty-five degrees
to the right of their real position.

If the fifth pair, which gives sensibility to the face, is divided,
the eye, nose, and tongue, lose their sense of touch, — ordinary
sensibility,—in common with the skin, and are not excited by me-
chanical or acrid stimulus as before.* In this experiment, the
pupil becomes greatly contracted in rabbits and guinea-pigs,
and dilated in cats and. dogs.” The retina has very little ordinary
sensibility, as Dr. Magendie showed by pricking and tearing it
with little or no pain; whence contraction of the pupil does not
follow the application of any stimulus excepting light. The third
pair, which is a nerve of motion, supplies, in common with the
fifth pair, the iris, and therefore Mr. Mayo found that division of
it, at least in cats and pigeons, causes dilatation of the pupil, like
division of the optic nerve; the dilatation arising in the former
case from the cerebral influence being no longer conveyed, and
in the latter from the cerebral influence being no longer excited.
On stimulating the ocular end of the third pair, divided in pigeons,
after removing the brain, he says that the iris suddenly acts: and,
on stimulating not the ocular, but the cerebral, end of a divided
optic nerve, the same thing happens. M. Fleurens says that
irritation of the superior quadrigemina causes contraction of the
iris, and extirpation of them its dilatation.

Judgment of colour.—Persons, all having excellent eyes, and see-
ing perfectly well, differ much in their powers of recognising per-
sons, finding their way, &c. In none of these points is the difference
so striking as with respect to judging of colours. It is by no means
uncommon to meet with individuals whose eyes appear excellent,
and whose sight is excellent, and who may judge of form and dis-
.tance correctly, but who cannot distinguish certain colours. Dr.
Nicholl describes a boy who confounded green with red, and called


* Dr. Magendie, 1.c.
¥ Dr. Magendie, l.c. Mr. Mayo informs us that, after death, in the cat and
pigeon the pupil is always dilated, and in the rabbit contracted. Outlines, &c.


QQ 4


582 SIGHT.


light. red and. pink, blue., His maternal grandfather, and one uncle,
had the same. imperfection... This uncle,was in the navy,,and,
having.a. blue, uniform..coat. and.waistcoat, purchased .a; pair .of
red breeches to match.2 . Dr. Nicholl mentions. a. gentleman who
could not distinguish green from red. |The grass in full, verdure _
always. appeared. to him. what, others. call.red;, and. ripe, fruit.on
trees he could not distinguish from the. leaves ;,. a, cucumber. and
a boiled lobster-were of the same colour in his sight; anda Jeek
resembled a_stick, of sealing-wax....,This person had.a brother, and
a niece —-.the daughter, of .another brother,.in a,similar, pre-
dicament.’,. Indeed, the, defect.hasfrequently occurred in several
members of the same-family, and frequently, has, been hereditary,
sometimes. passing over, a, generation, like, other peculiarities; of
structure. . It,is observed more frequently, perhaps,,in.men,;; In
the rarest and, most,extreme.cases. no; colour.is. distinguished, all
objects, appearing.in this respect.alike.,:. In-all the cases in which,
the paint Has been examined, the ngs: of the cranium under which,


bf amok PL Ws f°


~


iy Med. Chin Trans. ‘vol. vii.

*1,.€, Vol. ix. i case communicated to Dr. ‘Priestley wilt ‘68 found it in the
Phil. "Prans. 1777. “The man had two brothers* with the samé defect? “ Another
will'be found in thé voli ‘of 1778)" The gentlenian’s 's father) maternal uncle, one’
of his sisters, and two of her‘sons, had‘the same defects): Imthe' Phrenah: Trans, is
another by Dr; -Butter,; In the Manchester Memoirs, Vol.-y.3 are others. , » One such,
person, painted. aman’s head with a. green. beard sand. bive cheeks. dm oMr,, G.
Combe’s System, of Phrenology, and the Edinburgh Phrenological Transactions, are
mentioned ¢ one of three brothers and a cousin, who inherited it from ‘their maternal
grandfather, the intervening generation not having i it. “Professor Dugald: Stewart,
and’Mr. Troughton, as welll as many of his family, could notdistinguish colours); ’
and the) celebrated ‘instrument-maker: was ‘therefore prevented: from: applying
himself to execute any thing: inj which dt, was) necessary, to distinguish theni.,
Dr, Dalton, has the same defect... A-case of this.defect is recorded inthe din.
Phren. Trans. by Dr. Butter of Plymouth ; and, to show what irrational hostility.
is offered to phrenology by men of whom , we might expect better” things, I
must mention that the paper was sent to ‘the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, ?
but ‘that ‘the’ editor, Sir David’ Brewster, choosing’ that it should not "sap=
port phrenology, altered the title, without consulting: the anthor,ito Remarks»
on the: Insensibility, of the Eye.to certain Colours,| and. suppressed the. ‘phrenologi-
cal comments, .‘‘ for phvions reasons,’’ he says, .viz,, that, phrenology i is not a.
‘ substantial science.’ , Yet Sir David Brewster would wish to be considered a
philosopher in all. his intellectual and moral ‘doings. ‘Still more lamentable and.
very recent conduct with the view of suppressing phrenological ‘truth may be:

seen, in the case of The Edin. Med. and Surgical Journal. See The reget
Phrenological Journal, eheiiaad) 1886 3 and June, 1837, p.632."


SIGHT. 583


according to Gall, the organ for judging of the harmony of colours
is placed, is flat or depressed. I have seen several of these cases,
and in all this was the fact. In painters, remarkable for their ex-
cellence of colouring, this part is full or prominent. The con-
trast between this part of the forehead in a person who has the
defect, and in another excelling in the power of colouring, placed
side by side, is very striking.

Professor Dugald Stewart remarks that, “ in the power of con-
ceiving colours there are striking differences among individuals ;”
and ‘he does ‘not ascribe the difference to the eyes. “I am inclined
to suspect,” he says, ‘* that in the greater number of instances the
supposed defects of sight ought to be rather ascribed to a defect
in the ‘power of conception.”> "Mr. Stewart is ‘correct in exempt-
ing thé eye from blame, and ascribing the defect to a defect in
conception 5 but, since he has no idea‘ of a distinct faculty for
colours, he means conception in'general. © Yet, as the individuals
are not deficient in other conceptions, some reason must be given
for the deficiency of conception in this one point. He thinks it
arises “‘ probably in consequence, of some early habit of inatten-
tion,” Now this is sad trifling in a philosopher... What particular
attention do.children, who. distinguish colours accurately, bestow ?
Theydistinguish without: effort; and: those who. cannot, are not
only not proved to have been inattentive, but have, most probably,
been’ often extraordinarily attentive, in the hope ‘of seeing what
others can see. How should want of attention to this one point
run. in families. and be hereditary, passing through a generation,
&ee? \This isa specimen of the.errors of metaphysicians. » They
see, and generally acknowledge; that‘the brain‘is' the organ of the
mind; yetthey observe the faculties of the mind without even
once “considering the organ which ‘possesses, or is employed in the
working. of, these faculties. Gall examined the two together, and
we now know through, ‘him that local deficiency of brain both
exists where. the .power.of. distinguishing colours is deficient, and
is hereditary with this,deficiency. |

Motion of the’ eyes. — The eye | is'‘moved by six voluntary
muscles, — four’ straight, a superior, inferior, external, and in-
ternal; and two oblique, a superior, with its tendon running round
a pulley, and an inferior. |.


: Soieate of the Philosophy y of the Human Mind, ch, iii.


584 SIGHT.:


Left:eye, seen outside, the outer part of the orbit having been removed.


1,1. Portion of the upper part of the orbit belonging to the frontal bone.

_2. Section passing through the malar bone and. the malar process of the supe-
rior maxillary. .

3. Globe.

4. External rectus muscle. | eG byte

5. One of its two posterior insertions, running ‘to the small wing of the sphenoid.

6. The other of these insertions, running inwards to the cavernous grove.

7. Inferior rectus. é . piiihatrhlathe hie

8. Its posterior insertion.

9. Superior ‘rectus. ' -

10. Its posterior insertion in the small wing of the sphenoid. ©

11. Superior oblique. — i Se dastinn: 2 na

12. Its reflected tendon. * "5 I vin wold

13. Inferior oblique... it a

14. Internal rectus. p Pettis ise

15. Levator palpebre superioris.

16. Its posterior insertion.

17. Optic nerve. * ne

18. Part of the sphenoid.

‘The motions of ‘the eyes which result from the’actions of these
muscles were investigated, and the mental perceptions attending
them analysed, with considerable success, by Dr. Wells.’ Sir
Charles Bell long afterwards took up the subject, and published
some opinions which appear to me altogether groundless.© He


fancies that the pair of pathetic or intérnal motor nerves belong to


¢ Phil. Trans. 1823.


SIGHT. 585


his respiratory sct and are for expression, and that the two oblique
muscles have the same destination, and are not voluntary ; while
the four recti muscles and their common motor and abducent
pairs of nerves are voluntary. Now, in the first place, all the
objections that I formerly made to his views of a respiratory set
of nerves for expression (p. 459. sqq. supra) hold good in the
present case, which is merely a particular instance of those views.
The absurdity of applying the term respiratory to nerves and
muscles of the eye is too manifest to require comment. In the
next place, he conceives that the two oblique muscles are never
voluntary; and he contends that the superior draws the pupil
downwards and outwards, the inferior upwards and inwards.
Other ‘writers¢ say downwards and inwards, and upwards and
outwards; but he agrees with all, that their, combined action
draws the eye towards the nose, though I hardly understand
how, on either supposition, such a motion inwards can result.
‘Now, we can move the eyes downwards and outwards, and up-
wards and inwards, at pleasure: we can also make them approach
each other at pleasure, and it is a mere assumption, and a very
improbable assumption, that we do this by the internal straight
muscles, and not by the combined action of the two obliques.
He mentions experiments in which he divided the superior oblique,
and another in which he divided the inferior oblique; and he asserts
that the voluntary motions were unaffected.. The poor animal no
doubt moved its eye upwards and downwards, inwards and outwards,
as it had four muscles left for these purposes: but we, of course,
have no information given us that an attempt was made to in-
duce the animal to approximate both eyes together, as in looking
now at a distant and now at a near object. in the same line; and
this I believe to be the use of the oblique muscles, just as it is
of the straight to act when we look in different directions. He
divided the superior oblique of the right eye, held open the
eyes, waved, the, hand, before, them, and found the right eye
move upwards and inwards, and, the, other scarcely, so in that
direction, and ane dog ‘‘ seemed;to haye a difficulty in bringing
it down again.” But this did not show. that the muscle was
involuntary. If the superior oblique moves. the eye downwards
and outwards, its division explained, on his own views of the
effects of these mnscles, why the animal could not move the eye


4 Manuel d’ Anatomie comparée, par Jules Cloquet, p. 139. sq.


586 SIGHT.


simply’ inwards ; “and why the’ inferior’ pulled it inwards and
tipwards, being rio longer antagonised' by the uppér; jtist’ as
the muscles OF one half the face tat! the features to their’ side
if their antagonists of the other: half are paralysed. Pave ‘One
involuntary. ~ He says that when we wink, we draw the’ eyes up —
under the upper lid. “Now we can‘ wink’ voliititarily : ‘and, if the
eyes do ascend in winking, which I do’ not believe &, why should
they not ‘ascend by the superior: ‘Straight inuisclés ?"' His ideas’én
the action of the oblique muscles seem all ‘confusion! At one
time he says that the superior oblique moves the pupil downwards
and outwards, the inferior upwards and ‘inwards, and” that" “their
combined action draws the eye-ball towards the ‘nove (p31) + £

at another (p. 327. sq.), that the eye rolls upwards and inwards,
When’ they are balanced : ‘at another (p. 314), that, ay the superior
‘is prevented from’ acting’ “by” being divided, the’ eyé equally
‘turns upwards ‘and inwards ; and, indeed, (p.315.) that the inferior
gains in’ power of elevating the eye-ball’ by the ‘division of “its
“opponent the superior, ‘and’ that is its own’ proper “Action: “In
‘many places (pp. 294. sq. 298. 303. 316. 326.) he: speaks’ ‘simply
‘of the eyes turning upwards i in’ winking and’ sleeping, ‘and’refers
this to the combined action’ of the two obliques; néither ‘of which,
nor both’ together, aré able, “or aré’ supposed by him, to simply
‘elevate thé eye. ‘He is farther \ confused, ‘for, although? he’ con-
tends that the obliques are involuntary’ muscles and ‘act’ in wink-
‘ing and for’ expression in the: waking’ ‘state, ' he’ Says “¢ that’ in
sleep, faintness, “and insenisibility, the eye- -ball'is given’ ‘up to’ the
“one (the oblique),” and’ in’ watchfulness, ” and the’ full exercise of
‘the’ organ, it “is given’ up to the’ influence: are the’ other Vie
‘straight) class of muscles.” (p. 292:) ~ joa, bas, .yibetseq

fran ign I peceuiie that, when the Cortreat iMioves sutaghe under'the

iS 38 SOMOS

) ed at © To show that, i in. rakeue, ae ork turns up as She evelttn close, PR iend
a case of . inflammation of the cornea through the immobility of the eyes and
? ‘eyelids, _ ‘If the eye could have moved, the immobility of the eyelids would not
have had this effect: nor would it have resulted if the ‘eyelids only: could have
moved. But this case is no proof that the eye naturally turns tip’ in winking,
‘and’that the motion ‘of’ the lids alone is! not sufficient’ to anni the eye Moist
and prevent inflammation. | [SINSMOWM Mis

f I, make the references to the paper as aroha with others ¥y him in one

octavo yolume, under the title of dn, Exposition of the Natural System of the
Nerves of the Human Body. 1824,


SIGHT. 587


upper or lower eyelid on the sudden approach of any thing to it,
the motion.is. from fear, and.as instinctive, and expressive, and
respiratory { as any.motion canbe: yet it is accomplished. by
the superior.or, inferior. straight muscle of the organ, — both
voluntary, muscles...

_ Not. only do,,the motions ‘of the straight muscles continually
express. the passions, but the abducent, or external, is actually
the, antagonist. of the two, obliques when, in, Sir C. Bell’s own
words, ;“* their. combined action, draws the eye-ball towards the
nose ;”’ just.as the two obliques. when acting separately, are the
antagonists, of each other: and the circumstance, of this muscle
antagonising. not only, the. internal straight muscle but the com-
bined. action of the, two. okbanes. may explain why. it has a dis-
tinct, nerve.

He, further a itaclae that the. eye-ball moves. so_, that the
cornea always, rises. under, the; upper, lid, the, moment.that the
eyelids close. (ps 294), and. in. some places; he says it not. only
rises, but. moves)inwards..,(p. 328.) _Lhaye raised the upper eye-
lid of persons whose. eyes . were, shut, and. found,.the. cornea
sometimes.raised under -the upperplid,, but,.as often depressed
under;,the lower lid.,, I_haye,, often, looked, at. persons .whese
_ eyes, were.closed,. and) seen the cornea projecting at .the, centre
_ of the upper eyelid, in, the same line as when the eyes, were open.
He states. that,“ if we fix one,eye.upon an.object, and close the
other, with.the. finger i in, such. a,manner, as.,to. feel .the, convexity
of the cornea, through the eyelid, when we shut the, eye that, is
open, ,.we shall. feel that the; cornea, of the other. eye is instantly
elevated ;, and that jit, thus. rises and falls in sympathy with the
eye that is closed_and opened,” I have, made ;this experiment
repeatedly, and not found my.closed eye ascend when I closed
the other : nor, have .my..friends, who observed the cornea pro-
jecting at the closed eye, seen any ascent of it on my closing
‘the’ Other: Indeed, ‘according’ to’ him,’ the’ closed “eye ought
already to have ascended when it was closed, and thus could not
be felt or seen ascending when the other eye was closed. He says
that, Jif, closing, the.eyes opposite..a window and still seeing the
light. through, the lids, we. attempt»to) close.them farther,; we shall
be in momentary darkness, because during the effort) the) eye-
palls are then turning up.’ But there is sufficient reason for our
darkness in the’ circumstancé of the eyelids becoming thickly


588 SIGHT.


folded during the attempt to close them farther. In fact, if my
cornea is felt at this moment, it is found just where it was
before ; and the circumstance. of light. being seen, although ‘the
eyes were, shut (at first, disproves. Sir C. Bell’s statement, that,
“‘ at the instant in, which the eyelids are closed; the eye-ball
makes a movement which raises the cornea under the upper
lid.” He also says that, if the eyelid is prevented from closing
by palsy or adhesion, the sudden approach of any thing to the
eye causes the cornea to ascend. . Ihave no doubt that it will
ascend.or descend, in, order to: get. out.of yaa from the ap-
proaching body... |

But. the crowning. musedan of the whole is that one of the ob-
liques isnot supplied by a nerve of the respiratory set. The
superior oblique is. supplied by the fourth—the pathetic or in-
ternal motor —a pair evidently of voluntary motion, but, which
is called by. Sir..C. Bell. respiratory. . Neither this, however,
nor any other respiratory nerve goes to the inferior oblique,
which iis most .unluckily supplied by the third only. Further, the
oblique. muscle, which is not supplied by the fourth or any
other-respiratory (I ‘am really ashamed of thus repeating: the
word in so absurd a sense) nerve, but by a nerve of volun-
tary motion, is.the more important muscle of the\ two in‘ turn- .
ing, the, .eye upwards and inwards. For, not only does he ‘con-
tend that this is its ~proper action (p. 312.), but that; when the
superior oblique is divided and it and its nerve rendered spy


8 Sie C. Bell does ee, aye to this difficulty ; + but t quietly adyances an opinion
which he may at any time adduce as his means of getting over ‘it, should others
discover it. He fancies that’ nerves relax as well as contract muscles ; and
“¢ that the ‘influence’ of ‘the. fourth nerve is, on certain ‘occasions, to cause a re-
laxation of, the) muscle to which it goes,” in which: case the'! eye-ball must / be
rolled-upwards.,,,Thus the inferior oblique muscle acts because the fourth, pair
has. relaxed the, superior... The plain answer to this _is,. first, that the inferior
oblique muscle acts not only when it is unopposed, but when the superior oblique
is in action. Sir C. Bell speaks of their combined action, and it must move in
this by the positive stimulus of some nerye. Secondly, it of course is furnished
‘with'a nerve, ‘and! this is'a branch of the third — not a respiratory ‘pair, but a
pair of voluntary motion that supplies the straight muscles of the eyes’ In
fact, to,suppose a, muscle, not belonging to a cavity or canal, to,move without
an exciting nerve, would be impossible; and, were such a muscle: to have no
nerve, its muscular structure would be useless —a merely elastic substance
would have answered the purpose of lengthening under opposition and short-
ening when no longer stretched.


SIGHT. 589


-the lower gains in its power of elevating the ball, which turns
upwards and inwards so forcibly as to be brought, down again
with difficulty by an animal (p. 314. sq.); and, although he had,
throughout his paper, ascribed the elevation of the eyes, when
closed, to the two obliques (p. 317.), he, at the end of it (p. 332.),
ascribes the elevation to the inferior oblique only, and refers to
the page in which he had ascribed it to both, as if he had there
ascribed it to the inferior alone.

The straight and oblique muscles, there can be no doubt, are
equally voluntary. The straight are clearly for the direction of
the eyes, and we become acquainted with the distances, magni-
tudes, and positions ‘of objects, by the sensations which accom-
pany the motions of the muscles of the eye, or, in other words,
from the consciousness of muscular effort, ) We owe this important
principle to Bishop Berkeley, who, in his excellent essay on this sub-
ject 4, thus expressed himself more than.a century ago: — “ Now,
it ities already shown that distance is suggested to the mind by
the mediation of some other idea, which is itself perceived in the
act of seeing; it remains that'we inquire what zdeas or sensations
there be that attend vzszon, unto which we may suppose the zdeas
of distance are connected, and by which they are introduced
into the mind. And frst, it'is certain by experience, that when
-we look at a near object with both eyes, according as it approaches
or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our eyes; by
lessening or widening the distance between the pupils. This
disposition or turn of the eyes is attended with a sensation, which
seems to me to be that which in this case brings the idea of
greater or lesser distance into the mind. Not that there is any
natural or necessary connection, between the sensation we per-
ceive by the turn of the eyes, and greater or lesser distance: but
because the mind has, by constant experience, found the different
sensations corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes,
to be attended each with a different degree of distance in the
object: there has grown an habitual or customary connection
between these two sorts of ideas: so.that. the mind no sooner
perceives the sensation arising from the different turn it gives the
eyes, in order to bring the pupils nearer, or farther asunder, but
it withal perceives the different idea of distance which was wont
to be connected with that sensation. Just as upon hearing a


® An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, sect. 16. sqq. 1709.


590 SIGHT.


certain sound, the zdea is immediately suggested to the un-
derstanding, which custom had united with it.” Dr. Wells, in
1792, extended this principle of Berkeley’s, and proved that
the apparent direction also of an object which sends its picture
to any given point of the retina depends upon the state of
action existing at the same time in the muscles of the eye;
and he adduced many and convincing proofs that it cannot be
altered except by a change in the state of. that action. Thus,
an ocular spectrum impressed on any part of the retina does
not appear to alter its position, when it is forcibly pressed aside
in any. direction; but, whenever the voluntary muscles act,
it is referred by the mind to a different point of external space.
That the apparent distances and positions of objects are sug-
gested to the mind by sensations accompanying the motion of
the muscles of the eyes, is a principle then clearly stated both
by Berkeley and Wells. It has, however, by many been con-
sidered the discovery of Sir C. Bell, because he reproduced it,
in 1823, above a century after Berkeley and thirty years after
Wells, though he has not advanced a single original argument in
its favour, and has unpardonably suppressed all reference to the
philosophers by whose reasonings and researches it had been
established. *

Prof. Wheatstone has recently made a series of curious expe-
riments, from which it appears that the sensations which accom-
pany the converging and the parallel motions of the eyes are so
dissimilar, that it is highly improbable that these two sets of
motions are effected by the same muscles. He 1s of opinion that
the parallel motions of the eyes are governed by the straight


1 An Essay upon Single-Vision with Two Eyes. 1792. p. 56. sq. p. 70. sqq. of
an edition of this and some other writings, with his autobiography, 1818.

Kk Let any one read Wells (pp. 55—57.) and Sir C. Bell (pp. 318—323.),
and his eyes will rise.most expressively, by the action, ] presume, of the superior
straight muscles, .

Too many of the anatomical and physiological papers in the Philosophical
Transactions, from the time of the first contributions of the glorious burner of
John Hunter’s precious and voluminous manuscripts to the present, reflect no
credit upon those medical members of the council of the Royal Society who re-
commended their publication. But the poverty or errors of papers disfigure
the Transactions, to my view, less than the parade of old facts and opinions as
new, without the slightest reference to their authors; and this is a greater
reflection upon the medical members of the council, when the real authors
were distinguished Fellows of the Royal Society.


‘


SIGHT. 591


_muscles, , while.the ,converging motions» are’ regulated by the
oblique: The experiments from which /Sir -C..Belloinfers’ that
the oblique)are not | voluntary muscles prove only that ‘their
functions are not the same as,those of the straight muscles.’ If
Professor, Wheatstone, is correct in the functions which he assigns
tothe oblique. muscles, it is easy:tosee: that they: have:an:appro-
priate, office under, voluntary control, though: their ames ac-
tions do not. aasint the-straight-muscles.)s: > qooxs betdth


3


Light, like héat, ‘is anagent by which all vegetables and animals are intended
to be influenced. » As the terms) heat) and* cold are only’ relative,’ and ‘no tem-
perature is; so, low but that there might. be»a lower, and the plant, which lives
in ‘the snow only of polar regions; | would still perish ifthe. temperature were
lower ‘than i it is; so light really exists in darkness, — no darkness might not be
darker, and’ no Bide or animal can be totally deprived of light. Deprived , of
light, “a” platit wotild Tose its’ characteristic form, colour, taste, and odour, and.
puzzle: the best» botanist : » persons ‘deprived of light! ¢row pale ‘and sickly 5 but
inthis case; whether the place bea mine; a: narrow streetj/or a prison, the want
of fresh air, and in regard to prisoners the depressed condition of the mindy and
occasionally . the deficiency | or bad quality of food, must.also, be taken into,¢on-
sideration: and, if pregnant women “confined in dungeons often produce mon-
sters, the state of mind cannot but be a powerful cause of the aberration. Dr.
‘Edwards’bas proved that; by éxcluding tadpoles from the light, they will grow to
double-or triple the size that tadpoles ‘usually attain, ‘but aré not: metarnorphosed
into frogs... He thinks, that the-proteus anguinus, which, like tadpolés; has lungs
and gills, is but the first, stage of .an.animal whichis prevented from becoming
perfect by inhabiting the subterraneous waters of Carniola. He concludes there-
fore that light has a great influence upon ‘the human ‘body’; and ascribes the
observation of Humboldt, that; among: millions of» Caribs, Mexicans, “Peru-
vians, &c-, not-one instance of deformity appeared, to the exposure of their body
‘to light, and much-of the sickliness of imprisonedpersons and’scrofulous children
living in close streets to the want of light. (De ?Influence, &c.°Pliv. €15.)°
‘¢ Vegetables, though they:have no nerves, guided’ by light; open and close their
flowers and their leaves,” \ ‘In’ plants with’ compound ‘leaflets,”” says’ Professor
Lindley, “ the leaflets fold together while the petiole is recurved ‘at the approach
of night; and the leaflets again expand and raise: ‘themselves ‘at the ‘return of
day. In others the leaves converge over the flowers, as if to shelter those more
delicate organs from the chill airof night. «The flowers of the crovus and similar
plants.expand beneath the bright beams of the sun, but close as soon as these are’
withdrawn. The cenotheras unfold their blossoms to the dews of evening, and

RR | '


592 SIGHT.


wither away at the approach of day. Some silenes roll up their petals in the
day, and expand them at night. The florets of numerous Composite, and the
petals of the genus Mesembryanthemum are erect in the absence of the sun, but
become reflexed when acted upon by the sun’s beams.” ‘ Plants of corn, in
which there is little indication of sleep when grown singly, exhibit that pheno-
menon very distinctly when observed in masses: their leaves become flaccid and
their ears droop at night.”” “ A flower removed from the shade will often expand
beneath a lamp, just as it will beneath the sun itself.” De Candolle found he
could induce plants to acknowledge an artificial day and night by exposure to
the light of candles. Still, Prof. Lindley remarks, there must be some other cause
than light, because many flowers close in the afternoon while the sun shines on
them, and the petals of others fold up under a bright illumination. (Introduction
to Botany, book ii. chap. xii.)

Just, however, as different plants require different temperatures, and the
protococcus nivalis flourishes and secretes in snow, so different plants require
different degrees of light. Humboldt, near the Canary islands, saw a marine
plant of a grass green brought up from a depth of about 190 feet, where the
light could not have been stronger than that of a candle at the distance of a foot.
He found several green plants growing in the dark mines of Freiberg ; but there
the atmosphere was peculiar, — charged with hydrogen or alarge quantity of
nitrogen ; and Senebier remarked that plants do not completely lose their green
colour in darkness, if they are supplied with a certain quantity of hydrogen, —an
observation not verified in the experiments of Decandolle. (Physiologie Végétale,
par M. Aug. Pyr. Decandolle. Paris, 1832. t. ii. p. 899. sq.)

Zoophytes prove themselves sensible to light; some by expanding or con-
tracting according to its intensity, or by placing themselves on the side_of a vessel
where the light is strongest. One, the veretillum cynomorium, seeks the darkest
places, and contracts as soon as light is admitted to it.

- Most entozoa, living in the dark recesses of other animals and imbedded in
what they feed upon, require no eyes, and are not known to have them. . Nor
the acephalous or bivalve mollusca, as the oyster, or the cirrhopodous, as the
barnacle, the hind part only of which protrudes from the shell... Many minute
polygastric animalcules seek and enjoy the light ; and, on the front of their bodies,
small red spots are generally discovered, Even monads, regarded as the lowest of
animals, haye them. In other infusoria these spots are united into one. These
receive the impression of light only, and, as the polygastric animaleules move
rapidly and, prey on others, perhaps not merely light, but forms are distinguished.
No nervous filament has hitherto been detected in such creatures; but, as they
haye impressions from an external organ, desire and will, they must have some-
thing equivalent to a nervous system, This is the first form of the eye in the
larvee of insects when the organ begins to develope, and in the young of higher
animals ; and, when an optic nerve is added, this is placed behind the pigment of
the red spot, showing the spot to be the organ of vision. In the nais proboscidea,
and many of the lower tribes of annelida, an optic.nerve is added to the pig-
ment; but nothing more is discoverable. Many of those entozoa or rather
epizoa which live on the external parts of others, on the skin, eyes, gills, &c. as
the ergasilus gibbus, which is attached in myriads to the gills of freshwater fishes,


SIGHT. 593


have eyes, numerous or single, single originally, or several united into one, but lying
flat on the surface, —sessile. So with most free annelida : in the planaria viganensis
there is a single row of about forty eyes. In addition to the pigment and nerve
there isa lens. In different species of gasteropoda, as the slug, snail, limpet, eyes
are situated at the base, middle, or extremity of their tentacula. The eye of the
helix pomatia has within its pigment a transparent semifluid substance, and even
another transparent body shaped like a lens. The murex tritonis and voluta
eymbrium have also an iris forming a pupil. Among the articulated animals
we find the lucid spots already mentioned, called also simple eyes and. stemmata
conglomerate eyes, or clusters of these; and compound eyes, or a large assem-
blage of small tubes each with its own humours, retina, and cornea ; together
with eyes supplied each with separate lenses and retin, but having one common
cornea. Among myriapods we have examples of the conglomerate eye; in the
scolopendra there are twenty contiguous circular lenses arranged in five lines,
with one larger eye behind the rest, like a sentinel; in the millipede, there are
twenty-eight, arranged in a triangle of seven rows, each having one eye fewer
than the row above. In the larva state insects have only stemmata if they are
destined for a complete metamorphosis ; but, if to an incomplete, they have both
compound and simple eyes. Some zocphytes, being free in one state have eyes,
which they lose on being metamorphosed and no longer free, when eyes would
be useless. Except some parasitic insects and five species of ants, all insects
have compound eyes, generally one on each side of the head, forming a
globular mass of from fifty to some thousands, even twenty. or thirty thousand
minute eyes closely pressed together, and placed on a central bulb which is a
part of the optic nerve. They are cylinders or cones, while their external part
or cornea is the base, usually hexagonal, like the cells of a honeycomb, because
this form allows uniformity of arrangement with the greatest economy of space.
The united bases or cornee are an hemispherical convexity; under each cornea
is an almost. conical lens. ‘Each cornea is covered by smooth, epidermis, just as
-our cornea is covered by conjunctiva, with its apex backwardsjtowards the nerve,
and a-portion of chorioid pigment lies between the cornea and lens, with an
aperture in the centre, constituting a rudimentary iris, which in the grey dragon
fly has been seen to contract and dilate ;-and between it and the cornea are.a
little space and a drop of aqueous humour. The pigment runs backwards
around the lens, separating each cylindrical compartment. -The apex of the lens
is met by the endof a filament of the optic nerve, running through a vitreous
humour; and Dr. Wollaston found the focal distance to correspond accurately
with the length of the tube, so that an image falls exactly upon the retina. These
multiplicities of cornez in all directions compensate for the want of sensibility in
the eyes ofinsects. There are often simple detached sessile eyes also, equally mo-
tionless: and the purpose of the presence of both kinds is unknown, There is
-no apparatus of defence, —no eyelids, eyelashes, or tears, except that hair some-
times grows from between the cornez ; and these are compensated for: by the
great hardness and insensibility of the cornea, which allows it to be brushed
with the hairs of legs or other moveable parts. Branches of a trachea have
been traced into each kind of eye. In the arachnida the optic nerve expands
into a cup-like form behind a hyoloid membrane and vitreous humour.


RRQ


594 SIGHT.


The eyes of crustacea are compound and immoveable except in the higher
orders, in which they are placed on peduncles and moved by muscles; and one
crab has the peduncle jointed at one spot, so that the eye can be moved in
various directions, like the arms of a telegraph. In those crustacea which are
called monoculi, the eye is of the fourth class,— many lenses behind one cornea,
and placed in a socket, in which muscles exist for its motion... Allusion has
been already made to the eyes of mollusca, When they can be useful they exist,
but are always simple and solitary ; they have always a lens, and approach very
closely to the eyes of fishes and. higher vertebrated classes, The sepiz, indeed,
besides a large and very convex lens, exceedingly hard at its centre, have a
hemispherical vitreous humour, a chorioid, an iris with a kidney-shaped pupil, but
no cornea, the integuments of the head being continued over the iris, reflected upon
the edges of its pupil, and covering the external surface of the lens.—Fishes
have eyes similar to the sepiz, but possess a cornea, which, as in all aquatic
animals, on account of the small difference there can be between its refractive
power and the water they inhabit, however great its convexity, is nearly flat.
They require no aqueous humour, except a little to preserve the iris free. The
vitreous is nota body of sufficient density to be very important. The globe is
hemispherical, the lens nearly spherical and very dense, and more and more so
towards its centre. It consists of concentric layers of fibres, the fibres of each
layer being serrated and locked into another side by side, . The pupil is
large, and the iris nearly motionless. The outer shining layer of the chorioid
passes over the front of the iris and gives it a pearly lustre; the dark inner
layer lines its posterior surface. _ Their situation renders all eyelids and lachry-
‘mal apparatus superfluous; and they have only a covering of the common
integuments over the cornea. The sclerotic is of extraordinary thickness and
hardness, and contains fat between itself and the retina. As fish live in a dark
medium their eyes are large, particularly if they live 300 or 400 fathoms below
the surface, The eyes of fish which burrow in mud. are small; sometimes
rudimental or imperceptible. _ The optic nerves sometimes decussate, sometimes.
simply lie across each other, sometimes one passes through a hole in the other.
Amphibious reptiles, being destined to live on land and in water, have eyes
intermediate between those of fish and of land animals. Their eyes are large,
possessed of little aqueous humour, and therefore the cornea is comparatively
flat, especially in those which are the most in water; the lens is thick in the
direction of the axis of the eye; as they are sometimes out of the water they
have eyelids, the lower larger and more moveablethan the upper, together with
a third eyelid or membrana nictitans, In land. reptiles, the structure recedes
from that of the eye of fishes and approaches to what is observed.in birds; the

- cornea is more convex, the aqueous and vitreous humours more abundant, and
-the lens less spherical; two moveable eyelids, a membrana nictitans, straight
and oblique muscles, and a lachrymal apparatus exist. In some ophidian rep-
tiles, as serpents, the skin of the eyelids passes over. the eyes and their appen-
dages, and this portion of it is therefore shed with the rest: one small tribe of
them, comprehending eels, have a membrana. nictitans like saurian reptiles.
-In some chelonian reptiles, as the tortoise and turtle, and some of the saurians,
as the crocodile, a circle of imbricated plates of bone is seen at the fore part of


SIGHT, 595


the sclerotic, and supports the iris; within the sclerotic of some there is fate In
the gigantic ichthyosaurus, which formerly inhabited the ocean, but is now ex-
tinct, the same is found. The chamelion has very projecting eyes, to which
the light is admitted through a minute vertical slit in the skin, which forms. but
one lid, the upper and lower being united; and each eye can be turned ina
variety of directions independently of the other: there is also a membrana nic-
titans nearly as large as in birds.

The wonderful adaptation which is observed throughout nature, in the most
minute point, to the purpose for which every thing was intended, presents us in
birds with eyes the most remote in form and structure from those of fishes, and
exactly fitted for the rare medium which they inhabit; the difference between
which and the aqueous humour of the eye is so great, that this is sufficient to
refract the rays of light powerfully. The aqueous humour is, therefore, so
copious that the cornea, which is thin, is very convex; and, to prevent the
sclerotic from being unduly expanded, and the prominence of the cornea lost, a.
circular series of fifteen or twenty quadrangular, moveable, imbricated bony
plates are placed around its edge, between the two plates of the sclerotic: from
being imbricated, they are much less liable to fracture than a bony ring. The
tough posterior part of the sclerotic forms a large hemisphere almost occupied
by the abundant vitreous humour ; while the lens, not being so requisite for re-
fraction, is flattened, smaller, and less dense. The iris and lens are necessarily
ata great distance from the cornea, by which arrangement the refracting powers
are susceptible of great variation, and the animal sees well at the most different
distances. Not only were these powers necessary, but a large field of vision ;
and therefore the cornea is very prominent, and the eyes of great size compared
with the head, and placed laterally upon it. Yet they are less moveable than in
quadrupeds ; but the reason of this is the length of their neck and extreme mo-
bility of ‘their head. ‘The chorioid coat, lined with a black pigment of globules
with a transparent centre, sends a prolongation called marsupium or pecten,
puckered ‘and folded, from the entrance of the optic nerve through the vitreous
‘humour, and to the capsule of the lens, for some purpose unknown, unless it
be to supply copious vessels for secretion, to darken the eye in the blaze of the
sun, or, if muscular, to affect the shape and position of the lens, and thus
adapt it for vision in great variations of distance. The iris has various bright
colours, arid is wonderfully mobile, and thought to be voluntary, in parrots. The
“membrana nictitans, or moveable semitransparent fold of the conjunctiva at the
inner corner of the eye, is of great size and moved by two strong muscles in
order to keep the tears constantly diffused over the eye in the rapid course of
birds through the air, and to protect ‘it fully against sudden light. It returns
‘to its place by mere elasticity. We have a rudiment of it in our own inner
eanthus. The eyes of mammalia agree generally with our own; but, as some .
of this'class fly, some inhabit the water, some are amphibious, and some burrow
in'the dark, they are necessarily of great variety. They are generally small in
“those bulky animals whose food requires not to be discovered at a distance, as the
elephant, rhinoceros, and hippopotamus : the eye of the elephant is not above two
inchesin diameter ; of the whale, not above the 200th part of the length of its body.
They are small in moles and shrews; so small in the mole, that Dr. Magendie


ReR'S


596 SIGHT.


denied the existence of an optic nerve in this animal.* In the zemni, or blind
rat, the integuments, overspread with hair and of uniform thickness, cover the
whole side of the head, and under it a black spot only is found, a mere rudiment
and useless. In these cases, the sense of hearing is extremely acute ; and both it
and other senses in the bat, which has very small eyes, though a nocturnal animal.
For those which prey by night, as well as those which have to see at a distance in
order to pursue or avoid pursuit, as the carnivora, rodentia, and ruminantia, have
largeeyes. The pupil is transverse in many ruminants whose head inclines down-
wards, so that they can see extensively to the side and backwards when feeding :
while in' those which spring from a height, or climb, it is frequently perpen-
dicular, so that their vision is extensive upwards and downwards. In almost
all the inferior tribes, just as is generally the case in fishes, reptiles, and birds, they
are placed laterally in the head, with two independent fields of vision, the optic
axes forming a very obtuse angle together, so as to give a very large view. As
we ascend towards the quadrumana, the optic axes form a smaller angle,— the
two fields of vision approach, so that both eyes can be directed simultaneously
to the same object; and the same is noticed in nocturnal quadrupeds, and in
owls; and in us the axes are more nearly parallel than in any other mam-
malia, the fields of vision coincide in almost all their extent, and precision of
visual impressions is thus augmented. In carnivorous quadrupeds, the back


* Not only did Dr. Magendie deny this, but M. Serres, doing the same thing,
declared that the mole and several others saw by means of other nerves than the
optic, and thus argued that one part of the nervous system could perform the
functions of another. ‘ The sense of smell,”’ says he, “‘ can be transported from one
nerve to another, according to the ingenious remark of Professor Duméril. From
the observations of Scarpa, Cuvier, Jacobson, and Treveranus, hearing may be
partly performed by the fifth pair. From my researches on the mole, chryso-
chlore, shrew mouse, zemni, proteus, &c., these animals see by some other nerve
than the optic. Is it not such facts as these that gave M. Cuvier the idea of the
general law which he has stated, of the difference of the functions of nerves
depending rather upon the-different organisation of the parts to which they are
distributed, than upon their own nature.” Gall observes that M. Serres
must have forgotten the remark in his treatise on the difference of nerves (MON
traité sur la différence des nerfs, in his 4to work, t. i. p. 127.), that Cuvier dis-
avowed this idea in his Comparative Anatomy, p. 492., where he says, * analogous:
parts constantly receive their nerves from the same pair in all animals, whatever
be the situation of the parts, however circuitous the course which the nerve has
to take. Analogous nerves have always a similar distribution: always go to
_ the same parts. Even those small pairs whose distribution is the most limited,
and which might easily be supplied by others, as the fourth and sixth, preserve
their existence and office.” Gall then states that he has examined the mole and
found an optic nerve, though extremely small; and adds that M. Baily has
confirmed his observations, and demonstrated the nerve to St. Hilaire and Cuvier.
Naturalists now agree with Gall. (Gall, 1. c. 8vo. t. vi. p. 307. sqq-)


SIGHT. 597


part of the chorioid has not the black pigment of other parts, but a pigmentum
lucidum or a tapetum, shining with a blue or green metallic lustre. In mammalia,
to compensate for the smaller extent of motion in the head, the eye has more
means of motion than in birds. In aquatic mammalia, the eye has many affinities
with the structure of the organ in fishes. In cetaceous animals, for example,
the cornea is flat, the aqueous humour inconsiderable; the lens large, dense,
and spherical. Intermediate forms of the organ are observed in the semi-
aquatic, — the walrus, seal, beaver, otter. <‘‘ Thus,” says my able colleague,
“‘we observe these complicated optical instruments, the most universal and
the noblest organs of sense, gradually advancing to perfection from the monad
to the man, where all their internal essential parts, and all their external
accessory apparatus, are the most exquisitely finished and adjusted; and it is
chiefly through these means that he is enabled to provide for his wants, to acquire
the materials of thought, and to enjoy the sublime spectacle of nature.’”? — Dr.
Grant, ll. cc. See also Dr. Roget, 1. c.


598


CHAP. XXVII.


SLEEP. .


“ Tue faculties both of feeling and motion, possessed by the”
brain, ‘‘ are so fatigued by their exertions in the day, that rest is
necessary during the night to recruit them by means of sleep * —
the image of death,” as it has been termed ; for in it we Cease to
be cognisant of the world around and of our own existence, and
lie motionless. Mechanical contact, temperature, savours, odours,
light, and sound are no longer felt unless strong; nor the in-
ternal feelings of hunger, thirst, &c.; thought ceases, and, from
the general suspension of volition, gravity, no longer opposed by
contracted muscles, produces its full effect, the head falls for-
wards or to one side, the upper eyelid, the lower jaw, the ex-
tremities drop, and the body sinks, as far as circumstances allow
it, into the horizontal posture. This state may come on in a mo-
ment, or in a more or less gradual manner, and it may come on
gradually for a time and at length suddenly. If gradually, we
feel tired ; find attention and muscular volition more and more dif_i-
cult, so that we imperfectly understand what we are hearing, read-
ing, or thinking of, or what is passing around us: we speak slowly,
imperfectly, and unconnectedly, till we cease to speak at all;
we desire to think, perceive, and make the least exertion, no
longer, — are drowsy. If at the same time we have a reason for
keeping awake, we make great and repeated efforts to open our
eyes, to elevate the lower jaw, and to raise and balance our head
and trunk, perhaps to the great amusement of others: we take


* « Consult, besides authors hereafter to be recommended, Dr. Darwin, Zoo-
momid, t. i. Sect. xviii.

And Wienholt, Heilkraft des thierischen Magnetismus, vol. ii. p.. 437. sqq.

Fr. Aug. Ammon, Commentatio premio regio ornata de somni vigiliarumque
' statu morboso. Gott. 1820. 4to.

C. Fr. Heusinger, De vartis somni vigiliarumque conditionibus morbosis. Isenac.
1820.. 8vo.”

But particularly Dr. Robert Macnish, The Philosophy of Sleep. Ed. 2. Glas-
gow, 1834.


SLEEP. 599


the easiest position in our power, — that which approaches the
nearest to the horizontal, so that we may have to make no mus-
cular effort; we gape, and yawn; a degree of delirium” is ex-
perienced, from the impaired condition, short of suppression, of
our feeling and attention. This delirium or wandering when we
are between sleeping and waking is a much surer sign that we
are about to get to sleep than the consciousness of the greatest
drowsiness. A heaviness of the upper eyelid; smarting of the
eyes, such as to give rise to the common remark to a sleepy
person, that the dustman has thrown dust into them; peevish-
ness, especially in children; chilliness; also precede sleep that
does not come on suddenly. The breathing grows slower in
two respects, — as to the intervals of the respirations and as to in-
spiration, and on this very account it becomes deeper, and. takes
place with increased sound: and in adults snoring is a common
eccurrence during sleep, and takes place if the inspirations are
forcible, and if circumstances favour an open state of the
mouth, so that the velum palati, being relaxed, is thrown into
vibrations by the passing air, or if more or less of the tongue
lies up against the palate, so that the nose is made. to, vi-
brate; and if the mouth is closed, palatal snoring will still occur
should: a portion of the tongue touch the palate, and snoring will
be more and more nasal the greater this portion of the tongue.
Like the respiration, the pulse grows slower and fuller. To ex-
clude the light as much as possible, the pupil becomes contracted,
and the eyes sometimes turn up or down. |The temperature falls
somewhat. The transpiration is found to increase; and, when
persons are weak, this is shown by its occurring frequently to the
amount of sweating as soon as ever they fall asleep. From
this circumstance, and the cessation of drinking, less urine is se-
creted; and, from the motionless state of the lower jaws and tongue,
and the absence of food from the mouth, there is less saliva and
oral mucus; from the absence of light and the quiet state of
the eyes and eyelids, less lachrymal secretion. But, except from
such absence of stimuli which act in the waking state, I doubt
whether secretion is lessened in sleep: that it is not necessarily
lessened, is shown by the increase of perspiration. Dr. Macnish


_b “ De Pauw has some singular; bservations upon it in his Recherches sur les
Egyptiens et les Chinois, t. iis p. VJ.”


600 SLEEP.


contends that all other secretions are lessened, — the nasal,
bronchial, and intestinal. The nose is certainly not blown during
sleep ; but only because we do not perceive its charge of mucus:
on awaking, however, we find a handkerchief useful. In pulmonary
affections there may be no expectoration during the night, but
then a large quantity is discharged on waking. . Diarrhcea may
not disturb a patient while asleep, but a copious evacuation is
common in this disease early in the morning. With the chaste
of either sex, genital emission is common during:sleep. Jn the
morning the mouth is foul and the eyes gummy. But. these
circumstances probably arise from the lessened amount of the
respective secretions from the lessened excitement, so that eva-
poration concentrates them.

The circumstance of our resisting sleep as long as we can
keep our eyelids open, and falling asleep, when very sleepy, the
moment we allow the eyelids to drop, is very striking, but ex-
plicable on the continuance of voluntary effort in the former
case, and cessation of it in the latter.

There is less resistance to the cooling power and morbid
effects of cold and injurious agents during sleep. Therefore persons
cover their heads before going to sleep; and, when habit has not
overcome the necessity for this, cold is continually caught from
its neglect. A draught of air is far more dangerous. in the
sleeping state; and the back of the body appears less vigorous
than the front, as a draught at the back is much more dangerous
than in front. Agues are caught more readily if persons fall


asleep.
In the healthy state, we awake refreshed with sleep, —


‘¢ Tired nature’s sweet restorer, balmy sleep.” ©


The transition from the sleeping to the waking state may, like
the opposite, be sudden: but generally it is slow.4 When sudden,


© Young’s Night Thoughts.
4 Milton exquisitely represents the slow approach of Adam’s, first cae as
causing him to imagine his existence was departing ; —


‘¢ Pensive I sat me down: then gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seized
My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve.”’
Parad, Lost, b. viii.


SLEEP. 601


a few moments are required for us to recover from our surprise
and find we are awake. When slow, we for a little while are
sleepy, gape and yawn, but half open our eyes, scarcely perceive
what is around us or understand what is said; and have imperfect
power over the muscles, so that we stagger and perform all
movements awkwardly: and, if still slower, the same delirium is
experienced as while going slowly to sleep, and for a little longer
we are still sleepy.

Sleep appears much more profound at the beginning than
towards the end, and, I presume, because the fatigue is then
greatest and gradually lessens as sleep continues. In the same
manner, transpiration, we have seen, is at first greatest, and
gradually lessens. as the body loses its excess of fluid ; and ab-
sorption gradually lessens as the body becomes charged with
fluid. ’

In some diseases of the nervous system persons may pass
many days, and even entire weeks, with little or no sleep. I
have known this. sleeplessness to be the only disease, and recur
on several occasions in the same individual: usually after ex-
cessive corporeal or cerebral excitement. Great wretchedness,
debility, and restlessness of body and brain took place.

The duration of sleep is various. Youth and young adults
will habitually sleep soundly and uninterruptedly for eight or
nine hours. Infants and old people sleep for shorter periods. Some
persons are constitutionally sound and long sleepers: others
light and short sleepers. Infants sleep far more in the twenty-
four hours than adults: when very young, having but recently
come into the waking state from the womb, they are awake but
for short periods; and for very many months require to go to sleep
several times, and for the first two or three years more than
once, in the twenty-four hours. Old people sleep lightly and
frequently ; and altogether but little, unless lethargic disease
comes upon them, which is very common.

I heard Baxter the coachmaker declare he never took more than
three hours sleep during the most active period of his life. ‘* The
celebrated General Elliot”—“ never slept more than four hours out
of the twenty-four ; and his food consisted wholly of bread, water,
and vegetables.” Sir John Sinclair mentions a James Mackay,
‘‘a remarkably robust and healthy man,” “ who died in Strathnaver
in 1797, aged ninety-one, and only slept, on an average, four


602 SLEEP.


hours in the twenty-four.” Frederic the Great,” as he is called,
and the truly great John Hunter, “ slept only five hours in the
same period.” Dr. Macnish, to whom I am indebted for these
instances, says, “ I know a lady who never sleeps above half an
hour at a time, and the whole period of whose sleep does not
exceed three or four hours in the twenty-four, and yet she is in
the enjoyment of excellent health.” ¢ Sir Gilbert Blane states
that General Pichegru informed him that, “in the course of
his active campaigns, he had for a whole year not more than one
hour of sleep, on an average, in twenty-four hours.”f Sleep
varies so much in intensity that a dead sleep of an hour may be
an equal repose to an ordinary sleep of many hours. The cele-
brated De Moivre slept twenty hours out of the twenty-four;

and Thomas Parr latterly slept away by far the greater pat
of his existence. §

We read that some persons have been able to sleep long
whenever they wished. ‘ Such,” says Dr. Macnish, “was the
case with Quin, the celebrated es who could slumber for
twenty-four hours successively.” And “ Dr. Reid could take
as much food and immediately afterwards as much sleep as
were sufficient for two days.”

Independently of apoplexy, we have cases of extraordinarily
long sleep. A woman in Henault slept seventeen or eighteen
hours a day for fifteen years." Another is recorded to have slept
once for forty days.'- A man named Samuel Chilton, twenty-five
years of age, at Tinsbury, near Bath, once slept for a month: in
two years he slept again for seventeen days, at the beginning
of which period he took food, and had evacuations, but at length
his jaws fixed: when-he fell asleep the barley was sowing, and-
when he awoke he would hardly believe he saw it reaping: at
the end of a year he fell into such another sleep: his farther


® |, c. p. 33. sq. He refers to Gooch for the story, which he very properly
Cae eS cer of aman, who “ enjoyed good health and reached his seventy-third
year,’ > and yet “slept only for fifteen minutes out of the twenty-four hours ;
and even this was a kind of dozing and not a perfect sleep.”

f Medical Logic, p. 83. 2d edit.

€ Dr. Macnish, |. c. p. 35.

h Medical Observations and Inquiries, vol. i.

i Plott’s Natural History of Staffordshire.


SLEEP. 603


history is not given.* Mary Lyall fell asleep in the morning of
the 21st of June, and did not awake till the evening of the 30th,
and slept again the next day till the 8th of August, remaining
motionless and without food from the first till seven days had
elapsed, when she moved her left hand and pointed to her mouth,
in consequence of which food was given her, which she took during
the rest of her sleep: she heard nothing; and, though she instantly
drew back her left hand when touched with the point of a pin,
the right might be scratched till it bled without pain: she was
bled, blistered, and plunged into cold water without sensation:
her pulse for the first two weeks was generally 50; during the
$d and 4th about 60; and the day before she awoke 70 or 72:

her breathing was almost imperceptible, but in the night oc-
casionally strong as in a person asleep: she gave signs of hearing
about four days before she awoke; and afterwards recollected
nothing that had occurred in her attack,— neither the blistering,
bathing, nor eating; and had the idea only of having passed a
long night in sleep.!

A lady at Nismes would sleep from sunrise, whatever the
season of the year, till near noon; and again immediately after
noon, not waking till between seven and eight at night; but she
now remained awake till sunrise. If the attack lasted six months,
she was free for six months; if for twelve, she was free for twelve.
The affection gradually declined, so that she lived free from it
many years, and died at eighty-one.

Dr. Macnish mentions one “ Elizabeth Orvin, who spent three
fourths of her life in sleep.”

In hysteria, I saw a young lady who slept for six weeks and re-
covered: and her twin sister had slept for a month ; but, whether
from not being well supplied with nourishment and warmth I
cannot say, she died before I saw her, and on inspection nothing
but inanition and bloodlessness was found.™

Elizabeth Perkins, in 1788, fell into a deep sleep from which
nothing would rouse her: at the end of eleven days she spon-
taneously awoke, and went about as usual ; but fell asleep again in
a week; remained so for some days, and, with occasional intervals


k Phil. Trans. 1694.
1 Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1818.
m §ee my clinical lecture in the Lancet, March 12, 1831,


604 SLEEP.


of waking, dozed for several months and died. A poor paralytic
man at Kirkheaton, twenty years of age, was seldom awake more
than three hours in the twenty-four for a year: once ‘he slept
for three weeks, breathing calmly, but incapable of being roused
and of eating or drinking.

A lethargy of several days before apoplexy is sometimes ob-
served. Someare constitutionally or temporarily very susceptible
of the influence of soporifics. Ihave seen a person destroyed
by a single dose of a third of a grain of muriate of morphia ; and
two or three from a grain, although they had recently taken doses
of half'a grain, and even a grain, with little effect. Again, ‘in
morbid irritability, as in delirium without strength, large quanti-
ties are borne. I have seen a grain of muriate of morphia, after
its exhibition in more distant doses, taken every hour for forty-
eight hours, with not the least effect. Sometimes, without dying,
persons remain a long time asleep after soporifics. Dr. Macnish
refers to a child, near Lymington, that was thus sent 'to sleep for
three weeks.

I believe that most adults require from six to eight hours sleep.
Some require nine or ten. In proportion to the exhaustion is
sleep required. Therefore in debility, as after a severe disease,
convalescents, though making no cerebral or muscular exertion,
sleep a great deal, and find the utmost invigoration from it. The
longer the waking state is protracted the greater, both absolutely
and proportionally, is the exhaustion, whence one advantage of
early hours, which is expressed by the adage,—one hour’s sleep
before twelve is worth two after. Ifa person rises proportionally
late, he certainly cannot suffer from this course; and if he suffers,
it must be ascribed, provided there is no debauch in the case, to
his loss of the influence of so much solar light and morning air.
One of our judges, Lord Mansfield, is said to have questioned every
very old person who went into court respecting his habits: and
found that some had lived in towns, some in the country, some were
hard livers, some temperate, and all agreed in only one point,—
that of having been early risers through life. I, however, have
known several very old persons who had always sat up late,
though not in vicious indulgence, and risen late.

The Rev. Mr. Wasse, rector of Aynho in Northumberland, as-
certained, in a variety of instances, that we are nearly an inch
taller on rising in the morning than on going to bed; and the


SLEEP. 605


fact is explained by the intervertebral substances recovering
their elasticity during the removal of pressure in the night. »
Too much. sleep, produces headach, heaviness, and dulness:
too. little, feebleness, intellectual and muscular; thinness ;
indifference of the feelings, so that elephants are tamed by being
prevented from sleeping; headach, and various unpleasant feel-
ings in the head, chilliness and feverishness, and at length an
inflammatory state of the brain. Studious young men too fre-
quently disregard the law of nature, —that a certain quantity
of sleep) is requisite for cerebral and general vigour. They
fancy that far less sleep than people usually take is sufficient;
and instead of eight hours, which most require, especially in
youth, take but six, or even fewer. ‘The result of this is sooner
or later felt.severely ; study becomes more and more difficult,
and, at last impossible; constant uneasiness, tension, pain, heat,
throbbing in the brain are experienced; perhaps sleep becomes
very difficult.; general weakness is felt, and too often inflam-
mation of the brain, or typhus, occur, or some other disease,
the causes of which would have been inoperative but for the
exhausted and excited condition of the system to which they
were applied. So many of the best of our young men fall
into these ‘circumstances every winter, and thus, if they hap-
pily do not die, lose eventually more time than they had stolen
from sleep, to say nothing of the minor efficiency of their exer-
tions while they can study than if they thoroughly refreshed
themselves by a natural allowance of repose, that I find it a
duty earnestly to point out this at the beginning of every
session in University College; to urge that all excess, how-
ever free from vice, and even if it proceed from virtuous feel-
ings, is followed by bad consequences; and I can with truth
add that such is the industry and thirst for knowledge and
intellectual distinction, such the correctness and good feeling of
the very large majority, that I never spend more than a moment
in guarding the freshmen against idleness, vice, and bad practices.
There can be no question that study after repose is more
efficient than before it. The brain must be more vigorous when
refreshed than after the excitement of the day. Many prefer
night study, and in the winter it is more convenient; but, in the


" Dr. Macnish, p. 38.


606 SLEEP.


summer, early study is equally convenient; and those who have
acquired the habit of night study have only to persevere in
retiring early, and rising at a fixed early hour, and they will
after a time find the morning sun tell better than the midnight
oil. Some commit the error of rising very early, without going to
bed proportionally soon: and the result is of course the same as
if they sat up late and rose at ordinary hours; they go about
weak, feverish, and stupid the whole day, and are absolutely
knocked up in the evening.

The effect of too little sleep upon the face is very striking :
sailors, who have their rest broken at short intervals, acquire an
old look.

The power of habit over sleep is very great. Within certain
limits it will lessen or augment the amount of sleep necessary ;
but these limits differ constitutionally in different individuals, and
must be influenced by the habitual amount of exertion. Any
one may acquire the habit of dividing his sleep, so as to take less
at night, and a portion previously in the day or evening. Some
become accustomed to have their rest broken at short intervals,
and able to sleep directly they wish: they acquire the habit
also of waking on the least noise; that is, of sleeping very lightly.
“‘ Seamen and soldiers on duty sleep when they will and wake
when they will. The Emperor Napoleon was a striking instance
of this. Captain Barclay, when performing his extraordinary
feat of walking a mile an hour for a thousand successive hours,
obtained at last such a mastery over himself, that he fell asleep
the moment he lay down.”° By habit we wake invariably at a
certain hour, however late- we may retire; until, by repeatedly
retiring late, the system greatly feels the want of rest: on the
other hand, a person accustomed to go to sleep at a certain hour,
may oversleep himself in the morning, but becomes drowsy at his
usual time in the evening. Habit enables us to sleep in un-
favourable circumstances. “ An old artilleryman often enjoys
tranquil repose while the cannon are thundering around him:
an engineer has been known to fall asleep within a boiler, while
his fellows were beating it on the outside with their ponderous
hammers; and the repose of a miller is no wise incommoded by
the noise of his mill.’—“ It is common for carriers to sleep on


® Dr. Macnish.


SLEEP. 607


horseback, and coachmen on their coaches.”’P ‘“ Nay, silence
itself may become a stimulus, while sound ceases to be so. Thus
a miller being very ill, his mill was stopped that he might not be
disturbed by its noise; but this, so far from inducing sleep, pre-
vented it altogether; and it did not take place till the mill was
set a-going again. For the same reason, the manager of some
vast iron-works, who slept close to them, amid the incessant din
of hammers, forges, and blast furnaces, would awake if there was
any cessation of the noise during the night.”—** A ‘person who
falls asleep near a church, the bell of which is ringing, may hear
the sound during’ the whole of his slumber, and be nevertheless
aroused by its sudden cessation4:” and a person, sent to sleep
ina church by a stupid sermon, generally awakes as soon as the
preacher’s humdrum is at an end.

The ordinary cause of sleep is fatigue. The activity of the
day exhausts the powers of the brain—feeling, understanding, and
will, and the brain sleeps. The greater, in point of duration or
intensity, the activity, the greater the disposition to sleep, unless
the exhaustion has produced aching or irritation, — morbid con-
ditions, which, destroying the course of health, may prevent sleep.
It matters not whether the activity has been volition, passion,
sensation, or reflection, Exhaustion of one part of the encephalo-
spinal system exhausts the rest: nay, so bound up together are
all parts of the body,—the brain and the rest, that fatigue of the
brain exhausts all other parts, and fatigue of any part will impair
the powers of the brain, and great muscular exertion therefore
of any voluntary part exhausts the vigour of the mind. No one
thinks well who is fatigued by exercise, and nothing causes sleep
at night more than good exercise in the day, All studious men,
who are real thinkers, require a large allowance of sleep; and find
a great difference in the soundness and urgency of sleep after a
day of intellectual labour, and a day accidentally spent in the
shallow prattling and reading common to the greater part of the
more expensively, but not better, educated persons who fancy
themselves to possess cultivated understandings ; or in the per-
formance of what is the daily routine of the majority of popular,
and probably fashionable, practitioners, who are destitute of sound
knowledge and strangers to reflection and study, and yet impu-


P Dr. Macnish. 4 Dr. Macnish,


608 SLEEP.


dently assume the highest importance, and disparage tose who
read, observe, and reflect, and are anxious to advance the general
good rather than their own little interests. The exhaustion being
greater before sleep has remedied it, the beginning of sleep is ne-
cessarily the soundest part, and persons are less easily roused at
the early part of the night; and, after sleep, light at first finds
the eyes so sensible that it is disagreeable. Emotion, con-
tinued and at length wrought up to the highest pitch, will induce
sleep: whence persons condemned almost always pass the night
in sound sleep before the morning of their execution, and gene-
rals sleep on the eve of their great battles. Severe pain, or a too
vivid sensation, leaves drowsiness. Exhaustion of the brain by
defective support of its nutritive functions equally produces sleep
as over exertion of its functions. Loss of blood, purging, starv-
ation, cold, diseases that impair nutrition or cause exhaustion by
general excitement, produce sleep, perhaps coma; young infants
and old people frequently require stimulants and nutriment to
rouse them from coma. Cold will induce a fatal sleep ; yet, if the
cold is not powerful enough to produce torpor, it will keep a
person awake by the disagreeable sensation. Every one must
have been unable to sleep from not having sufficient bed-clothes
on a cold night; and cold feet frequently prevent repose.

Defective moral and intellectual excitement incline to sleep:
stupid and passionless people are generally great sleepers, and a
good method of getting to sleep is to think of nothing, — to turn
aside from every thought that presents itself on the pillow. The
withdrawal of all causes of sensation powerfully contributes to
sleep: and all animals, when inclined to sleep, place themselves
in a position which shall require no exertion of volition, and
retire from and exclude as much as possible all external excite-
ment.

The excitement of the brain may be reduced and thus sleep
brought on by impressions on the senses just sufficient to with-
draw attention from every feeling and thought, and yet insuf-
ficient to maintain much activity. A discourse stupid or
delivered monotonously, a dull book or one not understood, is
pronounced sleepy from its effects; the murmur of a rivulet and
the hum of bees; the sight of any thing waving, as of a field of
standing corn or of the hand drawn up and down before the
face by a mesmeriser, attracting attention much more than an


SLEEP. 609


object at rest and yet exciting but little; induce sleep, the
former acting by the ear, the latter by the eye; and gentle
friction is equally effectual by means of touch. I know a lady
who often remains awake in spite of every thing till her husband
very gently rubs her foot: and, by asserting to a patient my con-
viction that the secret of an advertising hypnologist whom I allowed
to try his art upon the sleepless individual, and which he did for a
time successfully, was to make him gently rub some part of his
body till he slept, he confessed this to be the fact. Boerhaave
acted on the same principle in regard to another sense, when
he directed water to be placed Hebi a sleepless patient, so cir-
cumstanced that it might drop into a brass pan. Gentle motion
acts by an impression on the same sense; and a combination is
of course still more effective, whence experience has taught
nurses to rock, and otherwise gently agitate infants, while they
hum them to sleep.

Most of the substances termed narcotic have a property of
inducing sleep and stupor; they have the property of inducing
also giddiness, confusion, headach, delirium, and heat and throb-
bing: but some narcotics produce few or more of the other effects
rather than sleep. Narcotics lessen sensibility throughout and
indeed affectibility, possessing a general hostility to all vital pro-
perties. Yet many, if not all, stimulate in moderate quantities.
Opium augments the pulse and the heat, even in the head ; excites
the intellect and feelings; gives headach; and renders noise in-
tolerable: strychnine causes tetanic spasms: tobacco excites
sneezing : very many narcotics occasion smarting and burning.

Impure air appears narcotic and disposes to sleep. Heat has
the same power, probably by relaxing; for a certain proximity of
particles, and as it were tension of structure, is indispensable to
vigour and activity. Heat may also act by overcharging the
head with blood, partly through relaxation of vessels, partly, as
some think, by expanding the blood itself. Whatever overcharges
the head, as the reversed erect posture, has the effect of causing
heaviness and stupor; and thus by lying flat on a revolving mill-
stone, with the head towards the circumference, the centrifugal
force accumulates blood in the head sufficient to produce sleep and
at last apoplexy. Whatever else than blood compresses the brain
has the same effect; for instance an accumulation of serum, depres-
sion of bone, and, when the bone has been deficient in an individual

ss 2


610 SLEEP.


through accident, pressure upon the brain with the hand at once
sends the person to sleep, A full meal causes drowsiness as long
as the food is in the stomach, perhaps from the great activity of
the organ, so that, from the general sympathy, the brain among
the rest is drained of its power: some ascribe a little to the
more difficult expansion of the chest, and consequent accumula-
tion of blood in the head, Fat and plethoric people are drowsy,
and in them there is excessive fulness of the blood-vessels of the
head from plethora and from the obstruction produced by dif-
ficult respiration.

The causes of waking are the opposite of those of sleeping.

The accumulation of vigour gradually proceeds while sleep lasts,
till the brain is spontaneously active again. But, before this, we
may awake from an external excitant, to whatever sense it
may be applied ; from any internal causes of feeling, mental, or
in the body at large ; or from excitement having been so strong
before sleeping that the brain will not remain torpid; from ex-
citement of the nutritive functions of the brain, its circulation,
evolution of heat, &c.; from the agency of certain substances
which possess the property of keeping the mind active, as tea,
coffee, which may prevent sleep altogether or cause it to be
short. :
_ The proximate cause of sleep or the condition of the brain in
it has been variously viewed. Some have fancied the brain
compressed, and compression will disqualify the brain for its
functions and cause sleep, even coma, apoplexy, and death: but
there is no proof or even probability of this in ordinary sleep.
Blumenbach says, he thinks that sleep “ probably consists in a
diminished or impeded flow of oxygenated (arterial) blood to
the brain; for that fluid is of the highest importance, during the
waking state, to the re-action of the sensorium upon the functions
of the senses and upon the voluntary motions. *


¥ «¢ Those who wish to know and compare other opinions upon the causes of
sleep, may consult, .

M. de Grimaud, Mémoire sur la Nutrition. Petersb. 1789. 4to. p. 194,

H. Nudow, Versuch einer Theorie des Schlafs. Koningsberg. 1791. 8vo.

Steph. Gallini at the end of his Saggio d’ Osservazioni sui nuovi progressi della
Fisica del Corpo Umano. Padua. 1792. 8vo.

Mauduit, in Fourcroy, in the Médecine Eclairée, &c. t. iv. p. 273.
~-'T. Chr. Reil, Functiones Organo Anime Peculiares. Hal. 1749. 8vo.
p. 108.


SLEEP. 611


* The influx of blood,” he continues, “is diminished by its
derivation from the brain and congestion in other parts; it is
impeded by the |pressure of foreign matter upon the brain,
whether from serous or purulent collections, from depression of
fractured bones, &c.”’

“« Besides other phenomena which accord with this explan-
ation, especially those of hybernating mammalia’, is a very re-
markable one which I witnessed in a living person whose case
was formerly mentioned, — that of the brain sinking whenever
He was asleep, and swelling again with blood the moment he
awoke.

“This opinion is likewise strengthened by the production
of continued watchfulness from congestion of blood in the
head.” .

Now it is certain that the supply of arterial blood to every
part, and especially to the nervous system, is requisite to its
functions and its life, and that in proportion to the activity of a
part is the activity of its supply of arterial blood. Analogy,
therefore, renders it extremely probable that, during the in-
activity of sleep, the brain, having less occasion for arterial
blood, has a less vigorous circulation than during the waking
state; and we know that whatever diminishes the ordinary de-
termination of blood to the brain, or impairs the movement of
the blood through itt, disposes to sleep. But, although this be


L. H. Chr. Niemeyer, Materialien zur Erregungstheorie. Gotting. 1800.
8vo. p. 71.

- Troxler, Versuche in der Organischen Physik. p, 435.

Brandis, Pathologie, p. 534.”

Cullen, Physiology, p. 124. sqq.

Adelon, Physiol. t. ii. p. 292. sqq.

Dict. des Sc. Méd. t. xix. p. 348. sqq.

Bourdon, Principes de Physiol. 1. 6. p. 785. sqq.

$ sy, c, Of the alpine marmot, of which Mangili treats in Reil’s Archiv.
vol. vili. p. 466. sqq.

t As arterial blood when at rest acquires the venous character, and the slower
its motion the greater is its tendency to assume this character, it is evident that
in congestion of blood, by which is meant simply an unusual quantity of blood
in the vessels of a part, not flowing with its usual freedom, the part atkected has
not its proper supply of perfectly arterial blood. Hence congestion in the head
must, even from this cause alone, produce drowsiness, to say nothing of the
effect of pressure on the cerebral substance.

ss 3


612 SLEEP.


granted, it must be viewed, not as the cause, but as a circum-
stance, or, in fact, a consequence, of ordinary sleep. Increase
the activity of an organ, you increase its circulation; diminish
its activity, you diminish its circulation. The alteration of cir-
culation is usually not the cause but the consequence ; necessary,
indeed, to the continuance of the altered degree of activity in
the organ, but not the cause. The degree of activity of any
part, and the degree of its circulation, are exactly and unalter-
ably correspondent. If the circulation through a part be me-
chanically increased or diminished, the sensibility and activity of
the part will, doubtless, be proportionally increased or diminished.
‘This example occurs in hemorrhage. Frequently both are af-
fected simultaneously, — when diarrhoea renders the surface pale
and cold, both the blood is sent more sparingly to it, and the
energy of its vessels is diminished by the increase of energy in
those of the intestines. But, in ordinary sleep, the diminished
circulation appears only the consequence, for activity is always
followed by inactivity. Stimulate a muscle separated from the
body, it contracts, but it soon refuses to do so; after a little
rest, it again contracts upon the renewal of the stimulus. The
case of the brain is analogous ; and when, after its daily activity,
it falls asleep, the diminution of its circulation consequently
ensues. ‘The influence of sleep upon the cerebral circulation is
shown by the headach and other marks of congestion which
follow too much sleep. Boerhaave mentions a student who took
a fancy that sleep was the natural state of man, and so slept
eighteen out of the twenty-four hours, till he died of apoplexy.
The horizontal posture will not explain these ill effects, because
persons with spinal disease will lie a year upon the back without
them. |

Sleep is an inactive state of the brain, resulting ordinarily
from mere fatigue of the organ through its activity: though
pressure, want of proper blood, narcotics, &c. or want of exciting
causes, may prevent activity, and thus induce sleep. The case


* The most silly discussions may be found in old authors and modern twad-
dlers (see, for instance, Isis revelata, a book soon to be quoted) about the state of
the soulin sleep. ‘ There have been great disputes,” says Gall, “‘ upon the ques-
tion, whether the soul can ever exist, as in sleep, without feelings or ideas? If
we lay aside all vain metaphysical subtlety, the answer is very easy. In this life
the soul receives its feelings and ideas by means of cerebral organs; when these.


DREAMING, 613


of the brain is the same as that of voluntary muscles. If these
are laid bare and freely stimulated, they at length cease to con-
tract; after a little repose, they obey a stimulus again. The
brain may be kept awake by strong exciting causes long after it
would have sunk into inactivity ; but at length no stimulus will
rouse it and sleep is inevitable. Exhausted soldiers sometimes
sleep as they march, or sink on the ground in deep slumber
amidst the roar of cannon. Still more readily will the young.
During the battle of the Nile some boys fell asleep on deck
in the heat of that dreadful engagement.¥


In sleep the function of the brain is suspended, and, if it is
perfect, there is no sensation, consciousness, thought, emotion, or
volition: but the degree of suspension is extremely various. In
ordinary sleep the mind is susceptible of sensations, and able,
if these are unpleasant, to make an effort to remove their causes ;
— whether to remove the uneasiness of impeded circulation in
the lungs by breathing, or to draw away the hand when tickled,
or change our position, as some continually do in sleep. One
or more faculties is often active, and one idea associates with
it another, intellectual or moral, so that we dream; but the ac-
tivity of the mind is partial, and, though we are able occasionally
even to reason correctly in our dreams, we are not sufficiently


organs are completely inactive, the soul can have neither feelings nor ideas.
Deep and complete sleep is a temporary cessation of personality (mioz).” (Il. cc.
4to. vol. ii. p. 454. 8vo. t. ii. p. 506. sq.) By soul Gall meant cerebral
power: but he wrote cautiously, as in Austria, Italy, and France, catholics
are not contented to base our hopes of a future life upon Scripture, but insist
on the existence of a soul to make Scripture probable.

Y¥ Dr. Macnish.—Blumenbach and Cabanis call sleep a function. The former
says, “* Sleep is a completely periodical function, by which the intercourse of the
mind and body is suspended, and whose phenomena correspond, if any do, with
the supposition of a nervous fluid.”’ To say intercourse of mind and body, and
hot activity of brain and its dependences,—the rest of the encephalo-spinal
system, and to say nervous fluid, is antiquated nonsense. Cabanis’s words are,
“« Sleep is not simply a passive state, but a peculiar function of the brain.” The
answer to both these writers is, that “‘the cessation of a function cannot be a
function.” How different is the language of Gall: “Sleep is merely in the
activity, the perfect repose of the brain in health. During this suspension of the
‘cerebral functions, the brain acquires new force, and, on waking, its funetions
take place readily.” 1. c. 8vo. t. i. p. 210.

ss 4


614 DREAMING.


ourselves to discover the incompatibility of many circumstances
which we fancy. In a higher degree of activity, we answer
questions put to us, although often ridiculously, as our deficiency
of mental power prevents us from keeping our associations in a
proper train; and we sometimes even perform a regular series
of movements. Somnambulism is but imperfect and partial sleep.
In it persons walk and even perform a variety of other actions,
without hearing or seeing, or consciousness of their situation, so
that they fall over things placed in their way, or down a descent.
They will sometimes write excellent letters, compose good verses,
and perform accurate calculations, in this state, and on being
roused into consciousness know nothing of what has happened.
This state generally occurs in sleep, but it occasionally seizes
persons awake, and is then termed ecstasis.~ This is by no


means uncommon at the commencement or termination of epi-—


leptic or hysteric paroxysms. In an opposite morbid affection,
the patient is conscious and sensible of every thing around, but
unable to move, or give the least sign of life.t

Dreaming and mental activity of all degrees in sleep, from
merely turning in bed, to talking, walking, and composing, are
partial activity of the brain. “ Almost all physiologists agree,”
says Gall, “that in dreaming animal life is partially active.
They are right, and yet they deny the plurality of organs! But
dreams cannot be conceived without the hypothesis of this
plurality.”

‘* When, in sleep, particular organs of animal life become
active, the sentiments and ideas which depend upon them must
necessarily be awakened; but, in this case, the activity is inde-
pendent of the will.

‘‘ When one organ only is active, the dream is simple: the
object of our love is embraced, harmonious music is heard, we
fight our enemies, accordingly as one organ or another is per-
forming its functions. |

‘«‘ The more organs are in activity at once, the more the action
of the dream will be complicated or confused, and the more in-
congruous will these be.


” A remarkable example is given in the Psychological Magazine of a young
Jady thus taken for dead, and after the funeral hymns were sung, &c. discovered
to be alive by a sweat breaking forth at the moment she found the lid of the
coffin was about to be nailed down.


DREAMING. 615


** When the organs are fatigued by the waking state and
exertion, we usually do not dream during the first hours of sleep,
at least unless the (brain is very irritable. But, in proportion as
the organs become refreshed, they are more disposed to enter
into activity, whence towards the approach of rising, we dream
more and with greater vivacity.”

“ How is it that in a dream certain faculties occasionally dis-
play more energy than in the waking state? What precautions
do we not take to meditate profoundly on a subject. We prevent
all external impressions, we put our hand before our eyes, we
shut ourselves up, to concentrate all our attention on a single
point. The same thing takes place in certain dreams. All the
vital energy is concentrated on one organ, or upon a small num-
ber of organs, while others are in repose; so that the energy of
the former becomes necessarily more energetic. The sentiments
and ideas excited in a dream are, in some cases, completely dis-
engaged from all external mixture. We therefore cannot be
astonished if some, like Augustus La Fontaine, make admirable
verses in their sleep, or like Alexander draw out the plan of a
battle; if others, like Condillac, solve difficult problems; if on
waking in the morning some, like Franklin, find a work com-
pleted which had been projected on going to bed; if in sleep the
true relations of things are discovered, which in the tumult of
sentiments and ideas had defied our sagacity.”*

In ordinary dreaming, our conceptions of objects of sense


* Il. cc. 4to. vol ii. p. 454, sq. 8vo. t. ii. p. 506, sqq. Cabanis relates that
Franklin had on several occasions been informed in his dreams of the
issue of affairs in which he was engaged. His vigorous mind, otherwise
free from prejudice, says Cabanis, could not quite secure him from a super-
stitious notion with respect to these premonitions. He did not take into
consideration that his profound prudence and rare sagacity still characterised the
operations of his brain during sleep. It is also related of Condillac that,
while writing his Cours d’ Etudes, he was frequently obliged to leave a chapter
incomplete and go to bed, and that, on awaking, he found it, on more than one
occasion, finished in his head. Voltaire assures us that, like La Fontaine, he
many times in his sleep made verses which he remembered on waking.  Tartini
composed his Devil’s Sonata in a dream, in which Satan appeared and challenged
him to a competition on his own fiddle. Coleridge prefaces his poetical frag-
ment called Kubla Khan with the following account of himself: — In the
summer of the year 1797, the author, then in ill health, had retired to a lonely
farmhouse between Porlock and Linton, on the Exmoor confines of Somerset
and Devonshire. In consequence of a slight indisposition, an anodyne had been
prescribed, from the effects of which he fell asleep in his chair, at the moment


616 DREAMING.


are always far stronger than when we are awake: we always
conceive with an intensity equal to sensation, — an impossibility
in the waking state, unless under extraordinary excitement. —
In sleep-waking, the conceptions have been so strong that an
archbishop of Bordeaux declares of a young man, whose case will
soon be related, that, dreaming he had just emerged from a stream,
he shivered, his teeth chattered, he begged for brandy, and, on
receiving water instead, again asked for brandy, took a glass of
strong liquor, felt refreshed, and without waking fell into a perfect
sleep. Insleep, things are sometimes remembered and spoken
of, which had been forgotten: and we sometimes dream of our
previous dreams, forgotten perhaps in our waking state: if
we have remembered them when awake as dreams, we may
dream of them as dreams, and sometimes, without having
awakened after a dream, we dream on, dreaming again that
the first was really a dream.y— Another instance of increased


that he was reading the following sentence, or words of the same substance, in
Purchas’s Pilgrimage : ‘ Here the Khan Kubla commanded a palace to be built,
and a stately garden thereunto; and thus ten miles of fertile ground were
enclosed with a wall.’ The author continued for about three hours in a pro-
found sleep, at least of the external senses, during which time he has the most
vivid confidence that he could not have composed less than from two to three
hundred lines ; if that indeed can be called composition in which all the images
rose up before him as things, with a parallel production of the correspondent
expressions, without any sensation or consciousness of effort. On awaking he
appeared to himself to have a distinct recollection of the whole, and taking his
pen, ink, and paper, instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines that are here
preserved. At this moment, he was unfortunately called out by a person on
business from Porlock, and detained by him above an hour, and on his return to
his room, found, to his no small surprise and mortification, that, though he still
retained some vague and dim recollection of the general purport of the vision,
yet, with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the
rest had passed away like the images on the surface of a stream into which a
stone had been cast, but, alas! without the after restoration of the latter.”

“ Henricus ab Heer mentions the case of a student at a German University,
who having been very intent on the composition of some verses, which he could
not complete to his satisfaction, rose in his sleep, and, opening his desk, sat
down with great earnestness to renew his attempt. At length, having succeeded,
he returned, went to bed, after reciting his composition aloud and setting his
papers in order as before.” (Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 310.) ‘ See what Holl-
man has related of himself in this particular. Pnewmotolog. Psycholog. et Theol:
Natur. Gotting. 1770. 8vo. p. 196.”

y Dr. Macnish, L c. p. 87.


DREAMING. 617


excitement in dreaming is the extreme rapidity of conception,
so that a succession of events may be crowded into a dream
which we are certain cannot have lasted more than a few
moments —a rapidity which takes place in the waking state only
under the strongest excitement, as in the fear of instant death
‘¢ Persons recovered from drowning have mentioned,” says Dr,
Macnish, “ that in the course of a single minute, almost every
event of their life has been brought to their recollection.’
Some dreams have been singularly prophetic, from the extreme
intelligence of the dreaming brain: in other instances, as when
the prevision has related to the individual's death, the strong
impression on the mind may have worked the fulfilment of the
prediction: in others there may have been mere coincidence,
but the coincidence has been most extraordinary, The greater
part, however, of dreaming prophecies are never fulfilled.

The impression from dreams sometimes continues for life, espe-
cially from the dreams of childhood, and sometimes its events are
afterwards confounded with reality. We always wake from a
dream in the mood of our dream: and, on waking from a terrific
dream, emotion and unconsciousness that all was a dream have
continued for a short time so powerful, notwithstanding the per-
ception of all objects of sense around, as to cause the individual
to jump out of window or to commit murder; sometimes insanity
has resulted, and sometimes, as from strong emotion in the
waking state, the cure of some disease.»

It is an error to suppose that our dreams are a mere repetition
of sentiments and ideas previously experienced. Man may invent
in his sleep just as when awake: for the internal sources of our
sentiments and ideas are the same, whether we are asleep or
awake. ©

Dreams are no doubt forgotten as well as remembered : and,
what is curious, we not only sometimes forget our dreams till we
dream again, when the same things are recognised, with or
without our knowing that they had been dreamt. We may
dream of things as having been dreamt before, when, on waking,
we cannot remember the circumstance.

To suppose, with some, that sleep is always accompanied by


m lem. 62. ® Dr. Macnish, |. c. pp. 46. 102.
b Phil. Trans. vol. ix., for such a cure of dumbness.
© Gall, ll. cc. 4to. vol. ii. p. 454.5; 8vo. t, il. p. 506. sqq.


518 DREAMING.


dreams, though not remembered by us4, is a mere assumption
and indeed very improbable ; and it is the offspring of another
assumption, — that we have souls, it being settled that souls are
sleepless things.e Perfect sleep must be free from them;
though slight dreaming stands on the same footing with cough-
ing, and cannot be considered sufficient to constitute’ disease.
Some always dream; some never.

In Locke we find the following passage: —‘“ I once knew a
man that was bred a scholar, and had no bad memory, who told me,
he had never dreamed in his life till he had that fever he was
then newly recovered of, which was about the five or six and
twentieth year of his age. I suppose the world affords more
such instances.’f For many years before his death, Dr. Reid
had no consciousness of ever having dreamed.” ‘The rev. Mr.
Jesse, of Margaretta, in Essex, informs me that he knew a car-
penter who never dreamt till after a fever in his fortieth year ;
and, as he before never could be made to understand what
dreaming meant, so when he first dreamt he was as much sur-
prised as perhaps Adam was when he first felt himself going to
sleep. He was aman of a remarkably good, quiet, and plod-
ding disposition.

We occasionally know a dream to be a dream and even act
against it: as when Dr. Reid, finding himself subject to frightful
dreams, determined to acquire the habit ofremembering their


@ « Consult Kant, Critik der Urtheilskroft, p. 298.; and Anthropolog., p. 80.”

© Locke reasons powerfully on this point: “ * The soul, during sound sleep,
thinks,’ say these men.” —‘ Methinks, every drowsy nod shakes this doctrine.”
= “Nature never makes excellent things for mean/or no uses; and it is hardly
to be conceived that our infinitely wise Creator should make so admirable a
faculty as the power of thinking, that faculty which comes nearest the excel-
lency of his own incomprehensible being, to beso idle and uselessly employed,
at least a fourth part ofits time here, as to think constantly, without remembering
any of those thoughts, without doing any good to itself or others, or being any
way useful to any other part of the creation.. If we well examine it, we shall
not find, I suppose, the motion of dull and senseless matter, any where in the
universe, made so little use of, and so wholly thrown away.” — ‘+ They, who
make the soul a thinking being, at this rate, will not make it a much more noble
being, than those do, whom they condemn, for allowing it to be nothing but the
subtilest parts of matter.” Hssay concerning Human Understanding, b. ii.
chi Teyssal QA Bot ty | |

fo]. ce (beds, chil tagdise & Dr. Macnish, |. c. p. 45.


DREAMING. 619


dangers were imaginary, and always threw himself down a pre-
cipice near which he dreamt he was standing, and thus destroyed
the illusion; or, as Dr. Beattie, when, dreaming himself in dan-
ger upon the parapet of a bridge, and reflecting he was not
in the habit of such pranks and might therefore be dreaming,
determined to awaken himself by pitching over, and did so with
success.

Dreams differ much in their absolute vividness, as well as in
the impression they make and the degree in which they are re-
membered.

We sometimes wake in our dream, and soon fall asleep and
experience a continuation of it. |

I conceive that all the phenomena of dreaming resolve them-
selves into partial activity of brain, partial not in Gall’s view only,
who considers that there is activity of one or of a limited number
of cerebral organs, but also partial in regard to individual organs,
—one portion of an organ being active and another not; and I con-
ceive that the activity of the organ or portion of organ or organs
may be of various degrees of intensity. All the phenomena of
dreaming may be thus explained: though some, strangely enough,
cannot understand how to view dreaming as a disturbed state
of brain is at all more explanatory than to view them inde-
pendently of the brain; and call it “ making insignificant speech
supply the place of analysis,” or, ‘ merely a translation of one
language to another,” i to take into consideration the organ, the
disturbance of whose functions actually constitutes dreams.

An idea, being excited, excites another associated with it by the
order of previous occurrence, by similarity, or some other of the
endless modes of association, exactly as happens in the waking
state. But, as our brain is imperfectly and partially active, so
that we are not, as in the waking state, intelligent enough to
perceive the grossest incongruities and impossibilities, nor pos-
sessed of power of volition sufficient to detain an idea and prevent
its floating off and being replaced by another associated with it
perhaps in the most trifling manner, and this by another and
another in endless successive images, thoughts riot on in con-
fusion, not in the order of previous succession, as some assert, but


h Dr. Macnish, 1. c. p. 108. sq.
i London Review, No. II. p. 430. Isis revelata, vol. ii. p. 120.


620 DREAMING.


more like the cross reading of a newspaper, according to a remark
of Dr. Macnish.*


“¢ Fancy,—
Wild work produces oft, but most in dreams,
Ill matching words, and deeds long past or late.” !

A dream sometimes continues rational and consistent till near its
end, when it suddenly becomes absurd. ™

Some have supposed that the diversity and incongruous character
of dreams “ arises solely from our having no external sensations.” "
This appears to me a very confined view of the state of the mind
during dreaming. The want of external sensations is not the only
point, nor the chief point; but the want of intelligence and volition,
and the intensity of our conceptions. We may have sensations and
yet be asleep and dream. We may feel heat applied to our feet
and fancy we are in eternal torments: yet should we wake, with-
out any further use of our external senses, without smelling,
tasting, hearing, seeing, and without moving, we discover the
unreality of our fancy, and, though we should be lying uncovered
on the ground in the dark, with no means of knowing by external
sense where we are, or how we got where we are, we know
for certain that we not in hell, but are satisfied of being still upon
earth. In truth we think the most acutely when we have no
external sensation. When we wish to meditate, we seek silence,
generally shut our eyes, and may become motionless so as to have
no touch, and as to tasting and smelling we do not think of such
things. We often meditate in bed in the darkness and stillness
of night, and forget where we are. While excluding and not
~ aware of any external sensations, we may be most successful in
poetical conceptions, and yet do not mistake them for realities.
The evident. reason of which is the same as of our poetry. dif-
fering from the wild nonsense of dreams:—we are awake and.
fully intelligent. Of course, when we are awake, our external
senses are in play, give us information, and may correct our
thoughts: but, if their impressions may have no relation to our
thoughts, and thus afford no correction, and yet we can medi-
date most philosophically without dreaming, their activity gene-
rally cannot be the cause of our not being asleep and dream-

kK lc. p. 49. ; ! Parad. Lost, B. vy.

m Hood’s Whims and Oddities, quoted by Dr. Macnish, l. c. p. 42.

" Darwin, Zoonomia, vol.i. p. 293.


DREAMING. 621


ing. The very want of external sense is the effect of the sleep of a
portion of the brain: and the want of intelligence is another
effect; not the effect of the want of external sense.

It isthe same with the portion of the brain devoted to emotions,
notwithstanding the ideas calculated to excite them are perhaps
present. Few or more may be inactive. “ Objects, scenes, and cir-
cumstances present themselves to the mind, unassociated with
those feelings with which they are usually or invariably accom-
panied in our waking hours. Thus in our dreams we may walk
on the brink of a precipice, or see ourselves doomed to imme-
diate destruction by the weapon of a foe or the fury of a tem-
pestuous sea, and yet feel not the slightest emotion of fear, though,
during the perfect activity of the brain, we may be naturally dis-
posed to the strong manifestation of this feeling; again, we may
see the most extraordinary object or event without surprise, per-
form the most ruthless crime without compunction, and see what
in our waking hours would cause us unmitigated grief, without
the smallest feeling of sorrow. Dreams of this kind are more in-
coherent, and are subject to more rapid transitions than those in
which one or more organs of the feelings are also in a state of ac-
tivity.”° We might as well ascribe want of emotion to the want of
external sense.

Again, we sometimes have great emotion during sleep:
sexual desire, terror, rage, &c.P; and we sometimes have great
intelligence, of which instances have been already given. But the


° Some Remarks on Dreaming, Somnambulism, and other Statesof partial Activity
of the Cerebral Faculties. Read to the London Phrenological Society, by Professor
Wheatstone, and published in the Lancet, March 31. 1832, through misprint, as
by Mr. Weisten ; and Dr. Macnish quotes it as mine, with a compliment to the
acuteness of the last sentence. (1. c. p. 76. sq.) But I am happy to say that there
is at King’s College, as well as at University College, a professor who has for
many years been a.decided phrenologist and avows his conviction. Excepting
this original remark, the paper is professedly nothing more than atranslation and
illustration of Gall. I amindebted to it for my references to Coleridge, Tartini,
and M. Giron de Buzareingues, not to Dr. Macnish, who appears to have taken
them from it without acknowledgment, and after all is incorrect, as he puts
Cabanis for Franklin, and Condorcet for Condillac.


P Porro hominum mentes magnis quz motibus edunt?
Magna etiain szepe in somnis faciuntque geruntque.
Reges expugnant, capiuntur, prelia miscent ;
Tollunt clamores, quasi si jugulantur ibidem,
Multi depugnant, gemitusque doloribus edunt. Luoretius,


622 DREAMING.


intelligence, however acute, is limited ; concentrated in one point,
without the general intelligence of our waking moments, so that
a collateral incongruity or impossibility is not detected.

I believe that excitement of the portions of the brain destined
for emotion is more frequently the cause of the train of ideas
than those of the intellect ; just as the hallucinations of madmen
most frequently arise from the morbid state of a feeling, — the
idea of being God or an Emperor, for instance, from inordinate
pride: and I may mention that Prof. Wheatstone remarked to me
in conversation that his observation of the greater incoherency and
rapidity of transitions in dreaming, where emotion was not excited,
might be extended to insanity. Still, I should say that, if very
many passions are excited in either dreaming or insanity, this
effect of emotion will be lost and the incoherence be very
great. The organs of the feelings may be excited alone in sleep.
We often wake under emotion, without knowing why. | If it is
urged that we may have dreamt unpleasant things, but forgotten
them, which may be true, for we may recollect our dream after
some lapse of time, I add that, after going to bed under distress
of-mind, we often wake in the morning feverish and wretched
without knowing why, till, after trying to consider the reason,
we in a few minutes recollect the real cause of our disquietude.
The emotion or unpleasant excitement of an organ of a feeling
must have existed during sleep, unaccompanied by images; at
least their occurrence is a mere hypothesis.

The excitement may be limited even to portions of organs,
or to particular modes of excitement. Just as in paralysis
“we sometimes find one patient’s organ of language so affected
that he forgets nouns substantive only, and but some of them,
and another forgets one particular language only of two or
more that he may have learnt, so in dreaming we may hear or
talk one language only of several that we know, or we may see
every thing of one colour.

The excitement of the individual part that dreams may of
course be of all degrees: the conceptions may be almost too ob-
scure for us to discern them: they may be most vivid: we may
surpass our best efforts of the waking state, as happens sometimes
in insanity: we may remember things forgotten, and which we
have in vain attempted to remember ; nay, we probably sometimes
remember in our dreams without ever being aware that what we


DREAMING. . 623


dream is the result of memory, and thus have revelations which
appear singular, but which are merely revived knowledge,
utterly forgotten.4 Dreaming being only excitement of some
portion or portions of the brain while the rest are asleep, the
causes of dreaming, no less than their mode of operation, must
be analogous to those of excitement in any other organ. These
exciting causes will produce their effect, like all other exciting
causes, not only according to their own intensity, but ac-
cording to the predisposition and present degree of excitement
of the brain; having, unless powerful, no effect if the brain has
no undue irritability or present excitement, and having, though
feeble, great effect if the brain is very irritable or already much
excited: and, where either of the latter circumstances exists,
dreaming will occur without any adventitious cause of excitement.
We may dream from an external impression upon any of our
nerves or from feelings produced in any internal part: from
light being let into the eyes, external heat or cold, titillation, an
uncomfortable bed, motion, pain, uneasiness of the digestive
organs, &c. We may dream from the brain being excited sym-
pathetically with the condition of any other organ, just as all
other organs may sympathise with each other: as the state of
the kidney or the brain may produce vomiting, the state of the
stomach produce headach, though productive of no uneasy
sensation in the stomach itself, so the administration of substances
possessed of the power of stimulating the brain in particular,
as certain narcotics in doses not sufficient to overpower the organ
and cause sleep, may induce dreams. Whatever excites the
-blood-vessels of the brain will do the same: the ingurgitation
of stimulants, blows, great functional excitement, and any cause of
an inflammatory state or an approach to it. When the brain is
irritable by disease, as in fever, dreaming occurs; and, sleep
taking place with difficulty, the delirium of approaching sleep
continues so long and sleep is so often interrupted, that nurses
tell us that the patient wandered greatly at night. But, inde-
pendently of its excitement of such a state, the functional ex-
citement of the brain in the waking state may be too great for
complete sleep, by not easily subsiding, so that, if not too
great to prevent sleep, it may continue sufficiently to prevent the


- @ See a curious instance of the discovery of legal papers by a dream, in Sir
Walter Scott’s notes to the Antiquary.
gb i


624 DREAMING.


complete repose of the brain, and may cause dreaming. Like
delirium, dreaming may arise from the opposite of stimulation,—
from the want of due stimulation, as from want of food, or want of
stimuli rendered necessary by habit. In dreaming there will be
all degrees and extent of excitement, just beyond perfect re-
pose or sound sleep, and just short of the waking state.

From the great irritability of children, shown by the facility
with which they have convulsions and inflammation, they dream
much; and their dreams are more frequently frightful than those
of adults. Old people, from the lightness of their sleep, also
dream much. fe

From the renewed power and irritability of the brain we dream
much more as the period for waking approaches."

The greater the development of a particular part of the brain,
and the greater its natural or acquired irritability, the more liable
will it than other parts of the brain be to dream; and for the
same reason dreams partake of the individual’s character, and, as
old people remember the events of their early life the best, they
dream most of these, while young persons dream of recent things.s
There.are however exceptions to this. The natural character of
the insane generally continues in their disease, but sometimes is
quite altered: and dreams may occur in which the tone of the
feelings may differ from that of the waking state. The dreams of
drunkenness and under the influence of narcotics are the most
extravagant.' ce

A curious circumstance is the direction given to dreams by the
character of the exciting cause. When they arise from uneasy
sensations, they are disagreeable ; and I may remark that, if the
cause of dreams is disagreeable, all the feelings excited will be ex-
cited disagreeably, and the images will be disagreeable. Evena
strange bed, though soft and warn, may make us dream simply


because it is not that to which we have been accustomed. If


there is any discomfort, mental or physical, sleep may be inter-
rupted the moment after it has begun by a sudden, and perhaps
violent, start, or by a sensation ofa blow or push, or of a loud noise:


* Lord Brougham contends that we dream only during the “ transition into
and out of sleep.” (l.c. p. 117.) This opinion is disproved by watching per-
sons in sleep and observing them toss about and mutter, evidently dreaming,
though their sleep continues.

‘ Dr. Macnish, |. c. p. 82. ¥ Ibid. lc, p. 95.


DREAMING. 625


and it may not be till after this has occurred more than once that
the person settles into sleep. Some always experience this on
first losing themselves, and then go to sleep for thenight."  Aris-
tides dreamt that a bull attacked him but only struck his knee; on
waking a small boil was there. Dr.James Gregory, having ap-
plied a hot bottle to his feet on going to bed, dreamt that he was
walking up Etna and finding the ground insufferably hot. One with
a blister on his head, dreamt that he was being scalped by Indians.
One in a damp bed, that he was being dragged through a stream.
A gouty man, when beginning to feel his pain in his sleep, may
dream he is on the rack before inquisitors. The sound of music
may excite delightful dreams. M. Giron de Buzareingues made
some curious experiments on this point, and directed at pleasure
the character of his dreams. In his first experiment, having allowed
the back of his head to be uncovered during sleep, he thought
he was at a religious ceremony in the open air: the custom of
the country in which he lived being to keep the head covered
excepting on some rare occurrences, among which was the per-
formance of religious ceremonies. On waking, he felt cold at
the back of the neck, as he frequently had when present at the
real ceremonies. He repeated the experiment in two days, with
the same result. In a third experiment he left his knees un-
covered, and dreamt that he was travelling at night in the dili-
gence, and all travellers know, he observes, that it is chiefly at
the knees they feel cold when travelling by that conveyance at
night.*

When sleep has not been profound, and persons have muttered,
I have amused myself with speaking to them and getting answers
from them. Dr. Beattie mentions a man “ in whom any kind of
dream could be induced, if his friends, by gently addressing him,
afforded the subject matter.’ y


« Dr. Macnish, l. ¢. p. 28.

* Dr. Magendie’s Journal de Physiologie, t. viii.

¥ «< Dissertations Moral and Critical. London, 1783. 4to. p. 217.”

Though the nature of dreaming is evident, some writers are so little advanced
as to be ignorant of it, and have no other than the most antiquated notions. Mr.
Colquhoun, as we shall see, p. 691. infra, supposes that, in dreaming, the soul is
struggling to act without the body ! and Lord Brougham, conceiving that the mind
acts better the more “ the influence of the body is withdrawn,”’ says that dreams
throw a strong light upon the “ subject, and seem to demonstrate the possible dis-
connection of mind and matter,” and illustrate “ the mind’s independence of


Pops Z


626 SLEEP-WAKING.


Tue power of volition is exerted in two ways —in dwelling
upon feelings or ideas, and in exciting muscular motion. (See
supra, p.346. sq.) While we dwell upon a feeling or idea, asso-
ciation occurs, and the various faculties enable us to judge and
invent ; we remember, desire, &c., attending to some ideas and
feelings, and neglecting others. In dreaming, our faculties judge,
remember, invent, in general, very imperfectly ; or, if on rare
occasions, well, and even admirably, on a single matter, still many
of our faculties are in total, partial, or a certain degree of repose,
and as soon as our dream turns off to something else, absurdities


matter and capacity of existence without it.” (4 Discourse on Natural Theo-
logy, p. 111.) It is very strange, however, that, when the soul is thus unfettered
or half unfettered, and thinks by itself, it thinks so oddly, and works, in the vast.
majority of cases, so much worse than when it has the full assistance of the brain,
that we are accustomed, if a man talks or writes nonsense, to say he is dreaming.
Even the soul’s consciousness of self often becomes false in dreams ; and we feel
ourselves * conscious of being, or having been, parties in acting and suffering
what not only never did, but never could, take place: ” “ indeed any dream is
more ar less, may I not say considerably, a check upon the mind of the waking
man,”’ and “ when we are taxing recollection for by-gone events, we frequently
exclaim, ‘ Did I really do so and so, or did I only dream it.’” (Observations on
the Discourse of Natural Theology, by Thomas Wallace, Esq. LL.D. p. 107.)

Locke, who argued well for us materialists, says, ‘* How extravagant and in-
coherent for the most part they are; how little conformable to the perfection and
order of a rational being, those who are acquainted with dreams need not be told.
This I would willingly be satisfied in, whether the soul when it thinks thus apart,
and as it were separate from the body, acts less rationally than when conjointly
with it, or no. If its separate thoughts be less rational, then these men must
say, that the soul owes its perfection of rational thinking to the body ; if it-does
not, it is wonder that our dreams should be for the most part so frivolous and
irrational ; and that the soul should retain none of its more rational soliloquies
and meditations.’ (1. c. b. ii. ch. i. 8.16.) |

Democritus and Lucretius account for dreams by fancying that the forms or
spectres of corporeal things, constantly emitted from them and floating about, as-
sault the soul in sleep: and Baxter, by fancying that spiritual beings amuse or
seriously busy themselves in making our souls active in sleep: and I think
they had as much reason on their side as Lord Brougham and Mr. Colquhoun.


SLEEP-WAKING, 627


commence: nay, coherency, after continuing a long while, often
terminates in an absurdity on the same subject. The power of
volition, whether over our feelings and ideas or muscles, in sound
sleep can be but moderately exerted; but its diminution has
endless degrees.. We may have little or no command over our
thoughts, or we may have much, as when we reason, calculate,
or compose well. We have all shades of amount of power over
our muscles: we breathe, cough, move our head, limbs, and even
our trunk, more or less, in ordinary sleep ; people forcibly roused
frequently get out of bed and begin dressing before they know
where they are or what they are about; and, when overcome with
sleep in the midst of forced exertion, will continue standing or
walking or even moving their fingers at their work. Some-
times we will, in vain, as when awake. When awake, we often
make great efforts in vain to detain particular ideas and under-
stand or produce, but find we cannot fix our attention to the
point, or, if we do, that our cerebral organs are incapable of
work ; sometimes we will motion without effect. So in sleep, not
only is our will generally feeble, but sometimes strong yet un-
obeyed. We strive in vain to detain thoughts, or, if we succeed,
still-certain faculties prove powerless. We may will much ex-
ertion strenuously, but the part of the nervous system connected
with the central extremities of the voluntary nerves is incapable
of being stimulated by that which is endowed with mental power.
In that imperfect sleep called night-mare, we will violently in
vain, but cannot move a muscle, norutteracry. Persons believe
that, if they can but move or even cry out, they shall recover
themselves, mistaking effect for cause: they move and cry out
the moment they have recovered.

The phenomena of partialsleep are seen more remarkably in
the state called somnambulism, or sleep-walking, than in common
dreaming. The term sleep-waking, or somno-vigilium, has been
proposed, and is very appropriate, because in this state patients
may not walk, or may even be unable to walk. The individual
is capable of no impression from his external senses, or trom one
or some of them only, and, if capable, either perfectly or in


2 Dr. Darwin (Zoonomia, vol. i. sect. 18. p. 286.), and after him Prof. Du-
gald Stewart, contended that, in sleep, volition was suspended, Dr. T. Brown
refuted them in his Observations on the Zoonomia.

Tie


628 SLEEP=-WAKING.


various degrees of imperfection ; some of his intellectual faculties
are highly active, and this in various degrees, while others are in
complete torpidity ; and the various inclinations and emotions
may be all inactive or one or more active in various degrees:
volition may be exerted over the muscles so that the person
shall talk, or walk, and execute various movements, or shall
dwell upon ideas at pleasure, and reason and compose, without
any general intelligence, so as to be in reality still asleep. Just
as occasionally in insanity and in ordinary dreams, an intellec-
tual faculty is sometimes heightened; and sometimes muscular
strength, or more properly the force of volition over the muscles.
Generally the whole is forgotten: sometimes remembered ; some-
times remembered and mistaken for reality; and sometimes re-
membered only when the same state returns. When persons
use their muscles, there must be that internal feeling which ac-
companies all muscular exertion (p. 527.),— there must be the
feeling of weight and resistance. I saw the sleep-waking con-
dition strikingly exhibited lately in a patient of mine in Uni-
versity College Hospital, —a girl, sixteen years of age, destitute
of the sense of smell as long as she could remember, subject to
pain of her vertex, and, like a sister, epileptic, though very in-
telligent, very facetious, and of excellent behaviour. After the
Baron Dupotet, passing the ends of his fingers up and down before
her, had sent her to sleep, on many occasions, for a few minutes
at a time, she was observed one day suddenly to talk uncon-
nectedly and move her arms and hands about, though incapable
of hearing, seeing, or feeling.’ She lay in bed or sat, with her
eyes open, saying a great number. of things, such as she might
say when awake, told stories, and with great expression of voice,
features, and manner, mimicked the voices and conversation
of many fellow-patients accurately, and mimicked the manipula-
tions of Baron Dupotet; yet she saw nobody, could not be roused
by hallooing in her ear, and bore the sharpest pinches with
indifference. She was cross, expressed displeasure at having
before been magnetised, said she would not be made a fool of,
complained of different things, shook her head, moving it forwards
and frowning, and saying, ‘“‘ You dirty beast.” Her hands were
very cold insuch attacks, and her whole surface pale. She would
suddenly come out of this state, stare about like a person waking,
rub her eyes, become still, smile, and be completely herself witheut


SLEEP-WAKING. 629


the least knowledge of what she had been doing, and feel quite
ashamed and beg pardon, when informed that she had said we made
afool of her. After some hours, or days, the attack would return.
But, before she remained permanently awake, shesome times fell
back repeatedly into the sleep-waking: and nothing could be
more striking than to see her eyes suddenly fixed unconsciously,
and then all the phenomena of perfect external insensibility and
talking begin again in less than a minute: and, in a few minutes,
to observe her become suddenly still, look wild or fall fast asleep
for an instant, rub her eyes, be sentient of every thing around her,
smile, and in short in less than a minute be wide awake, without
any knowledge of the state in which she had just been. As she
could not be awakened by the strongest agency applied to her ex-
ternal senses, I resolved to try the effect of producing an internal
sensation, and heightening her volition over her voluntary muscles.
I took her off the bed, and found she could not stand. Two of us
supported her erect, and lessened the support now and then, so
that she might feel she was falling. Her knees bent, and she
would have fallen, had we not held her up. This was repeated
a few times, till at Jast she seemed to feel the ground a little
with her feet, and, when we lessened our support, her knees bent
less: at length she stood pretty well. Then I forced her on,
and, though her legs at first dragged, she at last feebly attempted
stepping, soon she walked, and, when she walked firmly, being
led on quickly by one of us on each side, she suddenly awoke.
This was all the work of not five minutes. I presently laid her
down on the bed, and she in a minute relapsed into her old
condition: I raised and walked her again, and she was instantly
restored ; and remained without any return for a week. I did
not afterwards succeed in this way. When the affection re-
turned it was not so marked. She had some power of perceiving
persons, and hearing and feeling, so that she gave a certain amount
of answer and expressed some uneasiness on being pinched.
After a few days such attacks ceased, but she fell into the deli-
rium only of the state, — ecstatic delirium: having the full use
of her external senses, her volition over her muscles, knowing
where she was, and active in all her intellectual faculties and
feelings, saying she felt as if her brain was coming out and was
too big for her head, and begging me to cut her head off; in short,
being wide awake, but wandering unconnectedly from one subject
Tt;


630 SLEEP-WAKING.


to another, dejected, saying innocent, but absurd, rude, though
often witty and droll, things, which showed her feelings to be
disturbed, incoherent, and mimicking admirably, whistling and
singing well; and picking paper or linen to pieces: at length in
her attacks she occasionally swore, and was amorous. After re-
maining in this condition for a few days, she suddenly by mesmerie
manipulations one evening became herself completely ; still com-
plaining of pain at the top of her head, which she had suffered
from for many months and for which I had bled her repeat-
edly. She afterwards suddenly fell into this delirium again
several times, and, after continuing in it some hours or days,
would by mesmeric manipulations in two or three seconds become
completely herself and remain so for some hours or days. To ob-
serve her picking paper or linen to pieces, talking incoherently,
now whistling aloud, now singing in the ward, cross, miserable,
rude, dancing about, unable to look steadily for many seconds, her
eyes converging from parallelism, her countenanee pale, and
expressive now of insanity, now of fatuity; and then in two or three
seconds to see her completely herself, smiling, perfectly rational,
amiable, well behaved, with an expression of great intelligence,
was one of the most extraordinary changes I ever witnessed ; — to
see the functions of the brain in many points nearly suspended,
in many over excited, and in many wrong, — the organ altogether
oppressed and deranged, and then righting itself and perform.
ing all its functions properly in an instant, made an impression
upon me never to be effaced. When not in an attack, she forgot
every thing that had occurred in her attacks: but, when in them,
she recollected the occurrences of preceding attacks. In the
delirium her hands were not always cold as in the sleep-waking.
The pulse appeared hardly affected.

I will relate a number of examples of sleep-waking to show the —
various amount and extent of activity in this condition.

This first is very similar to that of my own patient, but sleep-
walking was added in one stage of the paroxysm.

‘© At Berlin,” says Gall, ** a young man, sixteen years old, had
extraordinary attacks from time to time. He was agitated in
his bed without consciousness; his movements and gestures
showed a great activity of many internal organs ; whatever was
done to bias he did not perceive it; at length he jumped out of
bed, and walked hastily in the apartment: his eyes were then


SLEEP-WAKING. 631


fixed and open. I placed different obstacles in his way, which
he removed with his hand, or carefully avoided ; then he threw
himself suddenly on his bed, was agitated there some time, and
at length awoke and sat up, very much astonished at the number
of curious persons who were about him.”

Here was a certain amount of sight and touch, and sense of re-
sistance and weight ; all was forgotten ; the changes were sudden.

« M. Joseph de Roggenbach, at Friburg in Brisgau,” continues
Gall, ‘‘ told me, in the presence of many witnesses, that he had
been a somnambulist from his infancy. In this state his tutor
had frequently made him read; made him look for places on
the map, and he found them more readily than when awake; his
eyes were always open and fixed; he did not move them, but
turned his whole head. Many times they held him, but he felt
the restraint, endeavoured to liberate himself, but did not wake.
Sometimes he said he should wake if they led him into the
garden, and this always happened.”

Here was a certain amount of szght, touch, and feeling of re-
sistance and weight; an increase of one mental power; and a certain
power of prediction ; he moved, not his eyes, but his whole head.

«« [ knew also the history of a miller, who, dreaming and with
his eyes open, would go into his mill, enter upon his usual daily
occupation, return to bed by the side of his wife, without re-
membering in the morning any thing he had done in the night.”

Here was a certain degree of szght, and feeling of reszstance
and weight ; and all was forgolien.

M. Martinet speaks of a saddler accustomed to rise in his
sleep and work at his trade»: and Professor Upham of an Ame-
rican farmer who rose in his sleep, went to his barn, and threshed
out five bushels of rye in the dark, separating the grain from the
straw with great exactness. ¢

These are examples of sleep-walking.

The following are examples of sleep-talking, or sleep-talking
and sleep-walking : —

«¢ Dr. Blacklock, the blind poet, on one occasion rose from his
bed, to which he had retired at an early hour, came into the
room where his family were assembled, conversed with them, and


® jl. ce. 4to. vol. ii. p. 456. sqq. ; 8vo. t. il. p. 510. sqq-
" Bibliotheque Médicale. © Jsis revelata, vol. i. p. 313. sq.


632 SLEEP-WAKING.


afterwards entertained them with a pleasant song, without any of
them suspecting he was asleep, and without his retaining after
he awoke, the least recollection of what he had done.”

«‘ Dr. Haycock, Professor of Medicine at Oxford, would deliver
a good sermon in his sleep; nor could all the pinching and
pulling of his friends prevent him.” ¢

Horstius mentions a young nobleman who was observed by
his brother to rise in his sleep, put on his cloak, open the case-
ment, mount by a pulley to the roof of the citadel of Brenstein
where he was, tear a magpie’s nest to pieces, wrap the young
ones up in his cloak, return to his room, place the cloak with
the birds in it near him, and go to bed. In the morning he told
the adventure as a dream, and was astonished when shown the
magpies in his cloak, and Jed to the roof and shown the remains
of the nest.

«« An American lady, now, we believe, alive, preached during
her sleep, performing regularly every part of the Presbyterian
service, from the psalm to the blessing. This lady was the
daughter of respectable and even wealthy parents: she fell into
bad health, and under its influence, she disturbed and amazed
her family by her nocturnal eloquence. Her unhappy parents,
though at first surprised, and perhaps flattered by the exhibition
in their family of so extraordinary a gift, were at last convinced
that it was the result of disease; and, in the expectation that
their daughter might derive benefit from change of scene, as
well as from medical skill, they made a tour with her of some
length, and visited New York and some other of the great cities
of the Union. We know individuals who have heard her preach
during the night in steam boats; and it was customary, at tea
parties in New York (in the houses of medical practitioners), to
put the lady into bed in a room adjacent to the drawing-room,
in order that the dilettanti might witness so extraordinary a
phenomenon. We have been told by ear-witnesses that her
sermons, though they had the appearance of connected dis-
courses, consisted chiefly of texts of Scripture strung together.
It is strongly impressed upon our memory that some of her
sermons were published in America.” ¢

‘“‘ A lady subject to spectral illusions would not only talk in


4 Dr. Macnish, |. e. 182. © Fraser's Magaxine.


SLEEP-WAKING, 633


her sleep with great fluency, and repeat great portions of poetry,
especially when unwell, but even cap verses for half an hour
at a time, never failing to quote lines beginning with the final
letter of the preceding, till her memory was exhausted.” £

I will now give instances of sleep-floating and sleep-swim-
ming.

Dr. Franklin says, “ I went out to bathe in Martin’s salt water
hot bath, in Southampton, and, floating on my back, fell asleep,
and slept nearly an hour, by my watch, without sinking or turning,
—a thing I never did before, and should hardly have thought
possible.” This showed only the completeness of his repose:
but Dr. Macnish quotes a case of actual swimming in sleep on
the coast of Ireland. ‘ About two o’clock in the morning, the
watchmen on the revenue quay were much surprised at descry-
ing a man disporting himself in the water, about 100 yards from
the shore. Information having been given to the revenue boat’s
crew, they pushed off, and succeeded in picking him up, but
strange to say, he had no idea of his perilous situation, and it
was with the utmost difficulty they could persuade him he was
not still in bed. But the most singular part of this novel ad-
venture, and which was afterwards ascertained, was that the
man had left his house at twelve o’clock that night, and walked
through a difficult and, to him, dangerous road, a distance of
nearly two miles, and had actually swum one mile and a half,
when he was fortunately discovered and picked up.” He then
adds a case of fishing. ‘ Not very long ago a boy was seen
fishing off Brest up to the middle in water. On coming up to
him, he was found to be fast asleep.”

The information given us with respect to these cases extends
no further, and we cannot tell the state of the eyes.

Dr. Pritchard mentions an individual who, having “ been in the
habit of frequenting a public promenade where he used to meet
his acquaintances, was seen to rise from his bed at night and
walk in his shirt along the same path, which extended a mile on
the brow of a hill, stopping very frequently and greeting dif-
ferent individuals whom he had been accustomed to seein the
same place.” &


f Edinburgh Journal of Science. See Dr. Macnish.
8 4 Treatise on Insanity and other Disorders respecting the Mind. By James
Cowles Pritchard, M.D. F.R.S. 1835. p. 407.


634: SLEEP-WAKING.


Vision might here have existed sufficiently to show him his
way, though the state of his brain suggested to him imaginary
forms; or he might have made his greetings by habit, without
fancying he saw individuals.

«A female servant in the town of Chelmsford, surprised the
family at four o'clock one morning, by walking down a flight of
stairs inher sleep, and rapping at the bed-room door of her master,
who inquired what she wanted ; when, in her usual tone of voice,
she requested some cotton, saying that she had torn her gown,
but hoped that her mistress would forgive her: at the same time
bursting into tears. Her fellow ‘servant, with whom she -had
been conversing for some time, observed her get out of bed, and
quickly followed her, but not before she had related this pitiful
story. She then returned to her room, and, a light having been
procured, she was found groping to find her cotton box. Another
person went to her, when, perceiving a difference in the voice,
she called out, ‘ That is a different voice — that is my’ mistress ;’
which was not the case, — thus clearly showing that she did not
see the object before her, although her eyes were wide open.
Upon_ inquiry as to what was the matter, she only said that she
wanted some cotton, but that her fellow servant had been’ to her
master and mistress making a fuss about it. It was now thought
prudent that she should be allowed to remain quiet for some
short time, and she was persuaded to lie down with her fellow
servant that she might then awake in her accustomed manner.
This failing in effect, her mistress went up to her room, and
rather angrily desired her to get up and go to her work, as it
was now six o’clock: this she refused, telling her mistress that
if she did not please her she might look out for another servant,
at the same time saying she would not rise at two o'clock,
pointing to the window, to injure her health for any one. For
the sake of the joke, she was told to pack up her things, and
start off immediately, but to this she made no reply. | She re-
buked her fellow servant for not remaining longer in bed, and
shortly after this became quiet. She was afterwards shaken
violently, and awoke. She then rose, and seeing the cotton
box disturbed, demanded to know why it had been meddled
with, not knowing that she alone was the cause of it. In the
course of the day several questions were put to her in order to
try her recollection, but the real fact of her walking was not


SLEEP-WAKING. 635


made known to her; and she is still quite unconscious of what
has transpired.” »

Here sight was suspended, but hearing perfect, as well as
touch and the feeling of weight and resistance ; all was forgot-
ten; she was roused by shaking, and with empunity.

A lad named George David, sixteen years old, in the ser-
vice of Mr. Hewson, a “ butcher in Bridge Road, Lambeth, at
about twenty minutes past nine, bent forward in his chair, and
rested his forehead on his hands, and in ten minutes started up,
went for his whip, put on one spur, and went thence into the
stable ; not finding his own saddle in the proper place, he re-
turned to the house and asked for it. Being asked what he
wanted with it, he replied, to go his rounds. He returned to
the stable, got on the horse without the saddle, and was pro-.
ceeding to leave the stable: it was with much difficulty and
force that Mr. Hewson, junior, assisted: by the other lad, could
remove him from the horse: his strength was great, and it was
with difficulty that he was brought in doors.’—“ The lad con-.
sidered himself as stopped at the turnpike gate, and took six-
pence out of his pocket to be changed; and holding out his
hand for the change, the sixpence was returned to him. He
immediately observed, ‘ None of your nonsense, that is the six-
pence again; give me my change.’ When twopence halfpenny
was given to him, he counted it over, and said, ‘ None of your
gammon, that is not right; I want a penny more,’ making the
threepence halfpenny, which was the proper change. He then
said, ‘ Give me my castor,’ (meaning his hat) which slang term
he had been in the habit of using, and then began to whip and
spur to get his horse on. His pulse was at this time at 136, full
and hard; no change of countenance could be observed, nor
any spasmodic affection of the muscles, the eyes remaining close
the whole of the time.”—“ During the time of bleeding, Mr. Hew-
son related a circumstance of a Mr. Harris, optician in Holborn,
whose son, some years since, walked out on the parapet of the
house in his sleep. The boy joined the conversation, and ob-
‘served, * He lived at the corner of Brownlow Street.’ After the
arm was tied up he unlaced one boot, and said he would go to
bed. In three minutes from this time, he awoke, got up, and


» Dr, Macnish, 164. sqq.


636 SLEEP-WAKING,


asked what was the matter (having been then one hour in the ~
trance), not having the slightest recollection of any thing that
had passed, and wondered at his arm being tied up, and at the
blood, &c.”i

Here sight, hearing, and touch, as well as the sense of weight
and resistance, were active; and all was forgotten.

According to the newspapers, a year or two ago, John Green, a
plasterer, accused Mary Spencer at the Town Hall, Southwark,
before Alderman Thorp, of stealing from him a pair of trowsers
which he was carrying home at ten o’clock at night, gine
High Street, in the Borough, fast asleep.

‘‘ He deposed that, after finishing his work, he went to see
some friends at Pimlico, and was accosted by a female; he had
at the time a bundle under his arm. He knew no more of
what transpired until between one and two o’clock on Sunday
morning.

“ Alderman Thorp. What! were you so drunk that you cannot
tell what happened ?

‘“¢ John Green (with great simplicity). I was not drunk, your
worship; I was fast asleep. (Laughter.)

“© Alderman Thorp” (with greater simplicity, though officially
one of those who are presumed competent to determine who are
the fittest persons to be physicians and surgeons and teachers in
St. Thomas’s and other hospitals, and who generally allow them-
selves to be led by one whom they have made treasurer and con-
sider fit to guide them in their judgment, having himself in most
instances already retired from business). ‘‘ You cannot be serious.
I never heard of such a thing, as a man walking through a
crowded thoroughfare, like the Borough High Street, without
being disturbed. :

“* John Green. What I have stated, your worship, is true; I
am unfortunately too frequently afflicted with fits of somnam-
bulism; and, for greater security from robbers, I always make
what articles I carry fast to my arm, so that if any one attempt
to snatch it from me it would awaken me.

“« Alderman Thorp. But how do you know the prisoner is the
party who accosted you in the Borough? If you were asleep,
you could not see her.


i Lancet, vol. i.


SLEEP-WAKING. 637


“* John Green. Strange as it may appear, although I have not
the power to arouse myself when in such a state of excessive
lethargy, yet I can retain the sound of persons’ voices in my
mind, and, from the voice of the prisoner, I have not the least
doubt she is the party.

“¢ Alderman Thorp. How do you account for the lapse of time,
from being accosted by the prisoner up to the time you dis-
covered your loss ?

“ John Green. I am in the habit of walking for hours in my
sleep, and if an attempt had been made to forcibly take the
bundle from my arm, it would have aroused me; my handker-
chief was cut, and thus the bundle was easily taken away.

“ Alderman Thorp. I never heard such a case before ; was the
bundle found ?

‘‘ Acting Inspector M‘Craw, division M., answered in the
affirmative, and added, that what the complainant had stated
about walking the streets and roads was true: he had made
inquiries, and found it to be the fact: it was well known to the
police.

“ Watt, Police constable 163., division M., deposed, that the
complainant came to the station-house between one and two
o’clock on Sunday morning, and made precisely the same state-
ment he had made before the Alderman. ‘The Inspector thought
the tale savoured of the marvellous, and told witness to accom-
pany him (complainant) in search of the property; and on ar-
riving at a house in Kent Street, Borough, he said he thought
the bundle was there. He knocked at the door, which was
opened, and by the door of a room wherein the prisoner was
sleeping, the property was found. The moment she spoke, he
said the prisoner was the person who stopped him in the Borough.
Witness took the prisoner to the station-house.

‘«« The prosecutor here pointed out the way in which the
bundle must have been taken away, and showed the Alderman
the rent handkerchief.

‘‘ Mr, Edwards for the prisoner contended that no jury would
convict upon the evidence of a sleep-walker, in prosecution
against a street-walker. The prisoner laid no claim to the
bundle; and as the complainant had sworn it was his property,
the police would give it up to him.

“ Alderman Thorp said it was so strange a case that he hardly


638 SLEEP-WAKING.


knew how to act; he should, however, under the doubtful cir-
cumstance as to identity, give the prisoner the benefit of it, and
discharge her. The bundle was given up to the complainant.

«¢ A gentleman, who was in attendance, said he had known the
complainant many years, and it was not an uncommon thing for
him to be seized with that unhappy affliction while at work on
the scaffold, and yet he had never met with an accident, and
while in that state, would answer questions put to him as though
he was awake.” *

Hearing was retained, as well as the sense of weight and re-
sistance, and possibly sz7ght to a certain degree; the attack came
on suddenly, in the waking state; so that the case, like that of
my patient, was one of partial sleep in the waking state, — ecstacy
as it is termed, and not of partial excitement during sleep.

An Italian nobleman, named Augustin Forari, was subject to
sleep-waking, and on one occasion watched by a Signor Vigneul
Marville, who gave the following account : —

‘“‘ One evening towards the end of October, we played at
various games after dinner: Signor Augustin took a part in
them along with the rest of the company and afterwards retired
to repose. At eleven o'clock his servant told us that his master
would walk that night, and that we might go and watch him.
I examined him some time after with a candle in my hand; he
was lying upon his back, and sleeping with open, staring, eyes.
We were told that this was a sure sign that he would walk in
his sleep. I felt his hands and found them extremely cold, and
his pulse beat so slowly that his blood appeared not to circulate.
We played at backgammon until the spectacle began. It was about
midnight, when Signor Augustin drew aside the bed-curtains
with violence, arose,.and put on his clothes. I went up to him
and held the light under his eyes. He took no notice of it,
although his eyes were open and staring. Before he put on his.
hat, he fastened on his sword-belt, which hung on the bed-post :
the sword had been removed. He then went in and out of
several rooms, approached the fire, warmed himself in an arm-
chair, and went thence into a closet where was his wardrobe.
He sought something in it, put all the things into disorder, and
having set them right again, locked the door, and put the key


k Tsis revelata.


SLEEP-WAKING. 936


into his pocket. He went to the door of the chamber, opened
it, and stepped out on the staircase. When he came below, one
of us made a noise by accident: he appeared frightened, and
hastened his steps. His servant desired us to move softly, and
not to speak, or he would become out of his mind; and some-
times he ran as if he were pursued, if the least noise was made
by those standing around him. He went into a large court and
to the stable, stroked his horse, bridled it, and looked for the
saddle to put on it. As he did not find it in the accustomed
place, he appeared confused. He then mounted his horse and
galloped to the house door. He found this shut; dismounted, and
knocked several times at the door with a stone which he had
picked up. After many unsuccessful efforts he remounted, and
led his horse to the watering place, which was at the other end
of the court, let it drink, tied it to a post, and went quietly to
the house. Upon hearing a noise which the servants made in
the kitchen, he listened attentively, went to the door, and held
his ear to the keyhole. After some time he went to the other
side, and into a parlour in which was a billiard table. He walked
round it several times, and acted the motions of a player.. He
then went to a harpsichord on which he was accustomed to prac-
tise, and played a few irregular airs. After having moved about
for two hours, he went to his room, and threw himself on his
bed in his clothes, and we found him in them the next morning,
for after his attacks, he always slept eight or ten hours. The
servants declared they could put an end to the paroxysm only
either by tickling his soles, or blowing a trumpet in his ear.”!

Here, hearing, touch, the sense of weight and resistance were
active, and probably sight to some degree; he was roused with
ampunity.

Drs. Righellini and Pigatti describe, from their own ob-
servation, the sleep-waking of a man servant named Negretti,
twenty-four years of age, who, from his eleventh year, had ex-
perienced attacks of the disease in March, not extending beyond
April.. March 16. 1740, after going to sleep on a bench ‘in
the kitchen, he first began to talk, then walked about; went to
the dining-room and spread a table for dinner, and placed him-


1%. A. Muratori, della forza della Fantasia Umana. Venezia, 1766. Dr.
. Pritchard, 1. c.
UU


640 SLEEP-WAKING,


self behind a chair with a plate in his hand, as if waiting on his
master, the Marquis Luigi Sale. After waiting till he thought
his master had dined, he cleared away, and put all the things
into a basket, which he locked up ina cupboard. He afterwards
warmed a bed, locked up the house, and prepared for rest.
Being then awakened, and asked if he remembered what he had
been doing, he answered, ‘ No.’ Often, however, he did re-
member. On the 18th of the same month, he went through the
same process, but, instead of going to bed, went into the kitchen
and sat down to supper. Dr. Righellini, with many others, were
very curious to see him eat. At once recollecting himself, the
man said, *‘ How can I so forget? to-day is Friday, and I must
not dine.’ He then locked up every thing and went to bed. If
water was thrown in his face or his eyes were forcibly opened,
he would awake, but remained some time faint and stupid. His
eyes were firmly closed in the paroxysm, and he took no notice
of a candle placed close to them. Sometimes he went against
the wall, and even hurt himself severely. If any body pushed
him, he got out of the way; and moved his arms rapidly on every
side: and, if in a place with which he was not well acquainted,
he felt all the objects around with his hand, and showed much
inaccuracy; but, in places familiar to. him, he was not confused
and went through his business well. ‘After Dr. Pigatti had shut
a door through which he had just passed, he struck- himself
against it on returning. Sometimes he carried a candle about,
but, on a bottle being substituted, he carried it about as if it were
a candle. Dr. Pigatti was certain he could not see. Once in
his sleep he said he must go and hold a light to his master in
his coach. Dr. Righellini followed him closely, and found that
he stood at all the-corners of the streets with his torch not
lighted, waiting a while in order that the coach which he fancied
was following might pass when the light was required. On one ~
occasion he ate several cakes and some salad for which he had just
asked the cook. He then went with a lighted candle into the
cellar and drew wine, which he drank. He would carry .a tray
with wine-glasses and knives, and turn it obliquely, to avoid an
accident, on passing through a narrow doorway. Dr. Pigatti once
substituted some strongly seasoned cabbage for a salad which
he had prepared and had sit down to eat: he ate the cabbage,
and then some pudding which was substituted for it, without


SLEEP-WAKING. 641


perceiving the difference. At another time, having asked for
wine, he drank water which was given to him; and sniffed ground
coffee after asking for snuff. ™

The state of ¢aste and smell was here inquired into, and found
inactive: touch and the sense of weight and resistance were active;
sight inactive ; and the actions were habitual.

Dr. Francesco Soave relates the case of Castelli, the pupil of
an Italian apothecary. The youth was found asleep one night,
translating Italian into French, and looking out the words in
a dictionary. They put out his candle, when he, finding him-
self in the dark, began to grope for it, and went to light it at
the kitchen fire, though other candles were alight in the room
At other times he had gone down to the shop and weighed out
medicines, and talked to supposed customers. “When any one
conversed with him on a subject on which his mind was bent,
he gave rational answers. He had been reading Macquer’s
Chemistry, and somebody altered his marks. This puzzled him;
~ and he said, ‘ Bel piacere di togliermi i segni. He found his
place and read aloud, but his voice growing fainter, his master
told him to raise it, which he did. Yet he perceived none of the
persons standing round him; and though he heard,” says Dr.
Soave, “any conversation which was in conformity with the
train of his ideas, he heard nothing of the discourse which
these persons held on other subjects. His eyes seemed to be
very sensible to objects relating to his thoughts, but appeared to
have no life in them; and so fixed were they, that, when he read,
he was observed not to move his eyes but (like M. Roggenbach,
p. 631. supra) his whole head from one side of the page to the
other.” 2

Here was most decided sight, though the existence of it
was so partial, and his mind could attend in so limited a way
that the presence of other candles was not noticed, and he went
to the kitchen for a light: hearing was active; of course the
sense of weight and resistance, and touch. Volition over the muscles
was rather weak, as his voice grew fainter while he read, and he
did not exert the muscles of his eyes, but moved his whole head.

Still more, however, has been done in sleep-waking.


m. Muratori, |. c.
" Riflessioni sopra il Somnambolismo: di Francesco Soave.


wo: 2%


642 SLEEP-WAKING.


‘¢ In 1686, Lord Culpepper’s brother was indicted at the Old
Bailey for shooting one of the guards and his horse. He pleaded
somnambulism, and was acquitted, on producing ample evidence
of the extraordinary things he did in his sleep. There is a some-
what similar story of a French gentleman, who rose in his sleep,
crossed the Seine, fought a duel, and killed his antagonist, with-
out recollecting any of the circumstances when awake.” °

The next, as well as the cases mentioned at p. 633. illustrates the
occasional great acuteness of sleep-wakers. ‘A young man named
Johns, who works at Cardrew, near Redruth, being asleep in the
sumpter-house of that mine, was observed by two boys to rise and
walk to the door, against which he leaned: shortly after, quitting
this position, he walked to the engine shaft, and safely descended
to the depth of twenty fathoms, where he was found by his com-
rades soon after, with his back resting on the ladder. They
called to him to apprise him of the perilous situation in which he
was, but he did not hear them, and they were obliged to shake
him roughly till he awoke, when he appeared totally at a loss to
account for his being so situated.” P

In. the following cases a partial increase of mental power took
place, as is sometimes noticed in insanity and common dreams: —

«“ A story is. told of a boy who dreamed that he got out of bed,
and ascended to the summit of an enormous rock, where he found
an eagle’s nest, which he brought away with him and. placed
under his bed. Now the whole of these events actually took
place ; and what he conceived, on awaking, to be a mere vision,
was found, to have had an actual existence, by the nest being
found in the precise spot where he imagined he had put it, and
by the evidence of spectators who beheld his perilous adventure.
The precipice which he ascended was of a nature that must have
baffled the most expert. mountaineer, and such, as at other times
he could not have scaled.” 4 |

Gassendi tells of a man who often rose and dressed in his
sleep, went into a cellar and drew wine, appearing to see in the
dark as well as in the day; but, when he awoke either in the
cellar or street, was obliged to grope his way back to bed. He
often thought there was not light enough, and that he had risen


° Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 316. P Dr. Macnish, p. 166.
4 Dr. Macnish, 1. c. p. 170.


SLEEP-WAKING. 643


too early, and therefore struck a light. He tells of another who
passed on stilts “over a torrent asleep one night, and on awaking
was afraid to return before daylight, and before the water had
subsided.” = |

The intellectual achievements of Coleridge and others during
ordinary dreaming are as striking as any thing of the kind to my
knowledge recorded of sleep-waking.

An increase of muscular strength has sometimes, asin insanity,
been noticed. One Sunday, Mr. Dubrie, a musician at Bath,
attempted in vain to open a window that happened to be nailed
down in his bed-room. At night he rose in his sleep, and made
the attempt successfully, but threw himself out and broke his
leg.s

The increase of mental power, in respect of determinate
muscular movement, is shown in that unusual variety of chorea
called leaping ague, in fits of which persons wide awake invo-
luntarily dance admirably who had never learnt, performing
the most difficult steps and exhibiting exquisite grace, rapidly
execute all kinds of difficult movements, and run violently in the
most dangerous situations without mischief.t Lord Monboddo
describes a sleep-walking girl in Scotland, about sixteen years of
age, who, in her fits, which began with drowsiness ending “in sleep,
or what had the appearance of sleep, for her eyes were close
shut,” would leap upon stools and tables with surprising agility,
and “run with great violence and much faster than she could do
when well, but always with a certain destination to some one
place in the neighbourhood, and to which place she often said,
when she found the fit coming upon her, that she was to go; and
after she had gone to the place of her destination, if she did
not there awake, she came back in the same direction, though she
did not always keep the high road, but frequently went a nearer
way across the fields; and though her road, for this reason, was
often very rough, she never fell, notwithstanding the violence
with which she ran. But all the while she ran, her eyes were
quite shut, as her brother attests, who often ran with her to take
care of her, and who, though he was much stronger, older, and
cleverer than she, was hardly able to keep up with her. When


® Dr. Pritchard, |. c. p. 434. sq. $ Dr. Macnish, 171.
* See, for instance, Med. Chir. Trans. vol. y. and vil.


UU 3


64:4 SLEEP-WAKING.


she told, before the fit came on, to what place she was to run,
she said she dreamt the night before that she was to run to that
place ; and though they sometimes dissuaded her from going to
a particular place, as to my house, for example, where they said
the dogs would bite her, she said she would go that way and no
other. When she awoke, and came out of her delirium, she found
herself extremely weak, but soon recovered her strength, and was
nothing the worse for it, but, on the contrary, was much the
worse from being restrained fromrunning. When she awoke and
came to herself, she had not the least remembrance of what had
passed while she was asleep. Sometimes she would run upon
the top of the earthen fence which surrounded her father’s little
garden; and though the fence was of an irregular figure, and
very narrow at top, yet she never fell from it, nor from the top
of the house, upon which she would sometimes get, by the assist-
ance of this fence, though her eyes were then likewise shut.”
Once, in a fit, she had a violent desire to drink of water from a
particular well, and on their giving her other water, “ she would
not let it come near her, but rejected it with great aversion; but
when they brought her water from this well, she drank it greedily,
her eyes being all the while shut. Before her last fit came upon
her, she said that she had just three leaps to make, and she would
neither leap nor run more. And accordingly, having fallen asleep
as usual, she leaped up upon the stone at the back of the chim.
ney, and down again; and having done this three times, she kept
her word, and never leaped or ran more. She is now in perfect
health.” ®

In a recent American case of somnambulism, to which I shall
presently refer, the patient, with her eyes closed, “ sometimes
engaged in her usual-occupations, and then her motions were
~remarkably quick and impetuous; she moved with astonishing
_ rapidity, and accomplished whatever she attempted with a cele-
rity of which she was utterly incapable in her waking state.”

In another, though the patient, in her fits of sleep, while her
eyes were open and she was talking to her acquaintance, making
ironical applications. to them under feigned names, was perfectly
insensible to pricking with needles, to wrenching her fingers, to
brandy and hartshorn put into her eyes and mouth, Spanish snuff in


" Ancient Metaphysics.


SLEEP-WAKING. 645


her nostrils, a candle held so near her eyes as to burn the lashes,
the noise of a loud voice in her ears or of a stone thrown against
the back of her bed, she would nevertheless spring out of bed, and
keep “ the middle way between the bedsteads as well as when
awake, and never come against them, turning dexterously round
between the bedsteads and a concealed closet without even groping
the way or touching the objects; and after turning round, she
returned to her bed, covered herself with the clothes, and again
became as stiff as at the commencement. She then awoke, as if
from a profound sleep, and when she perceived, from the appear-
ance of the bystanders, that she must have had her fits again,
she wept the whole day for shame, An never knew what had
happened to her during the paroxysm.”

In general patients are not easily mht a Sometimes they
are. Dr. Pritchard knew a man, who was accustomed to attend a
weekly market, rise from his bed, saddle his horse,.and proceed
as far as the turnpike, which, being shut, awakened him, I have
already given other examples. Although the persons mentioned
were awakened with impunity, immediate death has occasionally
been the consequence. Dr. Macnish mentions a young lady sub-
ject to sleep-walking, whose door one night was not, as usual,
secured, so that she walked out into the garden; and there she
was awakened by some of the family who followed her. But the
shock was such that she almost instantly expired. ¥ .

One evening, about twelve or eighteen months ago, at Dres-
den, a young lady was observed walking upon the top of a house.
The alarm was given, and a considerable concourse assembled.
Every precaution was taken to prevent her from receiving injury
in case of falling: the street was covered with beds, mattresses,
&c. Meanwhile, the young lady, apparently unconscious of
danger, came forward to the edge of the roof, smiling and
bowing to the multitude below, and occasionally arranging her
hair and her dress. After this scene had continued for some
time, and the spectators were in the utmost anxiety for her safety,
she at length proceeded towards the window of a room from
which she had come. In their alarm, some of her family had
placed a light in it, which the somnambulist perceived, and in


x M. Sauvage de la Croix. Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 33*
y 1, Cs D. 173.
uU 4


646 SLEEP-WAKING,


consequence suddenly awoke, fell to the ground, and was killed
on the spot.” | .

The curious occasional circumstance of our not remembering
the points of a dream till dreaming of the same things again, has
been strikingly noticed in sleep-waking.

Ritter* describes a somnambulist boy, who, on waking, recol-
lected nothing that occurred in his sleep, but could talk of other
matters. On falling asleep again, he could resume his discourse
just where it had been interrupted by his waking; on waking
again, he would know nothing that had transpired in his sleep,
but recollect what had been said to him last when awake; and
thus, says the simple reporter, it appeared as if he had two souls,
one for the state of sleep, and the other for the period when he
was awake. My patient recollected the occurrences of her pa-
roxysms of extatic delirium in her paroxysms only. (Supra,
p- 630.) |

Even in the mixed stupefaction and excitement of intoxication
the same phenomenon has presented itself. ‘ Dr. Abel informed,
me,” says Mr. Combe, “of an Irish porter to a warehouse, who for-
got, when sober, what he had done when drunk: but, being drunk,
again recollected the transactions of his former state of intoxi-
cation. On one occasion, being drunk, he had lost a parcel of
some value, and in his sober moments could give no account of
it. Next time he was intoxicated, he recollected that he had left
the parcel at a certain house, and there being no address on it,
it had remained there safely, and was got on his calling for it.”
This man must have had two souls, one for his sober state, and one
for him when drunk.

The paroxysms of intermitting insanity are sometimes followed
by oblivion of their-events in the lucid interval, and a fresh
paroxysm brings them all to the memory. Here, of course, are
a rational soul and a mad soul in the same tenement.

Shakspeare, aware of the frequency of the. phenomenon in
sleep-walkers, represents Lady Macbeth as walking in her sleep
with her eyes open, though he makes the royal physician igno-
rantly infer that therefore she must be awake, and a gentlewoman
of the court know better, —


% Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 320. sq.
* Psychological Magazine, vol. i. No. 1. p. 69.
> A System of Phrenology, ed. iii. p. 521.


SLEEP-WAKING. 647


** Doctor. You see her eyes are open.
Gentlewoman. Ay, but their sense is shut.


But a remarkable circumstance is that, though a particular
sense appear torpid, it may be alive to some impressions. <A
sleep-waking female, mentioned by Lorry, could not be made to
see or hear or be aware of the presence of any person but one,
and him she evidently saw, and to him she used to address her-
self upon the subject of her dream. Dr. Pritchard gives an ac-
count of a boy who, in these paroxysms, became insensible to all
external impressions, except that, when he happened to play on
the flute, he sometimes perceived if other boys began to accom-
pany him, and then evidently directed his attention to them. The
insensibility to external impressions in sleep-waking, as in common
sleep, is not in the organs of sense or the tract of their nerves, but
in the portion of the brain most immediately connected with them:
and, if these portions are not torpid, and at the same time there
is excitement either of a particular kind, as musical, for instance,
or in connection with a particular individual, those impressions
tell which are in relation with the excitement, while those which
find all torpid with which they might be in relation are unno-
ticed. But, for this singular partial sensibility to take place, the
portion of the brain in connection with the very extremities of the
nerve of sense cannot be torpid: for, if it were, no excitement in
relation to any object of that sense, no attention or direction of
the thoughts, would avail. Such a portion is torpid sometimes.
Negretti sat down to eat a bow] of salad : yet, though his thoughts
must have been upon it and his attention directed to it, he ate first
cabbage and then pudding, which his friends substituted for it in
succession, without perceiving the difference. Whenhe had asked
for wine, he did not detect that they gave him water; when
snuff, that he received coffee. On the other hand, if the portion
of the brain in connection with a particular sense is not asleep, its
objects may be perceived though presented unexpectedly. Signor
Augustin heard slight sounds at a distance, and was set listening.
I therefore cannot agree with Dr. Pritchard, who attempts to
explain these differences entirely by generalising the remark made
on Castelli’s case by the reporters, and saying that, ‘‘ when atten-
tion is by a voluntary act directed to the particular operation of


© On Disorders of the Nervous System, &c. p. 409.


648 SLEEP-WAKING.


sense, the perceptive faculty of the sleeper is perfect, even remark-
ably acute. But when his mind is distracted, his reverie presenting
different objects, even loud sounds are imperceptible to him.”
If, on the other hand, a particular sense is not torpid, but the
portion of the brain in immediate connection with its nerves sen-
sible, impressions may not be perceived, on account of the excite-
ment of the thoughts—of attention, in another direction; just as,
when in study we become wrapt in thought, we cease to hear the
chimes of a clock in our apartment: and, though a sensation take
place, the mind may form a wrong judgment if imperfectly excited
towards it; as when Negretti, if a blow was given him with a stick,
or a muff was thrown at him, fancied in each instance it was a dog,
—mistakes similar to those which we make, if addressed or
touched when deep in thought. And, although a sense be nearly
torpid, a powerful partial excitement and concentration of thought,
such as happens in common dreaming when we successfully effect
what we had attempted in vain when awake, may cause very
slight impressions on that sense to be accurately perceived.
Probably, not merely is the zntellect partially much heightened,
in some instances; but a sense rendered exquisite, so that a
person may see with the eyes so much closed that others consi-
der them shut, and perceive in what others call darkness, I shall
mention a case of extraordinary sensibility to light at p. 653. infra.
The sensibility’sometimes either quickly varies or becomes very
peculiar in the paroxysm. For, while it was certain that my
little patient in herdelirium saw perfectly all round her, I darted
my finger rapidly towards her eyes, but the pupil did not lessen
nor the lids wink. The same extraordinary phenomenon oc-
curred in a case presently to be quoted from Dr, Abercrombie,
and in another from an American journal. I made the expe-
riment repeatedly on different days. Another singularity was
that, though she evidently saw well around, she declared, on
my holding up one finger, that there were two; on holding up
two, she declared there were four; on holding up four, she said
there was a large number... On presenting a watch to her, she
could not tell the time, though she attempted carefully: she at
length pronounced an hour, and persisted in it, but quite wrong.
Once while looking at Baron Dupotet, she said he had a great many
eyes, and then that his eyes turned right round in his head. In the
delirium I always noticed one eye to be too near the nose. The


SLEEP-WAKING+s 649


following case also exhibited either rapid changes or an extraordi-
nary state of sensibility. Dr. Darwin relates the case of a young lady
about seventeen years of age, who, every day for five or six weeks,
had fits of violent convulsions, then retchings, next equally violent
hiccups, then tetanus, and at last sleep-waking, becoming insen-
sible, yet singing, quoting whole passages of poetry, and holding
conversations with imaginary persons, and coming to herself with
great surprise and fear, but with no recollection of what had hap-
pened. At length she could walk about the room in the fit without
running against the furniture, and evidently had some external
sense : for she took a cup of tea and expressed a fear that there was
poison in it; and seemed to smell at a tuberose, and deliberated
about breaking the stem, because it would make her sister so
charmingly angry ; once heard a bell, was less melancholy when
the shutters were open, and impatient if a hand was held over
her eyes or her hands were held down, saying, “ She could not
tell what to do, as she could neither see nor move.”

I conceive that those portions of the brain that are connected
with the nerves of the respective organs of sense may all be
completely torpid; or only some of them; or not completely
torpid ; or some in one degree of torpidity and others in another ;
and that they may appear torpid when they are not, or more torpid
than they are, from the attention being dull or directed to another
quarter: that one or more may become exquisitely sensible, while
the others are in various degrees of torpidity, and may fluctuate
rapidly between sensibility and insensibility or be peculiarly de-
ranged; that the partial intelligence of the brain may be of va-
rious degrees, and have various directions, and may act powerfully
with very little external sense: and that great variations in every
point may take place in the fits of the same individual, and even
in the same fit. If to these considerations we add the force
of habit, we shall explain all that is usually observed in sleep-
waking. Negrettilaid the table, waited, and put the things away, by
habit; and, in places to which he had been accustomed, showed no
confusion, but went through his business cleverly ; whereas, in a
place of which he had no distinct knowledge, he felt with his hands
all around, and showed much inaccuracy. He struck himself against
a wall severely, and against a door which they had intentionally
shut. Galen says that he himself walked about in his sleep a
whole night, till he awoke by striking against a stone that hap-


650 SLEEP-WAKING.


pened to be in his way. Habit will also be far more successful
in the partial excitement of sleep-waking. The man who often
went in his sleep to draw wine in the cellar had no difficulty,
but if he accidentally awoke he had to grope his way back.
He knew the way well, but when awake had the emotion of fear
to check him; and, in addition to this, probably had not the
intensity of partial excitement which prevailed in his sleep, so
that his habit was less effective.

But, though partial torpidity and partial excitement, of various
degrees and in various points of the brain, and excitement in rela-
tion to various individual external objects, and some derangement
of the natural sensibility, may explain all the cases which I have
described, some persons explain many of the phenomena by the
operation of a new sense diffused throughout the surface, but most
intense at the epigastrium and fingers, and adduce extraordinary
cases in proof of their belief.

‘‘ There are, therefore, somnambulists who see,” says Gall,
after relating the cases quoted in p. 630. sq., “and the opinion
of certain visionaries, who think that the perception of external
objects takes place in somnambulists only by the internal senses,
is refuted. |

«« Experience proves that somnambulists who have their eyes
shut hit themselves when obstacles unknown to them are placed
in their way, that they fall into holes, &c. When, with their
eyes shut, they find themselves in a place familiar to them, they
find their way, like blind people, by the aid of local memory.

“ Just as the eye and ear may be awake in dreaming, so may
other external senses. We perceive exhalations that surround
us; we recognise a bitter or sweet. taste of the saliva after a bad
digestion; we feel heat, cold, &c. Some persons think that
somnambulism is a completely extraordinary state, because som-
nambulists execute, during their sleep, things which they could
not accomplish awake: they clamber on trees, roofs, &c.

«¢ All astonishment ceases as soon as we reflect upon the cir-
cumstances in which we do the boldest things, and upon others
in which we cannot. Any one ina balcony, furnished with a
balustrade, could look down from a very high tower, and without
resting against this balustrade. We walk without tottering upon
a plank placed upon the parquet. ‘To what will not boys ac-
custom themselves in their rash sports? What do not moun-


SLEEP-WAKING. 651


taineers in the pursuit of the chamois, rope-dancers, tumblers,
&c. perform? But take the balustrade from the balcony: let
us but discover an abyss to the right and left of the plank, and
we are lost. Why? Is it because we are not in a condition to
walk upon the plank? No. It is because fear destroys our
confidence in our powers.

«« Now let us judge of the somnambulist. He sees distinctly
what he is about to do, but the organs which would warn him of
the danger are asleep: he is therefore without fear, and executes
whatever his bodily powers allow him successfully to attempt.
But wake him: instantly he will perceive his danger, and give
way.

“< All this is sufficient to establish that the nature*of dreams and
of somnambulism furnishes fresh proofs of the plurality of the
organs.”


Let us, however, now inquire what phenomena of a marvellous
kind have been recorded.

We have the authority of an archbishop of Bordeaux for the
case of a young ecclesiastic who in his sleep would rise, go to his
room, take pen, ink, and paper, and compose good sermons. When
he had finished a page, he would read it aloud, and correct it.
Once he had written ce divin enfant ; in reading over the passage
he substituted adorable for divin: but, observing that ce could
not stand before adorable, he added t. The archbishop held a
piece of pasteboard under his chin to prevent him from seeing the
paper on which he was writing ; but he wrote on, not at all incom-
moded. The paper on which he was writing was then removed,
and another piece substituted; but he instantly perceived the
change. He wrote pieces of music in this state, with his eyes
closed. The words were under the music: and once were too
large, and not placed exactly under the corresponding notes. He
soon perceived the error, blotted out the part, and wrote it over
again with great exactness.

A sleep-waking boy at Vevey, thirteen years and a half old,
was declared, by a committee of the Philosophical Society of
Lausanne,—Dr. Levade, and Messrs. Regnier and Van Berchem,
not only to discover things well by his touch, and to write, and
detect and correct any error he might have made, but to write,
with the same distinctness as before, what his master dictated,
though a piece of paper was put before his eyes. I relate no other


652 SLEEP-WAKING,


wonders of him, because I lay no stress upon the circumstance of
sleep-wakers sometimes apparently seeing in the dark or with their
eyes shut, though it is unquestionable and occurred even in
some of the cases which I have already detailed, since the
sight may become so acute that darkness is light to them, and
since the smallest aperture of the eyelids may be sufficient to
see through, and access may not be totally impossible to the
eyes, though they appear closed or are even bandaged. A case
. is related, by Professor Feder, of a Gottingen student, who, in his
sleep, with his eyes shut, would select music, place it on his harp-
sichord, and play it expressively; write letters ; tell that it snowed,
and that a man was at the window of the opposite house, &c. A
ropemaker at’Breslau, would be seized with sleep in the midst
of his occupation, and, when his surface, ears, and nose were
perfectly insensible, and his eyes firmly closed, continue his busi-
ness just if he had been awake, pursue his journey without miss-
ing the road, and, finding some timber in a narrow lane, pass over
it as well as if awake, and once on horseback, in passing the
river Ilme on his way to Weimar, let his horse drink, and drew
up his legs to prevent them from getting wet; yet ‘“ he could
not see when his eyes were forced open.” 4 Dr. Schultz of Ham-
burgh speaks of a girl of thirteen, who, in her paroxysms, recog-
nised all colours, and the number and stripes of painted cards, not
only with her eyes closed, but dandaged.

In America, Dr. Belden, in 1834¢, very minutely detailed .
an extraordinary case, in which the sleepwaker, a girl of six-
teen, did, in her paroxysms, every thing with the greatest
accuracy that she was accustomed to do when awake, threaded
needles, read, wrote, and corrected any omissions, although
in darkness and with her eyes closed and most carefully
bandaged. Sometimes she evidently saw and was directed
by her eyes; for, when once the stair-door, which was usually
left open, was fastened by the blade of a knife placed over the
latch, she rushed from her room impatiently, and, extending
her hand before reaching the door, seized the knife and threw
it indignantly on the floor, exclaiming, “ Why do you wish
to fasten me in? Her eyes were sometimes wide open, and the


d These cases are quoted in Isis reveluta from the French Encyclopedia,
vol. xxxviii. ; Encyclopedia Britannica, SurEPWALKER ; Psychological Magazine ;


Acta Vratislav. classiv. art. 7. |
© Journal of the Medical Sciences, No. 28.


SLEEP-WAKING. 653


pupil dilated and apparently insensible. Generally they were
closed, and that they then were extremely sensible would appear,
because she almost invariably supposed it was day, and when
advised to retire usually replied, “ What, go to bed in the
day-time?” Once, in the darkness of night, while preparing
dinner, she observed a lamp alight and put it out, saying she did
not know why people wished to keep a lamp burning in the
daytime; and once, when the light of a lamp was reflected on
the closed eyelid by a concave mirror, so diffused that the
illuminated space could scarcely be distinguished, it caused a shock
of such severity that she exclaimed, ‘* Why do you wish to shoot
me in the eyes.” Some uneasiness was produced even when she
was awake, although the experiment produced no pain in the
eyes of the reporter. It is particularly worthy of notice, that
once when she was writing out a song, with a black silk handker-
chief stuffed with cotton bound over her eyes, and a_ person
interposed a piece of brown paper between her eyes and the
paper on which she was writing, she seemed disturbed and cried
out, “ Don’t, don’t.” An apple being held before her, but
higher than her eyes, which were well bandaged, she raised her
head, as any one would if desirous of looking at something above
him, and when asked its colour, answered correctly. She learnt
backgammon in her sleep, and so well and quickly that she soon
beat Dr. Butler, an experienced player: sometimes, like many
somnambulists, she displayed an astonishing power of mimickry,
though she never exhibited the smallest trace when awake. Her
personality was double, for she recollected from paroxysm to
paroxysm and forgot all in her waking state: playing back-
gammon, for instance, better in the second paroxysm in which she
attempted it, and, when the paroxysm was over, declaring she never
saw it played, and not knowing even how to set the men. The
paroxysms were attended by pain, at an invariable spot in the left
side of the head, often so excruciating, that she used to cry out,
“It ought to be cut open, it ought to be cut open.” As her
sleep-waking became less perfect, her face less flushed, and her
head less painful, she required more light : for once she declared,
in her paroxysm, that she could not read with her eyes shut ;
and, when the doctor placed his fingers before her eyes, she
could not read a word and said it was total darkness.

Lest, however, such cases as the four last should be doubted


654 SLEEP-WAKING.


in this country, let us remember that Dr. Abercrombie re-
lates the history of a poor girl, who, when seven years of
age, looked after cattle at a farmer’s, and slept next a room
often occupied by an itinerant fiddler of great skill and ad-
dicted to playing refined pieces at night; but his perform-
ance was taken notice of by her as only a disagreeable
noise. She fell ill, and was removed to the house of a bene-
volent lady, whose servant she became. Some years after this
change, she had fits of sleep-waking, in which, after being two
hours in bed, she became restless and began to mutter; and,
after uttering sounds precisely like the tuning of a violin, would
make a prelude, and then dash off into elaborate pieces of music,
most clearly and accurately, and with the most delicate modu-
lations. She sometimes stopped, made the sound of retuning
her instrument, and began exactly where she had left off. After
a year or two she imitated an old piano also, which she was
accustomed to hear in her present residence: and, in another
year, began to talk, descanting fluently, most acutely, and wit-
tily, and with astonishing mimickry and copious illustrations and
imagery, on political, religious, and other subjects. For several
years she was ignorant of all around her in the paroxysms ; but,
at about the age of sixteen, she began to observe those who
were in her apartment, and could tell their number accurately,
though the utmost care was taken to have the room darkened ; and,
when her eyelids were raised, and a candle was brought near
the eye, the pupil seemed insensible to light. She soon became
capable of answering questions, and of noticing remarks made
in her presence, and in both respects showed astonishing acute-
ness. ‘“ Her observations, indeed,” says Dr. Abercrombie, ‘‘ were
often of such a nature, and corresponded so exactly with cha-
racters and events, that by the country people she was believed
to be endowed with supernatural power.

‘¢ During the whole period of this remarkable affection, which
seems to have gone on for ten or eleven years, she was, when
awake, a dull awkward girl, very slow in receiving instruction,
though much care was bestowed upon her; and, in point of
intellect, she was much inferior to the other servants of the
family. In particular, she shewed no kind of turn for music.” £


f On the Intellectual Powers; 4th edit. p. 294.


SLEEP-WAKING. 655


How much duller so ever than the rest of the servants this poor
girl was considered, it is evident that she had observed greatly and
acquired a store of knowledge. She was probably very reserved
and contemplative, and could learn in her own way only. The
really cleverest children are often considered stupid; while the
quick and prattling, who turn out but ordinary adults, are
thought prodigies.

Now at last comes the special wonder: greater than that
of the young priest or the Swiss boy. Dr. Petetin, perpetual
President of the Medical Society of Lyons about fifty years ago £,
had a cataleptic patient who seemed perfectly insensible. While
addressing her. loudly with the view of rousing her, he acci-
dentally moved his face from her head. towards the epigastrium
in finishing the sentence; when to. his surprise she heard him
distinctly. He made many trials, and found the same thing in-
variably take place: and then,- making experiment after experi-
ment, he discovered that she could taste, smell, and read, and
read even through an opake body, by the epigastrium : and at last
he found that speaking at one end of a conductor, the other end of
which rested on the epigastrium, was quite sufficient to make her
perceive. Van Helmont, a century and a half before, had de-
clared that, after-tasting some aconite, his head felt strange, and
all his intellect seemed to have left his head and taken up its
residence for two hours at his epigastrium. He was giddy for
two hours, and then in his ordinary condition.» The simple ex-
planation is, that Van Helmont was delirious.through the narcotic ;
and at page 40. supra, Imentioned that on one occasion of mental
transport he actually saw his little soul in his stomach. Dr. Pe-
tetin tried other sleep-waking patients:, and found the same phe-
nomena; and in some that the ends of the fingers and toes had
the same power as the epigastriam. Dr. Petetin secretly placed
pieces of cake, tarts, &c. upon the epigastrium, and immediately
the peculiar taste was perceived in the mouth: if they were
wrapped in silk, there was no taste till they were uncovered.
One patient distinguished a letter folded four times, and inclosed


~
& Mémoire sur la Découverte des Phenomenes que présentent la Catalepsie et
le Somnambulisme. Par M. Petetin. 1787.
h Demens idea, § 11. sq.
i Electricite Animale prouvée par la Découverte des Phenoméenes Physiques et
Morauzx de la Catalepsie Hystérique, et de ses Variélés. 1800.
Dae, <


656 SLEEP-WAKING.


in a semi-transparent box held by Dr. Petetin upon her stomach.
Another patient, when a letter was placed upon her finger,
said, “If I were not discreet, I could tell you the contents:
but to prove that I have read it, there are just two lines and a
half.’ She correctly enumerated the chief articles in the pockets
of the company: and a Madame de St. Paul, if interrogated
mentally only by means of a metallic chain, one end of which
was placed on her epigastrium and the other on the interro-
gator’s lips, or of a chain made by several persons, the first
of whom placed his hand on her epigastrium and the last
whispered in the hollow of his hand, heard perfectly, though
insensible to the loudest voice if the chain were interrupted by a
piece of sealing-wax.

These things seem calculated only to excite asmile; but, from
that time to this, similar cases have been recorded in different
countries. Baron de Strombeck published one, in which the
phenomena were observed, noted down, and attested by three
physicians as well as himself.‘

Dr. Joseph Frank!, in 1817, gave an account of a violent
case of hysteria and catalepsy, in a married woman twenty-
two years old, who, in her fits, was insensible to light, prick-
ing, and the loudest sound, but heard the moment the doctor
approximated his mouth to her epigastrium and spoke in a
low tone, not audible to the bystanders. Still he spoke: and
be it also known that the woman was so credulous as to
have given herself up to certain empirics and old women; “so
ardent in putting her trust in God that she prayed fervently
day and night ; and laboured under hysteria, which often gives
a strong disposition to deceive and excite the interest and
wonder of others. While comatose, she both tasted sugar and
water applied to her epigastrium, though after the coma she could
say only that something moist was there but could not tell
what, and could hear nothing except the doctor’s hand was
on her stomach. When asked the name of a gentleman pre-
sent, she was silent: but, as soon as Dr. Joseph Frank, whose
hand was always on her stomach, took him by the hand, she


k Histoire de la Guerison dune jeune Personne par le Magnétisme Animal pro-
duit par la Natur elle méme. Par un Temoin oculaire.
| Praxeos Medice Universe Precepita. Leipsix, 1817. P. ii. vol. i. p. 495.


sqq:


SLEEP-WAKING. 657


at once told his name; and, indeed, answered questions put
to her by any pérson, and told all their names, provided they
formed a chain by their hands among themselves and with Dr.
Joseph Frank, and he had his hand on her stomach. The woman
was always so obliging when the doctor had his hand on her
stomach, that it must have been fortunate his name was Joseph.
Dr. Bertrand gives several others, which had occurred up to
the appearance of his work in 1826, and contends that the
phenomena, repeatedly appeared in the hysterical excitement of
the Quakers, of the Cevennes, the Nuns of Loudun, and the
Convulsionaires of St. Medard.

A case more recently occured in the. Jervis Street Hospital,
Dublin, and is recorded in a.clinical lecture by Mr. Ellis. A
cataleptic female, Mrs. Finn, gave no signs of hearing an Holian
harp played. close to her ears; and, after the fit, declared she had
not heard. it, nor recollected that cold water was dashed upon her,
though it had made her scream violently. She had been spoken to
on the epigastrium, palms, and soles, but it was not till long after-
wards, in thinking on what had happened to her during the last
two months, that she remembered having heard a voice one day on
the pit of her stomach. “‘ Onthe occurrence of the first cataleptic
attack after this conversation, she was spoken to in the epigastrium
as previously ; and on the subsidence of the fit, she could report
with accuracy every word addressed to her. through this region.
This experiment was often repeated, and always attended with
similar results. She could hear the. lowest whisper, or the
ticking of a watch.” ,

One occurred in a man in the Hospital-della Vita at Bologna,
in 18329, and it was probably the fame of this that caused
the same city to be happy enough soon afterwards to produce
another in a female who in her coma talked Latin, which she
had never learnt, gave an accurate anatomical description in
technical terms of the solar plexus, pancreas, heart, and first
vertebra, detailed the pathological state of a lady whom she did
not know, and the situation of places in Paris where she had
never been; extracted roots of numbers, for instance of 4965,


m Dy Magnétisme Animal en France. Par A. Bertrand. Paris, 1826,
" Lancet, May 2. 1835.
© Bulletin des Sciences Médicales. Bologna, 1832. or Gazette Médicale, Paris,
Nov, 24. 1832.
ax 2


658 SLEEP-WAKING.


though she had never learnt more than the first four rules of
arithmetic, and unconsciously detailed various philosophical sys-
tems, and discussed others which were mentioned to her.?

Oh the waste of labour, time, and money spent in education,
and. books, and philosophical apparatus, when mesmerism is such
aready help! One hysterical young lady at Grenoble, whose
case was read to the Philomathic Society of Paris, was able to
get through a great deal of business, for in copying letters she
read with her left elbow while she wrote with her right hand. 4

Ido not doubt the truth of the narration of all the cases of
sleep-waking, excepting those in which there was extraordinary
knowledge, patients saw through opaque bodies, or the epigas-
trium, fingers, and toes, were the seat of extraordinary per-
ceptions: and these I shall defer considering till I speak of
sleep-waking induced by art. The cases are too numerous,
have occurred in too many places, at too many times, and
under too many circumstances, are too naturally and respect-
ably told, are all too similar and yet too diversified, and yet
not marvellous enough, for a reasonable mind to doubt them.
They are all evidently examples of partial torpidity and partial
excitement, and some also of partial extraordinarily rapid change
or peculiar derangement’ of various portions of the brain, and
perhaps of some other parts of the nervous system. The phe-
nomena ascend from the faintest common dreaming, or even from
disturbed sleep, through plain sleep-walking, and somewhat sin-
gular performances, to the most astonishing. Every degree is
morbid; and, to view the cases as any thing else than instances
of bodily derangement, would be absurd. ‘The attacks are some-
times periodical; take place in bad health, and are worse in
proportion as the health is worse; are frequently united with
other diseases of the nervous system, — catalepsy, hysteria, epi-
lepsy, delirium, &c., or are changes from these or change to
these; occur, unless when chronic, most frequently when the


P See Lancet, Feb. 16. 1833.

9 Bertrand, l.c. p. 458, sqq.

r Martinet mentions a watchmaker’s apprentice who had an attack once a
fortnight, and did his work well, astonished on awaking at the progress he had
made. The fit began with heat at the epigastrium rising to the head and_
followed by confusion and complete insensibility, his eyes being fixed and
staring. Negretti’s attack was alwaysin March. See supra, p. 639.


SLEEP-WAKING. 659


sexual feelings and functions are establishing themselves and the
former not yet gratified s, and the whole young mind is under-
going the changes of the adult period; are often attended by
pain in the head, and all the common symptoms of deranged dis-
tribution of blood and of morbid sensibility in that part; they
have all the same exciting causes as other nervous diseases ;
the pre-disposition to them is sometimes hereditary t; and they
require the treatment common to all other nervous diseases.
To consider them as examples of the soul acting independently
of the body in the disease, is discreditable to an author of the
present day. Old authors regarded common dreams in this
point of view; and I formerly quoted the remark,— that the soul
must work very strangely, when so disencumbered of the activity
of the brain, for us to dream “ such perilous stuff as dreams are
made of.” (Supra, p.626.) The cases of double consciousness
in those affected with the disease (supra, p. 646.) ought to
prove two souls to exist; and one of them to be able to get
drunk alone in the case of the Irish porter, whose second con-
sciousness showed itself only in his intoxication. Sleep-waking
is neither more nor less than diseased sleep. ‘The torpor far
exceeds that of common sleep, and is a coma like that of apo-
plexy, hysteria, or epilepsy; though in the first of these the
brain generally is prevented by pressure only from performing
its functions. In epilepsy we have equal coma: in a moment
the patient becomes insensible to mechanical violence, the loud-
est noise, and the strongest light: even when the disease is
partial, as in two little boys whom I attended, in whose fits
the eyelids only were convulsed and the head drawn back, the
insensibility came in a minute, and as suddenly ceased, and was


’ Of 50 cases which I have counted, 2] were apparently permanent, and 18
such occurred in males; 16 patients were females, and 13 of these from 13 to
25 years of age, and unmarried; of the 34 males, 16 were from 10 to perhaps
a little above 20 years of age, and apparently all unmarried: 7 of the young
patients were 16 years old. The chronic cases probably are more rare, but
appear so large in proportion from attracting greater attention and therefore be-
ing oftener recorded.

t « Negretti’s son was subject to it from boyhood.” Dr. Willis knew a family
in which the father and all the sons were sleep-wakers, and ‘** the sons in their
nightly discursions ran against and awakened each other,” Dr, Pritchard, T’rea-
tise on Insanity, p. 459.

xx 3


660 MESMERISM.


such that, during the minute of the fit, a pistol fired off in the ear
of one was unnoticed. In common epilepsy and sometimes in hys-
teria we have coma, — perfect insensibility, and at the same time
such high excitement of the parts of the nervous system which
move the muscles that violent convulsions occur. In sleep-waking,
it is an intellectual, and sometimes also moral, part of the
nervous system that is excited in the midst of the torpidity,
sometimes one part, sometimes another; and, in some instances,
probably a heightened partial sensibility of parts concerned
in external sensation. In neuralgia we have fits of violent
excitement of nervous parts concerned in sense; in palsy of
sensation, the reverse. In tonic and clonic spasms we have
excitement of nervous parts concerned in motion; in palsy of
motion, the reverse. We have these two portions sometimes in
opposite conditions. The same holds good precisely of all
parts of the brain: and these conditions, in all these cases, and
in all other diseases of the nervous system, as fits of morbidly
excessive sleep, may be purely functional, and occur in pa-
roxysms: nay, most rapid changes of external sense may pro-
bably take place in the paroxysms, or even alterations different
from changes of mere degree. Some may have ecstatic de-
lirium, in which there is no loss of external sense, nor coma,
but a sudden change in the internal feelings, so that the patient
talks and acts like a fool, and in a moment the whole may cease
and be forgotten, and the patient be as before: and this may be
interchanged with fits of sleep-waking. ) )


By certain processes, such as passing the points of the fingers
at a short distance from a person in a direction from the face
down the arms, trunks, and legs, with a degree of energy, the
state of sleep, or sleep-waking, may actually, we are told, be in-
duced. It is then termed magnetic, and the whole phenomena,
animal magnetism. The patient becomes insensible toall around, but
may have the inward senses augmented as in common ecstasis,—
may sing well for the first time in his life, and talk so unguardedly
as to disclose secrets. The external senses may become so impene-


MESMERISM. 661


trable, that a pistol fired in the ear is not heard, nor melted wax
dropped on the body felt, nor ammonia applied to the mouth or
nostrils perceived, although the gentlest word of the operator
(magnetiser) is heard and answered, water similarly treated (mag-
netised) by him tasted and found ferruginous, and the gentlest
touch of him recognised. A delightful feeling of ease and light-
ness is experienced, the body grows warmer, and perspires freely,
though sometimes anxiety, palpitation, slight convulsions, and
wandering pains take place. On the first attempt these occur
generally without sleep-waking, and it is only after many trials
(and sometimes they continue fruitless) that such a state is in-
duced. On coming out of the sleep-waking, the person is un-
conscious of all that has occurred; but, when thrown into it
again, recollects the whole and converses on it. The magnetiser
can put an end to this state at pleasure: and, when he is a good
magnetiser and the patient very susceptible, a single movement
of the hand may instantly magnetise, and even knock down and
kill; a look may magnetise: and we are told that all these effects
may sometimes be produced at great distances by the mere voli-
tion of the magnetiser.

But this is not all. We are assured that matters often go
much farther ; that a person can often be so highly magnetised,
not only as to taste magnetised water and recognise the mag-
netiser by hearing and touch, but even to perceive objects of sight,
hearing, taste, and smell, by the epigastrium, fingers, and toes, —
by the organ of touch, so as to read a letter by these parts", even
though it be folded in several envelopes ; nay more, to discover
a person in the next room, though a wall intervene; to foretell
events entirely relating to others, and describe things going on
at incalculable distances, as well as learn the thoughts of persons
present ; to relate the most minute points regarding persons who
touch them, though never seen before; to see the interior struc-
ture of his own body, and describe the seat and appearance of a
diseased organ, predict the future events of a disease of either
himself or others, and point out the remedy. However, I am not
aware of any anatomical discoveries having ever been made, and


" This reminds one
‘¢ Of Rosicrusian virtuosis,
Who see with ears and hear with noses.”’ Hudibras.


x xX 4


662 MESMERISM.


presume that blood would never have been seen flowing up: the
cava inferior and down the aorta unless Harvey had first taught
the circulation; and I observe that the remedies always depend
upon the country and the period, — that, in Paris, leeches to the
anus and vulva, ptisans, baths of Bartges, and extract of nux
vomica if the person has heard of Dr. Fouquier’s treatment of
paralysis, gummed water and gummed lemonade, diet drinks of
borage, and M. Dupuytren’s remedy of mercurialised milk
procured by milking a goat previously rubbed with mercurial
ointment, are ordered: and suppose that calomel, sulphate of
magnesia, porter, and port wine would be called for in England ;
and that neither quinine for ague, nor iodine for bronchocele,
were ever commanded before Pelletan and Dr. Coindet had
made known their virtues.

This state is calied hellsehen, clairvoyance, or lucid vision; and,
if the lucidity extends to all objects of space and time, so that
things long past relating to others, things passing at a great dis-
tance, and things to come, are revealed, it is universal bnatelaty or
allgemeine klarheitt.

They affirm not only that water can be magnetised so as to
taste chalybeate, but inanimate bodies made conductors no less
than a chain of persons.

It was said to have been discovered by Dr. Mesmer, a very
glutton in all that was marvellous, in the latter part of the last
century, who, knowing that the magnet was much employed as a
remedy, and hearing from-Hell, a Jesuit, the professor of astro-
nomy at Vienna, that he had cured himself by magnetic plates of
a severe cardialgia, opened a house for. curing every disease in
this way, and began to imagine the existence of an universal
magnetic power, distinct from that of the common magnet, de-
pending upon a fluid pervading all living and inanimate matter,
and the source of allin art and nature. To throw this fluid into
persons, —to magnetise them, he manipulated as we have men-

tioned, and employed other processes which are now omitted.
He travelled, performed many great cures, and often failed; was
praised, and deservedly abused, for he adopted the course of all
quacks, whether regular or irregular practitioners. He depre-
ciated others, affected mystery, and extolled himself. He insisted
that there was but one health, one disease, and one remedy, which


MESMERISM. 663


remedy, of course, he had discovered. He rubbed and pressed
his patients, and touched them with an iron rod, made them sit
silently in circles, in a room rather darkened and furnished with
mirrors, music playing all the time. After him, a school was es-
tablished at Lyons and Ostend by a Chevalier Barbarin, where no
manipulations were used and all was accomplished by the energy
of the operator’s volition. Faith removed their mountains, and
their motto was ‘ Veuillez le bien —allez et guérissez.” At a
third school, that of the Marquis de Puysegur at Strasburg, very
gentle manipulations were employed, and the operators made
them frequently at some distance from the patient.

Such results appeared as caused a commission of inquiry to
be ordered, in 1784, by the government of France. The whole
was ascribed to imagination, imitation, and touching; the matter
declined, and Mesmer retired to Switzerland. Still it was prac-
tised not only in the three first schools of Mesmer, Barbarin,
and Puysegur, but assiduously cultivated in many parts of Ger-
many, and lingered still among us, for a Miss Preston in Blooms-
bury Square, who died lately, practised it during the best part
of her life; and I recollect that, about twenty years ago, numbers
went to a magnetiser at Kennington. I some years ago saw
lectures upon it advertised in the prospectuses of the medical
courses in German universities,— at Heidelberg for instance.
Of late the subject has been revived among the physicians of
Germany and France, and at Berlin a magnetic clinical ward
has been opened ; and a commission of the Royal Academy of
Medicine sat in 1826, in Paris, to inquire into it anew.

J. B. Van Helmont, born at Brussels in 1577, certainly shows
in his works that he was well acquainted with animal magnetism
and practised it. His cures by its means, were, like most miracles,
ascribed by the wicked to the assistance of the devil. His language
is so distinct, that “ we might almost conceive,’ says Mr. Col-
quhoun, ‘‘ that we were reading the works of some disciple of
Mesmer:” and indeed many Continental and English writers of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries contended for an universal
magnetic power, which produced the dependence and reciprocal
action of bodies, and especially the phenomena of life; and al-
lowed extraordinary effects to be produced in another living
being, even at a great distance, by the will or imagination of


664: . MESMERISM.


man. Cornelius Agrippa ab Nettesheym asserts that a man
naturally, and without any miracle, unassisted by the Holy Spirit
or any other, may convey his thoughts in the twinkling of an
eye to another at any distance: ‘‘et ego id facere novi, et seepius
feci. Novit idem etiam fecitque quondam Abbas Trithenius.” *
A professor of philosophy at Padua, Petrus Pomponatius, born
in 1462, had contended, before Van Helmont, for the power of
the imagination or will of one person to send forth an influence
upon another; and enumerated the conditions of the exercise of
this power in nearly the terms of modern magnetisers. He too
surpassed all, for he point blank declares that inanimate matter
may obey this influence. ‘Cum hominis anime voluntas et
maxime imaginativa fuermt vehementes, venti et reliqua mate-
rialia sunt nata obedire eis.”y Still Mesmer was the great
restorer and modern establisher of magnetism in spite of great
obstacles, so that the facts have been termed mesmerism; and, as
the denomination animal magnetism is incorrect, and may lead to
misconception, I shall in future adopt the word mesmerism.
Even an arbitrary word in science is better than one devised
from imperfect knowledge. |

Those who ascribe all to imagination, consider the agitations and
prophecies of the Delphian priestess of Apollo and the Sybils, and
all ancient prophesies, the ecstacies of Dervishes and Santons, and
of Shakers and Quakers, Irvingites, and of all ridiculous enthu-
siasts in what they strangely call religion, but which is all super-
stition and revolting irreverence to the infinite God of the uni-
verse, and the pretended miraculous cures of all ages, from the
days of Serapis of Egypt to those of the blessed Paris of Paris *,
and of our own day, and of all countries, as only of a piece with
mesmerism, showing how strongly fear or enthusiasm will work
upon the brain and all the other organs. Others discover that mag-
netic influence has always been acknowledged, and even adduce
a passage attributed to Solon, and preserved by Stobzeus, to


* De Occulta Philosophia, 1. iii.
Y De Incantationibus. Basil, 1577. p. 237.
% Such ecstacies, &c. and miracles were worked at his tomb, that the govern-
ment closed it, and forbad any more!
«¢ De par le Roi, défense a Dieu
De faire miracle en ce lieu.”’


MESMERISM. 665


prove the antiquity of performing manipulations like those of
magnetism to procure tranquillity :—


~ & Toy 98 xanats vovooior xuxapevey dpyaréaic TE
“Arapctvog xetpoty atta rlOno” byt.”


Sometimes the fury of the worst disease,
The hand by gentle stroking will appease.


They adduce another from Plautus to show that manipu-
lations were used in Rome to send persons to sleep. Mer-
cury, proposing to knock a man down, says ironically in allusion
to putting a child to sleep by gently rubbing it,—“ Quid si
ego illum ftractizm tangam ut dormiat.” Sosia replies, — “ Ser-
vaveris, nam continuas has tres noctes pervigilavi.”@ The
Bible, of course, has not been left unquoted. When Naaman
drove to Elisha’s door in his chariot, and the prophet neither
invited him in nor went out to him, but directed him to go
and. wash himself seven times in the Jordan, he was greatly
disappointed at not being touched by the holy man. ‘ But
Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought,
He will surely come out to me and stand and call on the name
of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and
recover the leper.”» They believe there was mesmeric oper-
ation in these things: and consider them, and all the oracles,
visions, prophecies, magic, and miracles of the pagan world, and
those mesmerisers who are deists consider even the alleged
supernatural things of the Jewish and Christian world, as not
supernatural, but the result of this mighty power. Some are such
enthusiasts, that they refer to mesmerism the instinctive applica-
tion of our hand to a part in pain andrubbing it. The pressure
and. agreeable sensation go for nothing. The production of
sleep by gentle friction is mesmeric. The mere circumstance of
a gentle and continued impression has not the effect, because the
sight of waving corn, the trickling of a brook, or the motion of
rocking, does not produce sleep, nor can we rock or rub ourselves
to sleep. Thepractice of the peasants in Bavaria, of rubbing their


@ Amphitryo, act 1.

Consult Lettres Physiologiques et Morales sur le Magnétisme Animal. Par J.
Amedée Dupeau. Paris, 1826.

> Kings, ii. 5. 11.


666 MESMERISM.


little ones from head to foot before putting them to bed, and the
Oriental habit of uniting friction with the bath, ismesmeric. It is
a great oversight in them not to adduce the habit of brute mothers
to lick their little ones, as licking is friction with the tongue:
but then to be sure brutes lick themselves also. It must however
be an oversight not to adduce the habit of expecting our grooms
to rub down our horses thoroughly night and morning. The
verses of Martial referred to as implying mesmeric practice, are |
fully as applicable to grooms and horses : —


«¢ Percurrit agili corpus arte tractatrix
Manumque doctam spergit omnibus membris.”’ (iii. 82.)


Ignorant Mr. Mahomet and the rest of the shampooers ! ignorant
women who get your living as rubders to the diseased! you ima-
gine not that you are all anzma/ magnetisers. The mesmeric pro-
cess of rubbing horses, universal in civilized nations, would have
been as good an example as that of a family in Dauphiné, “* who
have been in the habit of magnetising, from father to son, for cen-
turies,” and whose “ treatment consists in conducting the great toe
along the principal ramifications of the nerves ;” or as that of the
great toe of King Pyrrhus. It was irreverent to adduce a merely
royal toe, when virtue is known to go out of the toes of his holiness
the Pope, whose foot is therefore devoutly kissed by the faithful.
The ancient medical employment of friction is mesmeric: and so
must be all similar mechanical means; and among the rest the
douche, which is liquid friction and percussion. I do not see why
percussion, on the good effects of which treatises have been
written, is not as mesmeric as friction. Mere touch does wonders,
not by imagination, but mesmerically. A boy at Salamanca is
mentioned who cured numberless persons merely by touching
them with his hand. Many monks did the same. They forget to
mention at the same time that an inanimate hand has great power
in this way. It might be thought to have lost its mesmerism, but
the mesmeric fluid is probably retained by the ligature around the
neck, for the hand of a dead man just fresh from the gallows is to
this day stroked over tumours to remove them. If any thing is
mesmeric and not mechanical, this must be; as it is quite sufficient
to draw the hand once across the swelling. Then again the
efficacy of the royal touch has been known from the time of


MESMERISM. 667


Vespasian, who performed two miracles now ascertained to be
mesmeric, to that of the Scandinavian princes, particularly St.
Olaf in 1020, and even down to our modern kings, for whose
mesmeric virtues the royal surgeon Wiseman, not through the
mean craftiness of a courtier, but through philosophical con-
viction, stoutly vouches.¢ It is very remarkable that it was not
simply hereditary and constitutional, but depended upon the
individual being actually in office as king, and it is a loss, if
not disloyal and radical, to consider our kings as no longer
endowed with this virtue. George the Third gave up the pre-
tension; but a king would still have thousands of patients if he
would but practise : —a strong argument in favour of mesmeric
influence. The practice of the imposition of hands and the
manner of benediction are unquestionably mesmeric. The Chal-
dean priests are said to have practised this mode of treatment ;
as also the Indian Brahmins, and the Parsi; and the Jesuit
missionaries inform us that the practice of curing diseases by
the imposition of hands has prevailed in China for many years.
The imposition of hands in blessing, and in the episcopal form of
confirmation dates from the remotest antiquity, and originated
in the view of imparting some holy effluence, just as I presume
the imposition of the hands in correcting naughty boys and
thrashing a man must have originated in the view of imparting
something disagreeable. Among the eastern nations curative
virtue was found to proceed from good men, if but even the
hem of their garment could be touched. On the other hand,
pernicious influence has always been acknowledged to proceed


© “I myself have been a frequent eye-witness of many hundreds of cures
performed by his Majesty’s touch alone, without any assistance of chirurgery ;
and those, many of them, such as had tired out the endeavours of able surgeons
before they came thither.” ‘ This our chronicles have long testified, and the
personal experience of many thousands can testify for his Majesty that now
reigneth, and his uncle, father, and grandfather. His Majesty that now is
having exercised this faculty with wonderful success not only here, but beyond the
seas, in Flanders, Holland, and France itself.” (p. 243.) The king always ex-
pressed his belief that the cure was effected by the grace of God, saying, at the
time of the ceremony, ‘I touch, God heals ;” and the pious and moral Charles
II. touched 92,107 in twenty years, an average of twelveaday. Chirurgical
Treatises, vol. i. p. 387. In 1684, Thomas Roswell was tried for high tresaon
in having spoken contemptuously of the royal’ touch.— See Wadd’s Mems.,
Maxims, and Memoirs.


668 MESMERISM.


from the eye. Every schoolboy remembers the passage in
Virgil —


** Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.” 4


The word envy comes from invidio, and this from in and video.
The Arabs dread the evil eye above all other mischiefs, and, if a
stranger expresses admiration of any object belonging to them,
they avert the calamity by passing over the object a finger wetted
with saliva. Who is ignorant that the fierce look of man disarms
the most ferocious brutes of their courage: that Pliny recom-
mends breathing upon the forehead as a means of cure®; and that
when a child complains the nurse often tells it she will blow away
the pain. A dyspeptic friend of mine assured me that, on con- ~
sulting a celebrated physician at an inland watering place, the
doctor put his finger in mystic silence upon his forehead before
feeling his pulse. Had it not been a little too late in the day,
I have no doubt he would carry on such tricks like the notorious
Dr. Streper, an Irish gentleman named Valentine Greatrakes,
and a gardener named Leverett, who all, in the middle of the
seventeenth century, cured thousands by stroking with the hand.
Boyte and Cudworth both put themselves under the care of Great-
rakes; and the Lord Bishop of Derry declared that he himself
had seen “ dimness cleared and deafness cured,” pain “ drawn
out at some extreme part,” ‘‘ grievous sores of many months date,
ina few days healed, obstructions and stoppages removed, and
cancerous knots in the breast dissolved,” by the Irishman. The
gardener used to say that so much virtue went out of him, that
he was more exhausted by touching thirty or forty people than by
digging eight roods of ground. By means of the mesmeric fluid,
some believers explain why a person cannot tickle himself; why,
proverbially, when a friend is near, we think of him (“ talk of the
devil, &c.”) ; and why, at the moment of death, distant friends
have been said to see or hear the dying who happen to be think-
ing intensely of them so as mesmerically to influence them! f


d Eelog. 30. © Hist. Nat. xxviii. 6.

f A short and luminous account and defence of mesmerism will be found
in Dr. Georget’s Physiologie du Systéme '-Nerveux, t.1. from p. 268. to 301.
1821. Drs. Hufeland, Treviranus, Sprengel, Reil, Autenrieth, Kieser, Carus,


&c. have believed in it.
For a good and entertaining history of the mesmeric phenomena as they ap-


MESMERISM. 669


Many of the phenomena of mesmerism are unquestionable,
and no more than occur in health or disease. To yawn and
fall asleep, have catchings of different parts, and various little
sensations, is nothing wonderful. To become more or less in-
sensible to all around, and more or less powerless in one or
more or all external parts, and have one or more of the intel-
‘lectual faculties or external senses highly exalted beyond their
usual pitch in the individual, to have not only trains of thought
and inclinations, but to speak and sing, walk, write, &c., in the
midst of extreme insensibility, and afterwards to forget what has
occurred, or even to remember it when the same state returns, and
only then, is no more than what we occasionally observe in patients.
But when we are requested to believe that persons perceive objects
of sight through dead walls; perceive objects of hearing and sight,
smell and taste, with their bellies and fingers or toes ; know what
is going on at a distance, what will happen in regard to persons
and places with which they have no connection, know the his-
tory of persons whom they never heard of before, but who are
put in relation (en rapport) with them by contact, speak lan-
guages they never learned, display scientific knowledge which
they never acquired, and make anatomical and pathological ob-
‘servations in their own frames and those of others, the matter is too


peared in a patient at the Hotel-Dieu in 1820, see Eupériences Publiques sur
le Magnétisme Animal, faites d ? Hétel-Dieu de Paris. Par J. Dupotet, 3d edit.
1826. The woman had gastritis and aortic aneurysm, and is said to have de-
scribed the inner surface of her stomach as raw with red pimples, and perceived a
little pouch full of blood! The Baron is now publishing a work upon mes-
merism in London.

For a complete history, see the Diction. des Sc. Méd. article Magnétisme
Animal. The writer remarks that, in some Egyptian monuments, Anubis is
represented near the patient as a mesmeriser, with one hand raised above the head,
the other on the breast, while behind the patient another figure stands with the
right hand elevated. See also the work of Deleuze, 2 vols. ; the Marquis de
Puisegur, 3 vols. ; the Count de Puisegur, 4 vols. ; Chardel, 1 vol. ; Tardi de
Montravet, 2 vols. ; the Bibliothéque du Magnétisme, 4 vols.; Archives du M.,
4 vols. ; Annalen des M., 4 vols. Dr. Bertrand’s excellent treatise Du Mag-
nétisme Animal, &c., 2 vols. Paris, 1826. He at first ascribed all to imagin-
ation; but was obliged at last to admit an unknown power. ‘The reader of
English only should consult Isis revelata, a work just published in two volumes,
by Mr. Colquhoun of Edinburgh. It contains great information, and is highly
amusing, not the less so perhaps for containing some nonsense.


¢


670 MESMERISM.


wonderful for belief. I must be excused for not believing, till Ihave
seen these things. Those who have read the history, and seen a
little, of human nature, well know what deceptions have been prac-
tised upon the most wary; how long it has been impossible to
detect the cheat; how bold and marvellous have been the im-
positions; and yet that at last the truth has come out, the im-
postor been covered with shame and the credulous believer with
ridicule. Human testimony has been given to all kinds of ab-
surdities and impossibilities in all ages, and may always be ob-
tained from ignorance, superstition, enthusiasm, or interest, to
any amount for any prodigy. It may be sometimes difficult to say
what is contrary to the laws of nature and impossible; but the
wonders of mesmerism are so astounding, and our experience of
deception so abundant, that I find it more rational to suspend my
belief than to admit them. Indeed, the most zealous mesmeriser
must allow that deception on the part of the patient has fre-
quently been detected; that women have appeared to be in so
deep a mesmeric sopor that they have borne impressions of
melted wax without the least agitation of countenance, and yet
the whole has been proved an imposture: nay, that collusion
between both parties has been discovered. We have seen that
the same prodigies have been recounted as occurring in ordinary
ecstacy and somnambulism as from mesmerism.

No one will allege that deception must have been impracticable,
who knows the tricks performed by Asiatic and African jug-
glersé: and no one will allege that frequently no motive for de-
ception was possible, who remembers that, besides interest, and
even against interest and comfort, the desire to excite attention
in ill conducted minds, and to excite attention or even simply
to deceive in hysterical disease, is often intense; and no one will


& They will not only make a branch blossom before your eyes, but a seed
spring up into a tree, and the tree bear fruit; throw one end of ‘a long chain
into the air, where it remains as if fixed, and send a dog up it, which disappears
as soon as he has reached the other end: they. will take the form of a cube,
which then rises into the air, remains stationary over the heads of the spectators,
and descends again ; sit in the air four feet from the ground, one hand and arm
being held up, the outer edge of the other resting on a crutch, while its fingers
deliberately count beads ; and will cause unblemished boys or women, or pregnant
women, to see in ink the figure of any dead or absent individual that a third
person may name. See Mr. Hunter, 1. c. p. 284. sqq. ; and Mr. Lane’s recent
work on Egypt.


MESMERISM. 671


urge the sense, attainments, and respectability of the believers,
who has seen much of human nature, for he must know that the
wisest have their weak points, and especially in regard to ex-
traordinary things, which they often gloat upon like the most
ignorant peasant, and that many who pass for highly informed
men possess but partial information, and many who are dis-
tinguished for some one kind of discovery and pass for men of
talent, possess but a moderate share of high and general intel-
lectual power. The chief. British advocate of all the miracles
of -mesmerism believes a thing to have been possible, which
was an evident trick, and in which interest was the palpable and
only motive. A Scotchman exhibited a boy lately in London,
whom he pretended to be gifted with second sight. I went to
the exhibition, and the boy told the colour and other qualities
of things without seeing them, the names and ages of strangers
in the room, &c. &c. But the father very fairly demanded that
we should show him the objects, and tell him our names and
ages, in short, make him acquainted with the facts, previously, in
order that we might not say the boy was wrong when he was
right. The boy, on being admitted into the room, without pre-
vious conversation with any person in it, invariably gave correct
answers. A friend who accompanied me at once pointed out
the trick. The father always addressed the boy before the little
fellow uttered a word: and he began each successive sentence
with a word, the first letter of which went to form the answer.
For instance, if the object was of s1LK, the father might begin —
«« See now you answer correctly ; J know you will; Zook well
before you speak; Know what you are about.” Or each letter
of a word of ten letters might be agreed upon, each being dif-
ferent, to signify a particular number. Thus if the letters of the
word Cumberland were settled to signify 1, 2, 3, &c. in the order
in which they stood, the father would begin, after a numerical
question, with a sentence, the first letter of the first word of
which signified the first number; then next with a sentence
beginning with the letter signifying the second number. This
was the principle, and of course there might be many variations
of its application.» Mr. Colquhoun records, that ‘“ the father


h My friend’s explanation will be given in a new edition of Dr. Brewster’s
Letters on Natural Magic, in which numerous deceptions are explained. A more
copious work is by Eusébe Salvert. Sur la Magie.

ss


672 MESMERISM.


stated he had five children, all gifted in the same extraordinary
way:” and, though Mr. C. acknowledges there is much room for
deception, “ would strongly recommend” (in italics) the investi-
gation of the facts to professional men, because he has “ suf-
ficiently proved that the phenomena exhibited are of possible
occurrence.”! He would have us believe the case of Miss Mac-
aray, of Liverpool, a Roman Catholic young lady, who became
blind in June, 1816, when fifteen years of age, and accidentally
discovered in the following October that she could read with
her fingers the ‘“ Lives of the Saints,” — the “ Life of Thomas 4
Becket,” and the Bible; having previously, after having become
totally blind, presented a stole made by herself to her confessor.
Whether the priest, for the glory of God and the church, sug-
gested subsequent miracles of sight to her, or she imposed
upon his Roman Catholic credulity, is a matter of speculation.
She told an object placed under two plates of glass, by touching
the upper plate of glass with her fingers; and could read with
her fingers nine inches from the book, by a convex lens which she
touched! Now this single circumstance proved the whole to be
an impudent imposture. If the lens could have assisted her
fingers to see, it must have been when they were placed at that
particular distance from it at which the rays formed an image
of the object; not when they were in contact with it. At its sur-
face, a lens affords no image of an object: yet to her fingers,
touching the surface of the lens, objects appeared magnified if
the glass was convex, small if it was concave! This statement
was a most unlucky mistake; she should have pretended to see
with her fingers at the proper focal distance. *

Voltaire advises the Devil never to address himself to the
faculty of physic, but» to that of theology, when he wishes to
impose upon mankind. However, in 1726, a poor woman at
Godalming in Surrey, named Mary Tofts, pretended that, after
a violent longing for rabbits, when pregnant, she brought forth
these animals; and persuaded her apothecary, “ Mr. Howard, a


i l.c. vol. ii, p. 339. sq.

KE See Annals of Med. and Surgery; London, 1818, yol. ii. p. 385.; where
it is remarked as singular that no person thought of ascertaining whether the °
point which she touched upon the glass was in a line between the object and
her eyes; and whether an intervening opake substance, placed in this line,
prevented her power of discriminating objects.


MESMERISM. ' 673


man of probity who had practised for thirty years,” or, in common
language, a highly respectable practitioner of great experience,
that, in the course of about a month, he had delivered her of
nearly twenty rabbits. George the First, not thinking it impossible,
sent his house surgeon, Mr. Ahlers, to inquire into the fact; and
the royal house surgeon returned to London, “ convinced that he
had obtained ocular and tangible proof of the truth,” and pro-
mised to procure the woman a pension. The wise king then
sent his sergeant-surgeon, Mr. St. André: and the sergeant-
surgeon returned to town also a firm believer. They both re-
_turned with rabbits as proofs! and the rabbits had the high
honour of being dissected before the king. An elaborate Report
of their production and dissection was published by the sergeant-
surgeon; and Whiston (of the faculty of theology indeed)
showed, in a pamphlet (for a furious controversy arose between
the believers and the unbelievers), that the miracle was the
exact fulfilment of a prophecy in Esdras. An eminent physician,
Sir Richard Manningham, backed by Caroline, then Princess
of Wales, detected the cheat, and, on a threat of a dangerous
operation and imprisonment, Mary Tofts confessed the whole.
— Ann Moore of Tutbury, of extreme piety, and with a Bible
always on her bed before her, pretended in 1808, sqq. to have
taken nothing into her mouth for six years but the inside of
some black currants once; and for the last four years and a
half, nothing. There was no peculiar state of the nervous sys-
tem to account for the circumstance. She was watched for
sixteen days and nights in September, 1808: and members of
the faculty of theology and medical practitioners testified to
the truth of her statement: though Dr. Henderson showed,
from many circumstances, to all rational people, that it was an
absurd imposture. The Rev. Legh Richmond, in 1813, earnestly
solicited her to undergo another watching. She consented ; and,
having caught a bad cold and thinking herself dying, she with
great solemnity said, “In the face of Almighty God, and on my
dying bed, I declare that I have used no deception,” &c. Yet
evidence of guilt and falsehood was at last obtained, attempts
at concealment were useless, and she publicly expressed her
contrition for her long continued imposture. !

1 See an interesting work by my friend Mr. Hunter; Sketches of Imposture,
Deception, and Credulity, — Family Library. London, 1737.

MY: 2


674 MESMERISM.


Gall was at considerable pains to examine into the facts
of mesmerism. It was then in high favour with many, and
adopted by many physiologists in their writings, so that he felt
“the subject as delicate as it formerly was to proceed against
sorcerers..™ © To avoid the charge of misrepresentation, he
quotes the words of Kessler, who maintains that the epigastrium
of the magnetised can perform the functions of all the five senses,
and more acutely too than the special organs under ordinary
circumstances ; the fingers read the smallest print; the contact of
the magnetiser’s thumb render the ears unnecessary for hearing, —
‘“‘the most common fact in the world, and the simplest experiment; ”
and complete vision take place with the eyes shut, so that all ob-
stacles are avoided as dexterously in strange as in familiar places.
‘‘T will not bring a multitude of proofs, and the authentic testi-
mony of many credible persons,’ says Kessler, “ but will mention
only what I-have seen again and again, and of the truth of which
any one may satisfy himself favourably by his own experience.” ®
Gall then, at great length, quotes Walther, the professor at Land-
shut, for a description of the stages of mesmerism, in the highest of
which (clairvoyance) “time and space no longer present obstacles
to the penetration of the magnetised,” “ who sees as distinctly
into the interior of the magnetiser’s body as into his own,’ the
reason of which is, that “ all the nervous system is an identity
and a totality ——a pure transparence without cloud, an infinite
expansion without bounds or obstacles,—such is universal
sense ;”” and, as “in the waking state the soul is more closely
‘and intimately united with the body,” and “natural sleep is a
more intimate communication of our soul with the universal soul of
the world; so in magnetic sleep our soul is united in the most
intimate manner with the soul of the world and with the body,
and with the Jatter not by means of the nervous system only, but
immediately in all its parts and members, so that life is no longer
a particularity, but original life.”° “If any one,” says Gall,
‘¢is convinced of all these marvellous fancies, and especially if
he comprehends them, he is justified in asserting that such a doc-
trine exercises the most important influence upon the whole science
of nature.’ Reil, so strangely brought forward as the rival of Gall,


™ I]. c. 4to. vol. i. p. 135. sqq-
® Priifung des Gallschen Systems. Jena, 1805.
° Phys.'t. ii. p. 244.


MESMERISM, 675


is the third whom he quotes: — “ The estimable Reil,” thus Gall
generously terms him, “after having spoken of the abdominal
ganglia as capable of becoming the conductors of sensation, says,
‘the transition to the state of a conductor is so much more easy
in living than in inanimate nature, that a communication may be
established between the magnetiser and the magnetised, so that
if the former chew pepper, the latter tastes it;’” “the mag-
netised are enabled to know by this evidence the configuration of
their interior just as well as if they saw it with their external


39


senses ;” “a patient described the thoracic and abdominal
viscera, the spinal marrow, the sympathetic nerve, and the solar
plexus, as white threads and clear spots; some have heard
sounds too low to be heard by others; some, with their eyes
shut, have perceived objects, and especially men, in another
apartment, and foretold, without ever making a mistake, what
persons would come to the house: the magnetiser scratches
himself, the magnetised itches at the same part; the former
coughs, pricks himself, the latter also coughs and feels the
prickp: the magnetiser takes wine and pepper into his mouth,


P This equals Sir Kenelme Digby, who solemnly assures us that a gentleman,
having had his hand wounded in a duel and suffering great pain, found the
pain suddenly cease when Sir Kenelme dissolved some powder of vitriol in water,
and put into the solution the bloody garter with which the wound had been
bound up. A few hours afterwards, however, he took the garter out of the
solution and dried it before a large fire; but “it was scarce dry before the
wounded gentleman’s servant came rearing that his master felt as much burning
as ever he had done, if not more, for the heat was such as if his hand were twixt
coales of fire.” He desired the man to return home, saying, ‘his master should
be free from that inflammation, it may be, before he could possibly return unto
him.”—*‘‘ Thereupon he went, and at the instant Sir Kenelme did put again the
garter into the water: thereupon he found his master without any pain at all.
To be brief, there was no sense of pain afterwards, but within five or six dayes
the wounds were Ccicatrised and entirely healed.” (4 Late Discourse made in a
Solemne Assembly of Nobles and Learned Men at Montpellier in France, by Sir
Kenelme Digby, Knight, &c.; rendered faithfully out of French into English,
by M. White, Gent., ed. 2. London, 1658. p. 6. sqq.) I may mention that

-the knight anticipated another folly and imposition, just as it may be with dif-
ferent practitioners, — Hahnemannism, or homeopathy, by pointing out an
undoubted remedy on the principle of similia similibus. “ Tis an ordinary
remedy, though a nasty one, that they who have ill breaths, hold their mouths
open at the mouth of a privy, as long as they can, and by the reiteration of this
remedy they find themselves cured at last.” p. 76.

<0


676 MESMERISM.


and both taste them: the magnetised distinguishes magnetised
from common water, foretelis the commencement and duration of
the paroxysm of his diseases, and points out the remedies.” 4
Gall, with that beautiful and playful irony which so charac-
terised him, and with which he delighted to annihilate his adver-
saries’ absurdities, after remarking that the human mind always
turns in the same circle,— that Plato and Socrates had taught
that our souls knew every thing originally, were in intimate com-
munication with the universal soul of the world, and that their
connection with the body did but impede the free use of their
knowledge, avows that, if, in mesmeric sleep, our soul becomes
intimately united with the soul of the world, none of the in-
credible tales of mesmerism can be doubted. “It is a trifle to
hear a poor peasant, born far from Upper Saxony, speak the
dialect of that country in its purity and with all its inflexions,
and possess the gift of unknown tongues: to see another stupid
peasant, ignorant of French, read correctly and understand a
French book applied to her stomach. To read with the fingers,
to know the hour by the watch in my pocket, to see through
walls and houses, and perceive at a distance a person who will
come to the house, are all wonders explicable by the intimate
connection with the universal soul of the world. We thus see
that if ever a great truth was promulgated, it is the doctrine of
predestination and pre-established harmony. Magnetism proves,
in the most peremptory manner, that every thing in the universe
is not only concatenated, but completed. The dialect of Upper
Saxony, the French language, my watch, the visit of the stranger,
the letter of a lover which you fancy is so snugly concealed in
your bosom, are concatenations of the world as necessary as the
sun is to the universe. Say, now, what can be concealed from
us either present or future ?”— “* We will not ask how the soul
can be united intimately with the body and with the soul of this
world at the same time; how it can be confined in its narrow
prison and at the same moment detached from all its ties ; how
the soul of the magnetiser and the magnetised can be mingled,
and afterwards separated again.” “ Unfortunately,” he continues,
‘‘ scientific discoveries still have to be made by the long and
laborious method of experience, notwithstanding the magnetised


4 Archiv. fiir Physiol. b. vil. st. 2. 8. 232s


MESMERISM. 677


see all their internal structure in the clearest manner, and mag-
netism has been practised so long.”

The result of Gall’s investigation was this :—‘* Neither we, nor
any other dispassionate observers, who have been present at the
famous experiments of which such wonderful accounts have been
given, have witnessed any thing supernatural or contrary to
nature: we ought therefore to abandon the belief of the meta-
morphosis of nerves (the perfermance of the function of one nerve
by another) to those who are better organised for the marvellous
than ourselves.”

It being, however, impossible to deny such facts of mesmer-
ism as occur in some nervous diseases, are they to be ascribed
to mere imagination — an excitement of the feelings by the ges-
ticulations and proximity of the manipulator", or to the oper-
ation of an unknown power? Gall admits this power, and even
does not reject the hypothesis of its connection with a fluid.
‘“‘ How often in intoxication, hysterical and hypochondriacal
attacks, convulsions, fever, insanity, under viclent emotions, after
long fasting, through the effect of such poisons as opium, hem-
lock, belladonna, are we not in some measure transformed into
perfectly different beings, for instance, into poets, actors, &c. ?”—
*‘ Just as in dreaming, the thoughts frequently have more deli-
cacy, and the sensations are more acute, and we can hear and


* « Among all the phenomena, however,” says Professor Dugald Stewart,
“to which the subject of imitation has led our attention, none are, perhaps, so
wonderful as those which have been recently brought to light, in consequence of
the philosophical inquiries occasioned by the medical pretensions of Mesmer and
his associates. That these pretensions involved much of ignorance, or of im-
posture, or both, in their author, has, I think, been fully demonstrated in the
very able report of the French academicians; but does it follow from this that
the facts witnessed and authenticated by those academicians should share in the
disgrace incurred by the empirics who disguised or misrepresented them? For
my own part, it appears to me, that the general conclusions established by
Mesmer’s practice, with respect to the physical effects of the principle of ima-
gination (more particularly in cases where they co-operated together) are in-
comparably more curious than if he had actually demonstrated the existence of
his boasted science: nor can I see any good reason why a physician, who admits
the efficacy of the moral agents employed by Mesmer, should, in the exercise of
his profession, scruple to copy whatever processes are necessary for subjecting
them to his command, any more than that he should hesitate about employing a
new physical agent, such as electricity or galvanism.” Elem, of the Phil. of the
Human Mind, vol. ili. p. 221.

¥yae


678 MESMERISM.


answer: just as in ordinary somnambulism we can rise, walk, see
with our eyes open, touch with the hands, &c.; so we allow that
similar phenomena may take place in artificial somnambulism, and
even in a higher degree.” —“ We acknowledge a fluid which has
an especial affinity with the nervous system, which can emanate
from an individual, pass into another, and accumulate, in virtue of
particular affinities, more in certain parts than in others.”—“ We
admit the existence of a fluid, the subtraction of which lessens,
and the accumulation augments, the power of the nerves ; which
places one part of the nervous system in repose, and heightens
the activity of another; which, therefore, may produce an arti-
ficial somnambulism.’ 5

A rigid mathematician, La Place, observes that, “ of all the
instruments which we can employ, in order to enable us to dis-
cover the imperceptible agents of nature, the nerves are the most
sensible, especially when their sensibility is exalted by particular


‘ It may be interesting to mention an observation which Gall made upon
himself by chance, and which, independently of the phenomena of mesmerism,
confirmed him in this opinion. Having, while in contemplation, placed his
hand upon his forehead, and walking backwards and forwards several times
with his fingers over the hairy part of the front of his head, at about the distance
of an inch, he remarked a gentle warmth, like a vapour, between his hand and
the upper part of his cranium: he felt a heat ascend towards his shoulder and
cheeks: heat in the head and chilliness in his loins. - The same thing having
recurred several times arrested his attention, and he repeated the experiment,
and always with the same results. If he continued to move for some moments,
with his hand suspended, the same phenomena increased. “ The eyes become
painful, and tears run down; the tongue can no longer articulate, twitchings of
the face occur, respiration grows laborious, and sighing and oppression follow ;
the knees tremble, and totter: and some hours of repose are required to restore
him perfectly.

‘¢ He has often, by the continued movement of the hand, produéed similar
phenomena in persons not previously aware of them. He produced even deep
and prolonged fainting: he has, in regard to this peculiarity, a particular
affinity with persons of both sexes who have fine and rather curly hair. They
only act upon him in this manner, and he is able to distinguish, by this singular
impression, if it is an individual of this description or not, who, at a fixed dis-
tance, in a numerous company, moves his hand over the superior anterior part
of his cranium. On the other hand, he can act upon persons of this consti-
tution only. The rapidity with which he loses his senses, and especially the
extremely disagreeable impression produced by an inexplicable depression, have
prevented him from pushing the trial beyond this and obtaining farther


results,”


MESMERISM. 679


causes. It is by means of them that we have discovered the
slight electricity which is developed by the contact of two
heterogeneous metals. The singular phenomena which result
from the extreme sensibility of the nerves in particular indi-
viduals have given birth to various opinions relative to the
existence of a new agent, which has been denominated animal
magnetism, to the action of the common magnetism, to the
influence of the sun and moon in some nervous affections, and,
lastly, to the impressions which may be experienced from the
proximity of the metals, or of a running water. It is natural to
suppose that the action of these causes is very feeble, and that it
may be easily disturbed by accidental circumstances; but, be-
cause, in some cases, it has not been manifested at all, we are
not to conclude it has no existence. Weare so far from being
acquainted with all the agents of nature, and their different
modes of action, that it would be quite unphilosophical to deny
the existence of the phenomena, merely because they are in-
explicable in the present state of our knowledge.” ¢

Cuvier fully admits mesmerism : —‘* We must confess that it is
very difficult, in the experiments which have for their object the
action which the nervous system of two different individuals can
exercise one upon another, to distinguish the effect of the imagin-
ation of the individual, upon whom the experiment is tried, from
the physical result produced by the person who acts for him.
The effects, however, on persons ignorant of the agency, and
upon individuals whom the operation itself has deprived of con-
sciousness, and those which animals present, do not permit us to
doubt that the proximity of two animated bodies in certain
positions, combined with certain movements, have a real effect,
independently of all participation of the fancy. It appears also
clearly that these effects arise from some nervous communication
which is established between their nervous systems.’#

I have no hesitation in declaring my conviction that the
facts of mesmerism which I admit, because they are not con-
trary to established morbid phenomena, result from a specific
power. Even they are sometimes unreal and feigned, and, when
real, are sometimes the result of emotion, — of imagination, to


t Théorie Analytique du Calcul des Probabilités.


u Anatomie Comparée, t. il.


680 MESMERISM.


use common language; but, that they may be real and inde
pendent of all imagination, I have seen quite sufficient to con-
vince me,

In May, 1829, I was introduced to Mr. Chenevix by Dr.
Hodgkin, and, as that gentleman had persuaded himself, theo-
retically and practically, at Paris, of the truth of mesmerism, I
seized this opportunity of commencing an experimental examin-
ation, by availing myself of his offer to mesmerise any person I
might present to him. I saw him mesmerise two girls at his own
lodgings in Old Burlington Street, and took him several times to
St. Thomas’s Hospital. The two girls appeared to fall fast
asleep by the process: but, though I watched them very carefully,
I might be deceived, and, as they were well known to Mr. Che-
nevix, and had been mesmerised before, I drew no inference.
At St. Thomas’s Hospital, I selected female patients at random
from my list of their names, and neither he had seen them nor
they heard of him or mesmerism. Each was manipulated alone
in a private room. On manipulating a patient of a colleague,
who selected her himself, she had an hysterical fit, at which
I was not surprised, as hysteria was her complaint and the
least emotion at any time excited a paroxysm. He endea-
voured to put an end to it in vain. On a second occasion, a
violent fit recurred and his attempts to calm it were fruitless,
He manipulated six other young females, with no effect, except
that one, labouring under chorea, said her head was light and
heavy alternately, and menstruated two days afterwards for
the first time during three months. An epileptic woman fell
asleep, apparently, on the two occasions she was mesmerised:
yet we found that she was not asleep the second time, and she
declared she had not been asleep the first time, though on both
occasions she felt drowsy. I did not venture to conclude she
was asleep, but the redness of her eyes and cheeks, the heavi-
ness of her look, and every circumstance make me now believe
she was asleep the first time, for I have seen many mesmerised
persons fast asleep, who afterwards denied it. Pain was pro-
duced in her arm, and afterwards in her head, and presently
recurred by manipulating in another direction; from this I
inferred nothing then, but I have since then witnessed such
phenomena so frequently, that I do not doubt their reality and
their production by the manipulator. I remained unconvinced


MESMERISM. 681


till another female was mesmerised. She was an ignorant Irish
girl, and unprepared to expect any thing. In a minute she
plaintively entreated Mr. Chenevix not to proceed. The mani-
pulations “ drew weakness into her, and made her feel faint.”
She next complained of pain in the abdomen; on a few transverse
movements she said the pain was gone: the same thing occurred
several times, and once pain was complained of in the chest,
but ceased perfectly after a few transverse movements. He
darted an open hand towards one of her arms, and told her to
raise it; she could scarcely move it: after a few transverse
movements, she declared the stiffness and uneasiness were gone,
and she moved it as well as the other. He produced all the
same effects on the other arm, and then upon one leg. Her eyes
were closed as perfectly as could be, and, a piece of paper weigh.
ing, perhaps, a grain, being placed upon one foot, she instantly
was unable to raise it; the paper was removed, and she raised it
directly. All these things were repeated again and again, I tell-
ing Mr. Chenevix, in French, which part I wished to be rendered
powerless and which to be restored and she being prevented as
much as possible from seeing. “ Deception was impossible. Mr.C.
looked round at me, and asked, in French, if I was satisfied. I
really felt ashamed to say no; and yet I could scarcely credit
my senses enough to say yes. I remained silent. He then
asked me, still in a language unintelligible to the patient, ‘ shall
I bring back a pain, or disable a limb for you once more. I
of course requested that he would do so. He complied instantly,
giving her a pain in the chest once, and disabling her several
times from moving her limbs, and removing those effects at
pleasure, according to the intentions he avowed to me; the
whole taking place exactly as it had done in my former trial with
this woman.” *

From this time I was satisfied that such a power as mes-
merism exists, and hoped some day to inquire into it. I had no
opportunity, however, before the arrival of Baron Dupotet in this


* T allowed Mr. Chenevix to publish my memoranda of what I saw. They
will be found in the London Medical and Physiol. Journ. for Oct. 1829, which
contains the last of a series of papers by him on mesmerism. He did not print
them with perfect fairness, but omitted two or three comments, and I think
facts, unfavourable to mesmerism, in regard to those cases in which the effects
were none or doubtful. .


682 MESMERISM.


country a few months back. As mesmerism is extolled in ner-
vous diseases, I selected three epileptic patients, a male and
two females, at University College Hospital, in whose disease
I despaired of doing any good: and one hysterical female,
who was said to have fits at such very distant intervals that I
really could not tell whether she had any thing the matter with
her, and who would not have been allowed to remain in the
Institution. Several students and other gentlemen and myself
submitted to the manipulations. On some gentlemen no effect
was produced, but the process was not repeated above once or
at all in them: of the greater number, some experienced a
tingling or some strange sensation in the arms, legs, or face, fre-
quently with little twitchings, an oppression and unusual heaving
of the chest in respiration: and some always felt a heaviness
or unusual sensation about the forehead, and even drowsiness,
convincing them that they were under some strange influence,
and on repetition experienced nothing more ; I was mesmerised
frequently, and always but once with the effect of tingling and
twitchings only. Those who had never heard of tingling and
twitching being the result, but conceived they were to be sent
to sleep, experienced these effects abundantly ; and many, who
sat. down laughing at the whole as nonsense, honestly confessed
they were. affected by some influence. Some of these had
witnessed the seporific power of the process, and believed in mes-
merism, like myself, and yet none could be sent to sleep. A visiter
one day was put to sleep, but he never returned, and I did not
see him. The four patients were sent fast asleep, the man
always, and in from five to ten minutes ; occasionally in longer
time, occasionally in less. One of the epileptic females was
manipulated very often before she slept, although she was de-
lighted at the process and mortified whenever she was not sub-
jected to it with the others. At length, however, she began to
sleep under it; and once was sent to sleep in a few moments;
but the process often failed with her. The other was for a great
length of time sent to sleep invariably ; but a curious circum-
stance at length occurred, —a few moments after she had lost her-
self in sleep she awoke, and it was impossible to give her longer
sleep than for a few moments. This always happened repeat-
edly during the process, till Baron Dupotet was too tired to
continue it: and it happened in every process for a long while.


MESMERISM. 683


At length, however, she was put to sleep again for the same
time as before. The patients, when about to sleep, either
showed a fixed stare, or they looked heavy and their eyelids
gradually dropped or winked; their breathing became heavy ;
and sometimes they changed from waking to sleeping in an
instant. When they were asleep, the head nodded or fell in
one direction or another, the arms fell, they breathed loud or
even snored. In some, twitchings of the fingers, feet, arms, legs,
or face took place : in the hysterical girl the eyeballs rolled rapidly
from side to side, or the lower lip was raised and depressed.
These movements were the more striking that they alternated.
On awaking, she never could open-her eyes; but, on the Baron’s
making a few transverse passes above and below them, she opened
them instantly. This invariably occurred : I and others every day
made the same passes in vain. If we raised her eyelids, they in-
stantly fell. _We begged her to open them; but, till the fingers
of him who had mesmerised her made transverse movements, they
remained closed, however long we waited. In the rest, the sleep
lasted a short time only: from a few minutes to a quarter of an
hour: but in her it was very protracted ; it was often so profound
that she did not feel pricking nor pinching; and it seldom ceased
till put an end to. This the Baron always did instantly at our
desire, by transverse movements; when she got up, rubbing her
eyes and looking drowsy for a minute, and then walked away as
if nothing had occurred. The man often on awaking complained
of a pain in some part or other, or some very strange sensation,
which was immediately dissipated by transverse movements. At
first he liked the process and prepared the chair with delight:
but, after a time, he took a dislike to it, and at length requested
not to be mesmerised, but to trust to medicines for his cure, and I
of course did not oppose his wishes. Yet at both periods the
effects were precisely the same upon him.

One of the students tried the process upon an epileptic girl,
a patient of the gentleman with whom he lived at the distance of
several miles from the College, and sent her presently off to
sleep for several hours. He offered to bring her to the Hos-
pital, as she was so susceptible of mesmeric influence ; and she
came three times aweek. Her eyelids were always closed pre-
sently: and she never could open them till the Baron made
transverse passes around them. I always attempted, but in


684 MESMERISM.


vain; and, if I opened them forcibly, they immediately shut
again. After the Baron had done this, she always was sent
asleep rapidly; and it was invariably remarked that at length
she made one deep inspiration, and was then in a comatose
sleep. This deep inspiration, the Baron informed me, is the
uniform precursor of the coma. From this moment, we could do
what we pleased without waking her,— halloo in her ears, dash
her arms in any direction, pull her hair out, pinch her hand, put
snuff up her nose: she was perfectly insensible, breathing pla-
cidly, and slept on in spite of any attempt to awake her, till the
Baron made two or three transverse movements, when she instantly
awoke. These phenomena were too striking and invariable for
any rational person to disbelieve that some peculiar power had
been in operation. Still, though awake, she generally could not
open her eyes till transverse passes had been made around them.
Her lower jaw was always firmly closed in her sleep, so that none of
us could open it: but the Baron always caused it presently to open
on moving his finger along it or holding his hand in contact with it:
it was opened more slowly by manipulations made without touch-
ing her. On one occasion he held his finger near the meatus of .
the ear, and she presently heard, and from that time heard more
or less and talked, especially if he operated again upon the
ear; but after she was awakened she knew nothing that had
passed in her sleep-waking. Still she was mesmerised many
times before she answered questions: she heard a noise, and this
roused her sufficiently to make her talk of what was present in
her mind, but her words_had no relation to the question. At
length she began to speak to every question ; and, on one occasion,
on being teased again and again to give an answer when she
repeatedly declared she could not, she fell into a violent rage,
rose, seized the inquirer, shook and pushed him with both hands,
and on being forced into a chair, after resting quiet a few mi-
nutes, she rose and made at the same person again very fiercely,
and, sat down at last with difficulty, pale with rage, and her
hands quite cold. Baron Dupotet thought it right to awaken her,
and did so immediately, when she smiled with her natural good
humour, and, on being addressed, proved herself to be in-complete
ignorance of all that had just passed.

The power of mesmerism was shown as strikingly though dif-
ferently upon one of my two epileptic female patients. She ceased


MESMERISM. 685


to have epilepsy ; but fell into fits of ecstacy, which I described
at p.629., perfectly insensible, though with her eyes open,
chattering, mimicking, relating stories, &c. This state could be
put an end to by mesmerising her. Generally she was restored in
less than a quarter of an hour, even after this state had continued
many hours, or even for a day or a week ; once or twice it resisted
long manipulations, but they continued, excepting onee, till put
an end to by the process, and that once, I understood, she fell back
very soon into the state again. These attacks, I have already said,
changed to ecstatic delirium ; in the fits of which she was in pos-
session of all her external senses, and these attacks were terminated
by mesmerism, just like those of simple ecstacy or sleep-waking.
They ended with momentary sleep. While sitting before the
magnetiser, looking attentively at him, and saying all sorts of
ridiculous and witty spiteful things, pale, with the countenance of
a maniac, she suddenly seemed lost, her eyes rapidly closed for
a moment, then opened, she looked astonished, and was ia her
perfect senses, smiling amiably, behaving in the most proper
manner, in short, in full possession of her intellect and feelings,
This phenomenon was, if possible, more striking than the sudden
awaking of those who were in a state of coma. It occurred again
and again and again for weeks, and the young gentleman under
whose care the patient was in my absence from the hospital,
succeeded like Baron Dupotet in bringing her to herself, and
even two or three times when the latter had not been able through
the state of exhaustion in which he was from having magnetised
very often and long in the course of the day.

These are the phenomena which I have witnessed. To ascribe
them to emotion and fancy, to suppose collusion and deception,
would be absurd. They must be ascribed to a peculiar power ;
to a power acting, I have no doubt, constantly in all living things,
vegetable and animal, but shown in a peculiar manner by the pro-
cesses of mesmerism. I have witnessed its power at least three
times a week for two months: and should despise myself if
I hesitated to declare my decided conviction of the truth of mes-
merism. I am willing to believe that a sleep-waker may pro-
phesy morbid changes in himself with accuracy, as the boy men-
tioned by Gall predicted the termination of his fit if his friends
would lead him into the garden, and the girl mentioned by
Lord Monboddo predicted the cessation of her disease with


686 MESMERISM.


equal accuracy. I cannot forget that a minute portion of semen
masculinum, probably far less than a drop, will transmit a
father’s structure, mental and bodily character, in the minutest
points, even idiosyncracies of affection from various articles of
food and medicine, and from morbid influences, so that the
offspring may never take a particular contagious disease or not
take it till a certain time of life, just like the father.

This declaration will excite a smile with almost every body;
for, since the report of the French commissioners in 1784, it has
been customary to ascribe all mesmeric phenomena to imagination
or deception. But I set no more value upon reports of French
commissioners than the reports are worth. I know their reports
on Gall’s labours (see suprd, p. 329. sq.), contradicted by them-
selves in their subsequent report on M. Fleuren’s experiments;
on Le Gallois’ experiments, so well opposed by Dr. W. Phillip;
their injustice to Dr. Tiedemann; and afterwards to Dr. Vimont.
I haye never yet declared an opinion upon a new truth that I
have been obliged to retract. Phrenology has now advanced
to its firm establishment; Human Glanders is universally ad-
mitted; Auscultation is invariably practised except by the
wretchedly ignorant: Quinine, Prussic acid, Creosote, are now
in daily use. I stood abundant ridicule for advocating these, and
will now stand more ridicule with the same firmness: and the
same silent pity * or contempt which I have always felt for my
opponents, till I see, as I shall, the truth of mesmerism also
admitted and the world forget that it was ever doubted. Ig-
norance and party feeling are more unblushing when many are —
united officially, than when all is left to private and. individual
discussion. For expressing opinions favourable to mesmerism,
two French academicians were expelled, and Mr. Chenevix I
heard censured after his death as a fellow of the Royal So-
ciety by the President from the chair. The first French com-
missioners strangely referred all the effects which they witnessed
to imagination, imitation, and touching. Now the influence of
touching must have been different from that of imagination,
as they employed two distinct words, and therefore all could not
have been imagination even in their view. Franklin was so


y “ Rideat me ista dicentem, qui non intelligit ; et ego doleam ridentem me ;”’
said St. Austin. Isis revel. vol. i. p. 81.


MESMERISM. 687


generally absent and paid so little attention that he ought not to
have signed the report, and seems to have taken the absurdity of
the thing for granted. The celebrated Jussieu refused to sign it,
and made a special report of his own. I have seen so much of
what is wrong, in bodies and in individuals, that the opinions of
the former and of the latter, whatever may be the rank, title,
office, power, riches, or scientific character of the parties,
never are regarded by me beyond their own simple worth.

But I have never witnessed more than what, it is certain, takes
place in health and disease. I have seen persons sent to sleep,
I have felt and heard others declare they had tingling, and heard
some declare they had various other sensations and pains, I have
seen twitchings, convulsions, and spastic contractions of muscles,
loss of power of muscle, and the most profound coma; and I have
seen these evidently and instantly removed by the process. I have
seen one sense restored in the coma by the process, so that
the person was insensible in taste, smell, sight, and yet heard and
answered questions well. I have seen paroxysms of sleep-waking
and ecstatic delirium, which had been originally induced by its
disturbance of a system already epileptic, put an end to evi-
dently, and in general quickly, by mesmerism. But I have not
witnessed persons seeing through walls or pasteboard, nor tasting
or smelling with the epigastrium or fingers ; nor speaking or under-
standing languages they had never learnt ; nor telling the circum-
stances past, present, and to come of persons they had never heard
of before. Yet I have persevered with patience and docility.
Often have I seen Baron Dupotet speak at the epigastrium and
finger ends of the ecstatic and comatose patients: often heard
him address them in a language with which they were unac-
quainted: often ask when they would have another fit; but nothing,
which, till I witness such things, I must consider supernatural,
has yet occurred. He has frequently said that these phenomena
would soon occur, — that the patients would probably soon be-
come clairvoyans: but no. No marvel has yet presented itself in
my experience: nor has any good been yet effected in the dis-
eases of my patients; but the perfect coma induced in some of


= Rapport de l'un des Commissaires, A. L, Jussieu, chargés par le Roi de V Ex-
amen du Magnétisme Animal. Paris, 1784.
ZZ


688 MESMERISM;


them would be an inestimable blessing in the case of a surgical
operation, which I am positive might have been performed without
the slightest sensation on some of the female patients, exactly
as took place at the Hotel-Dieu, where a cancerous breast was
removed in mesmeric coma from a poor woman without her
knowledge. I have no doubt that I shall in time see all the
established phenomena of sleep-waking, — writing, reading, and
doing endless things even better than in the waking state. But,
before I see, I cannot believe more. I cannot believe that even
those strange phenomena are produced by it which some de-
clare to occur occasionally in plain sleep-waking, because I must
see such sleep-waking before I believe it. Yet I will continue a
little longer with docility to inquire and learn, for of Baron
Dupotet’s perfect good faith I entertain no doubt, however cre-
dulous he may be.

The observations of the late French commission agree with
mine; but they go farther. Sometimes there was no effect;
sometimes but slight effects ; sometimes decided effects, as sleep,
extreme insensibility, and muscular movements on the direction
of the fingers of the mesmeriser, though sometimes none, and
sometimes with scarcely uniformity enough for any one to assert
that the movements resulted from it; sometimes insensibility of
a particular sense dissipated, so that perfect coma was exchanged
for sleep-waking, or the whole coma dissipated at the pleasure of
the mesmeriser by transverse movements.

They saw a large variety of the more wonderful, but established
phenomena of sleep-waking, such as appeared in many of the
cases, related by me, unconnected with mesmerism: but which
the shortness of time only has prevented me from witnessing.
They, however, believed that they witnessed more than this. They
declare they witnessed the production of sleep-waking by mes-
merism practised in the next room to that in which the patient
was ; that they witnessed clairvoyance, — reading and perfect re-
cognition of objects of sight, &c. amounting to the ability of
playing games of cards, &c. in coma, with the eyes completely
closed; accurate prophesying of the day of occurrence of dis-
tant epileptic attacks and of other events of the case; great
diminution of epilepsy ; rapid cure of hemiplegia; true de-
clarations of the seat and nature of the diseases of strangers


MESMERISM. 689


by mesmerised persons in the state of sleep-waking who had
never seen them before, but who were placed in relation with
the patients by putting their hands in contact with them. ‘The
details are most interesting, and, in at least all particulars to
which my own experience extends, I have no doubt most faithful.
The report is signed by MM. Bourdois de le Motte, Fouquier,
Gueneau de Mussy, Guersent, Husson, Itard, J. J. Leroux, Marc,
and Thillaye.

After translating this report, Mr. Colquhoun refers to some
cases of mesmeric sleep-waking in which it is said that the
surface of the body acquired a new power of sensation; some
related by M. Tardy de Montravel* of the recognition of ob-
jects of sight by the epigastrium even at some distance; one
by Dr. Gmelin» ; one of a Scotchman named Macgill, a servant
of a Russian ambassador, who resolved the man’s cure should
be attempted by mesmerism, and describes all the phenomena
himself ¢; one of an epileptic boy at Jena, magnetised by Pro-
fessor Kieser4, with the effect of producing various nervous
symptoms, coma, convulsions, chorea, tetanus, and at length
perfect sleep-waking, in which, though the eye appeared quite
blind, objects of sight were recognised by his toes, fingers,
elbows, shoulders, abdominal and facial surface, chin, and point
of the nose. Similar cases without end are recorded in works on
mesmerism.¢


* Traitement Magnétique de la Dem. N. vol. i.

b Material fiir die Anthrop. vol. ii.

© Biblioth. du Magn. Animal, vol. iii. p. 126.

4 Archiv fur den thierischen Magnetismus, vol. iii, No. 2.

© The work of Mr. Colquhoun is meritorious in a literary point of view —
for the industry and ardour employed in it, and for the total disregard of the
laughter of the ignorant and prejudiced world at large, and of the contempt
of men who, eminent in one department of science, consider themselves autho-
rities in matters which they have never studied. It is valuable also for the
translation of the French Report, which had never been published and was
merely lithographed and distributed among the members of the Academy. But
I fear it is calculated to do far more harm than good from its displaying en-
thusiasm, and an inordinate love of the marvellous, whether true or false, in-
stead of knowledge and judgment. It contains an Appendix, entitled, 4 New
Theory of Physics, which any one acquainted with physics will perceive to be
replete with mistatements and illogical infererces. Phrenology he abhors,
and displays the grossest ignorance of it, making statements totally at variance

y ay Alay?


690 MESMERISM.


My readers will remember the extraordinary, but unquestion-
able, case of Colonel Townsend (supra, p. 485. sqq.), who some


with facts.* (Vol. ii. p. 120.sq., 150.) So credulous is he, that he considers the
learned and amiable Swedenborg to have been naturally in a state of magnetic
illumination, whom any one conversant with Swedenborg’s theological writings,
and with the history of insanity, must know to have been a monomaniac for
thirty years. The mad Joan of Arc he supposes to have been in an habitual crisis.
He believes every childish tale without a shadow of authenticity (vol. i. p. xxx.
87. sq.), every absurdity advanced by mesmerisers,—that mesmerised people speak,
not merely understand, when spoken to by others influencing them mesmerically,
languages unknown to them; he applies ridiculously extravagant terms of
praise to ordinary persons, and considers a certain production as highly satis-
factory, —just what he himself would have executed, — but which any man of
sense and good feeling will agree with me to have been too contemptible, intel-


* As a specimen of his knowledge and mind, I refer to a note in vol. ii. p. 153.
He has ‘“ good reason to believe’’ that the brain is the seat of the operations of
intellect, but equally good to hold “ that the ganglionic system, the nerves of
the chest and abdomen, is the primary seat of the affections!” Love, hate, jea-
lousy, &c. alter the functions and even the structure of these organs, and any
effect of these passions “ upon the brain appears to be merely secondary and
sympathetic!” Shame makes the cheek blush; shame therefore has its pri-
mary seat in the cheeks. We may go farther: disorder of the stomach causes
headach ; dyspepsia therefore has its primary seat in the head, and any effect
produced upon the stomach appears merely secondary and sympathetic.

I must take this opportunity of supplying an omission on the subject of phreno-
logy. Allpersons give Dr. Spurzheim the credit ofinventing the term phrenology
for his master’s science: and he takes this credit, for, in his Phrenology, vol. i.
p- 12., he says, “ In extending my views, I have found it necessary to change
the name again. I have chosen that of phrenology, which is derived from two
Greek words, ¢puv, mind, and Avcyos, a discourse, and I understand by it the
doctrine of the special phenomena of the mind, and of the relations between the
mental dispositions and the body, particularly the brain.” Now, Dr. Forster,
in his Recueil des Ouvrages et des Pensées @un Physicien et Metaphysicien, par
Thomas Forster, Francfort sur le Mein, 1836, p. 12., proves that he himself gave
the name: ‘I introduced my friend (Dr. Spurzheim) to the converzationi of
Sir Joseph Banks, which were held every Sunday evening in Soho Square, and
to many other men of science; but the greatest benefit I rendered him was
to give him a suitable name for his system. In 1816 I published my Sketch of
the Phrenology of Gall and Spurzheim, London, 1816;—a name which the
science has never lost.”’


MESMERISM. 691


time before his death possessed the power of gradually reducing
the action of his heart till it became imperceptible and for half


lectually and morally, for me to condescend to notice. Materialism is as greata
horror to him as phrenology ; and he fancies that mesmerism proyes the existence
of a soul independent of body, and is doing wonders by weaning people “ from
the deadly error of materialism and infidelity, and giving birth to a sound and re-
ligious faith.” (Vol.ii. p.176.) He is thusignorant that materialists may not only
believe in God, but in the divine authority of Scripture; and more honour Scripture
by looking implicitly in full faith to it alone, as God’s authority, for their belief
in a future state, than those who endeavour to make its declarations more pro-
bable by fancying a soul immortal in its own nature and independent of matter,
when the Scripture tells us we shall rise as matter, — with bodies, and go to
heaven with bodies, where Christ, God himself, sits bodily, —as matter, flesh,
blood, and bones, in the words of the Church of England. (See my arguments
at pages 39. sqq., 360. sqq. )

He supposes that, when Negretti had dressed a salad and then ate first cabbage
and then tart instead, without perceiving the trick, and did not know that he
was drinking water when he had called for wine, his “ soul only was busy,
without any co-operation of the body.” (Vol. i. p. 344. sq.) Negretti’s im-
material soul was resident in his brain, however, at the time, because Ne-
gretti was eating and drinking and doing a great many things with his body set
in action by his brain; which was evidently hard at work. He conceives that
in sleep there is always dreaming,— that the soul can never sleep, but is always
at work; and that; when we are conscious of dreaming, it is only that the
soul is struggling to manifest its independent activity without the co-operation
of the bodily organs. (Vol. ii. p.121.) It is a pity that the soul does not suc-
ceed ; for, when acting only half followed by the brain, it works much worse
than when completely so, our dreams being generally absurdities. (See supra,
p- 626.) I wonder why we should not recollect what our soul does in sound
dreamless sleep without the co-operation of the brain: surely it must have
memory. I wonder why, if it works so well without the brain, nature entangles
it in a brain at all. ;

In mesmeric sleep-waking he contends that all has proceeded without the
brain. The sleep-waker “remembers nothing, because the soul acts perfectly
without the body, and every thing has taken place out of the brain, since we
have seen that the fluid goes in search of objects.” (Vol. ii. p. 159.3; vol. i.
p- 302.) In the subsequent fit, however, all is remembered, and yet the fluid
must be again gone out in search. It must, therefore, be at home and abroad
at the same time. So powerful does he believe the soul unencumbered by
body to be in sleep-waking, that he actually declares not only that he is not
aware of a sleep-waker perishing in the dangers which he frequently encounters,
but that “so long as he is left undisturbed in his proceedings he acts fearlessly
and is safe,”—* that he is protected from injury by other means and guarantees
of security than those by which his conduct is regulated in his ordinary waking

ZZ 83


692 | MESMERISM.


an hour he appeared really dead. Bernier informs us that In-
dian Bramins and Fakirs can throw themselves into somnam-


state.” I have frequently read in the newspaper of persons opening the
window and being dashed to pieces in their sleep. But, waving this, we
saw that Negretti struck himself against a door which was shut without his
knowledge, and once hurt himself severely against a wall (p. 640,): that Galen
was awakened by striking against a stone: and that Mr. Dubree in his sleep
threw himself out of the window and broke his leg. Besides the soul must be
very stupid in sleep-waking, while it is doing the more wonderful things, —
seeing with the surface, it is not aware of half that is existing and doing
around. (See for instance supra, p. 635. 637. 640. sq.) Supposing that persons
perceive, independently of touch, by their surface, this shows no immaterial
substance independent of matter to be at work, for the material surface is con-
cerned in the operation. Ifthe mesmerised person has intelligence of the past,
present, and future, in regard to others as soon as they are put into relation with
him by contact or intermediate communication, the unconnected, detached, imma-
terial substance must be a strange substance, which, to do these wonders, requires
material bodies and their conjunction. At any rate, there is no detached im-
material esserice at work. But I am weary of such nonsense. Any person of
common discernment, unbewildered by fancies and unfettered by the intolerance
of conceit and prejudice, must perceive that all the phenomena of sleep-waking
are the effects of disorder of the matter called nervous system; coexist cr are
variously interchanged with all kinds of disorders of this part of the animal body ;
and are often attended:by common bodily symptoms — heat, pain, throbbing,
flushing of the head, &c.; and arise from the same causes as other nervous
diseases, — mechanical injury, derangement of some distant part, &c.; and are
sometimes hereditary. _Brutes are influenced by mesmerism like human beings ;
and even vegetables, and inanimate matter. If mesmerism can act at a dis-
tance, so, let us remember, can gravitation, affinity, and other properties of
inanimate matter. The soul,-in the mesmerised, has disconnected itself from
the brain! the fluid (is the fluid the soul? is not fluid still matter?) has gone
out in search of objects! Where is it? and when out, how happens it to learn
so little? to see only what is passing with respect to certain persons? to see
only one person perhaps dying? or does the soul of the dying person go to its
friends for a moment and show itself in those remarkable cases of the fancied
sight of dying distant friends? The soul flies out under the manipulations of
the magnetiser, and then flies away home again, knowing its way to the original
skull, like a little material dickybird. Mr. Colquhoun’s views are fit only for
old divines and nursery maids. An enlightened Christian will scorn the support
of any thing for his revelation but its plain evidences; these he will consider
all-sufficient; and above all will he scorn the assistance of mesmerism, when
he reflects, —a fact which Mr. Colquhoun does not mention, that some of the
greatest mesmerists, — those who believe things which I will not believe till I see
them, but which he believes, ~contend that all the prophecies of the Old and New


MESMERISM. 693


bulism, and even teach the art.f Cardanus professed to be able
to place himself in ecstatic insensibility.s St. Austin tells of a
priest, named Restitutus, who could become insensible and lie like
a dead man whenever he pleased, insensible to blows, punctures,
burning, though if persons spoke loudly he heard something
like distant sounds.» We have a modern account of a similar
nature:—A man in India, “is said by long practice, to have
acquired the art of holding his breath by shutting his mouth and
stopping the interior opening of the nostrils with his tongue; he
also abstains from solid food for some days previous to his in-
terment ; so that he may not be inconvenienced by the contents
of his stomach, while put up in his narrow grave ; and, moreover,
he is sewn up in a bag of cloth, and the cell is lined with ma-
sonry and floored with cloth, that the white ants and other
Insects may not easily be able to molest him. The place in
which he was buried at Jaisulmer is a small building about twelve
feet by eight, built of stone; and in the floor was a hole about
three feet long, two and a half feet wide, and the same depth,
or perhaps a yard deep, in which he was placed in a sitting
posture, sewed up in his shroud, with his feet turned inwards
towards the stomach, and his hands also pointed inwards towards
the chest. ‘Two heavy slabs of stone, five or six feet long, and
broad enough to cover the mouth of the grave, so that he could


Testament, and all the miracles relating to the animal frame, were only so much
mesmerism, and that Christ was but an extraordinary mesmeriser. A celebrated
living mesmerist asserted this in a public lecture at Montpellier, and the people
soon afterwards took up stones to stone him and endeavoured to drive him out
of their city. Mr. Colquhoun himself quotes at great length a fierce tirade
against the Bible, calculated, I should think, to produce great irreverence of
the book.

Mr. Colquhoun would have rendered real service to mesmerism, if, instead
of compiling so much rubbish, and displaying such ignorance and credulity,
with a dogmatism and coarseness (vol. i. p. 136.3; vol. ii. p. 162. sqq-) which
have prevented me from being at all delicate with respect to him, he had col-
lected unquestionable facts only and gone to work experimentally, like a phi-
losopher, and communicated his results to the public.

£ Cérémonies. et Coutumes réligieuses, t. vi. p. 188.

& < Quoties volo, extra sensum quasi in ecstasin transeo.”” De rerwm varietate,
1, vill. c. 43.

» De civitate Dei: all quoted in Isis revelata, vol. i. p. 146. sq.


694 PERIODICAL PHENOMENA.


not escape, were then placed over him, and I believe a little
earth was plastered over the whole, so as to make the surface of
the grave smooth and compact. The door of the house was
also built, up, and people placed outside, so that no tricks might
be played nor deception practised. At the expiration of a full
month, that is to say this morning, the walling of the door was
broken, and the buried man dug out of the grave; Trevelyan’s
moonshee only running there in time to see the ripping open of
the bag in which the man had been enclosed. He was taken
out in a perfectly senseless state, his eyes closed, his hands
cramped and powerless, his stomach shrunk very much, and his
teeth jammed so fast together, that they were forced to open
his mouth with an iron instrument to pour a little water down
his throat. He gradually recovered his senses and the use of
his limbs ; and when we went to see him was sitting up, supported
by two men, and conversed with us in a low, gentle tone of
voice, saying that ‘we might bury him again for a twelvemonth
if we pleased.’”’ The narrator is Lieut. A. H. Boileau, an officer of
engineers, employed on the extensive trigonometrical survey of
India. The Indian is now alive, and he voluntarily agreed with
Esur-Lal, one of the ministers of the Muharawul of Jaisulmer, to
be buried for a month. There may be after all some trick ;.
but Cornet Macnaghten once suspended him for thirteen days
in a close wooden box. Previously to his interments he takes
milk only, and of that no more than is sufficient to support life:
and during it his hair ceases to grow.


/


BEsipDEs sleep, various diurnal revolutions take place in the ani-
mal system. We have seen that the pulse is generally thought to
be quicker in the evening than in the morning: that the form-
ation of carbonic acid in the lungs was found by Dr. Prout
in experiments upon himself to increase from daybreak to noon,
to decrease from noon to sunset: that muscular power in Dr.
Edward’s experiments increased during the first half of the day
and decreased in the latter. I have noticed for twenty years a


i India Journal of Medical and Physical Science.


SLEEP. 695


diurnal revolution in my intellect and feelings: in the morning
my intellect is stronger, as is that of all persons necessarily after
repose ; but in the evening all my social feelings are strikingly
more acute. I often am deeply distressed in the evening, when
reflecting on the loss or absence of those dear to me, and at the
misfortunes of others not connected with me, till the very mo-
ment I go to bed and fall asleep; and in the morning can reflect
upon the very same things with coolness, and perhaps am
indisposed to reflect upon them at all.

Again, brutes have their seasons, — periods in which certain
propensities become ungovernable, — for travelling, for singing,
building, for the joys of love.

Morbid phenomena frequently have periodical recurrences —
fever, pain, epilepsy, &c.,— and the intermission may be hours,
days, weeks, months, years.


All brutes, probably, except those whose life is of very short duration, sleep.
They sleep, however, at different periods of the twenty-four hours; so that
according to their waking period they have been divided into diurnal, crepus-
cular, and nocturnal. Though darkness is not the cause of sleep, its effect
upon diurnal birds is strikingly shown, if darkness supervenes in the day: I
have been amused to see my birds go to sleep in the morning during a solar
eclipse, and awake again when it was over. Those which prey by night, like
the cat, see better in darkness from the structure of their eyes, and pass the
greater part of their time in sleep; while those which do not, are awake the
greater portion of the twenty-four hours. The former are said to reverse their
natural habits if in captivity, and to sleep at night. Carnivorous brutes sleep more
than herbivorous. Most brutes, we are informed, sleep longer in winter than in
summer. Brutes generally have a certain character of sleep; all hares, cats,
birds (a goose is a far better night watch than a dog), &c. being light sleepers:
bears, badgers, turtles, &c. heavy sleepers. Some, as the hare, always sleep
with their eyes open (Dr. Macnish, p. 25. sqq.): some sleep well standing,
and horses have been known to stand for thirty days. Those which eat at long
intervals, as ‘some reptiles, have been observed to sleep for days after their
enormous meal.

Plants have been said to sleep, from periodic changes in the position of an
entire leaf or of the several leaflets of which a compound leaf is formed. The
leaf stalks bend upwards or downwards, so that the flattened surface of the leaf
is elevated or depressed: the upper surface of some leaflets and the under of
others is brought together. These changes are influenced by light and heat,
but not primarily induced. For, in a darkened room, the leaflets of sensitive


696 HYBERNATION.


plants periodically fold and open: if excluded from light by day, and exposed
to strong lamp-light by night, the periods of sleep become irregular at first, but
generally, at length, the leaves close by day and open at night. The alternate
opening and closing of flowers is analogous, but take place at different periods
in different species, and not at the same period with the same changes in the
leaves. An acacia has closed its leaves and expanded its flowers at sunset, and
expanded its leaves and closed its flowers at sunrise. (Prof. Henslow’s Prin-
ciples of Descriptive and Physiological Botany, in Lardner’s Cyclopedia, p. 171. sq.)

The functions of plants are very periodical: leafing and flowering occur at
certain periods, ‘The regular return of the seasons influences their periodicity,
but there is a natural independent tendency to it which, though assisted by the
vicissitudes of the season, causes the changes of individuals to be considerably
accelerated or retarded. (Prof. Henslow, 1. c. p. 149. sq.)


The phenomena of hybernating animals, which grow dull on the approach of
winter, and at length fall asleep, continuing so till the return of mild weather,
and generally endeavouring to be as little exposed to noise, motion, and all causes
of excitement, and to lose as little heat during the approaching cold as possible,
by coiling themselves up and getting into holes and warm situations, covering
themselves with leaves, &c. (and all the classes of animals, except birds, contain
species that have the faculty of living in this state), are precisely analogous,
though very different in degree, to those of common sleep. The sensibility and
all the functions are lessened, the temperature becomes nearly as low that of the
surrounding medium, the circulation slow, respiration almost or quite impercep-
tible, and digestion suspended. Although all activity is thus reduced in the
hybernating state, vitality becomes more tenacious,—is less easily extinguished.
Mangili cut off the head and neck of a marmot in the state of hybernation in
March, and put it in spirits, yet movements were evident in it at the end of half
an hour, and galvanism produced strong contractions in pieces of voluntary
muscles three hours after they had been cut off ; and even four elapsed before
their excitability wasmuch diminished: the heart beat for three hours after de-
capitation. He made the same examination in June with a marmot which had
been. out of hybernation two months; the muscles showed little excitability
under galvanism at the end of two hours, and the heart ceased to beat in fifty
minutes after decapitation. (Annales de Museum, t. x. p. 453. sqq.) This is
what we should have expected. The augmented tenacity of life, which allows
food, air, and heat to be dispensed with in whole or in part, is likely to pervade
the muscles and indeed every part of the frame; just as the necessity for air,
food, and heat is in all other cases proportionate to the want of tenacity of
excitability in muscles and of all vital properties. The sensibility is not so dimi-
nished but that ‘the slightest touch applied to one of the spines of the hedge-
hog immediately roused it to draw a deep and sonorous inspiration ; the merest
shake” induces a few respirations in the bat. (Dr. Marshall Hall, Phil.
Trans. 1832.*) .


* This gentleman endeavours to show that an inverse ratio prevails between
respiration and irritability, in which word he includes. both tenacity and sus-


HYBERNATION; 697


This torpidity is produced by a deficiency of external excitants, usually by cold
and want of food, and, in the language of Brown, is a state of direct debility,
while our ordinary sleep is one of indirect debility, —exhaustion. No struc-
tural peculiarity is discoverable, which enables certain animals to exist in the
torpid state.

Such animals at all times produce less heat, and vary more with the surround-
ing medium, than others, so that Dr. Edwards in an hour cooled a dormouse 36?
by surrounding it with a freezing mixture, which caused a reduction of not more
than 5° or 6° in adult birds and guinea-pigs exposed to it for even’ a longer time.
(I. ¢. p. 154. sq.) Some which do not hybernate resemble them in this inferior:
power; mice, for example, which, therefore, at all ages and seasons make
themselves nests. (p. 259.) On the other hand, hybernating animals are not all
equally deficient in the power of resisting the influence of surrounding low tem-=
peratures ; dormice are the most so, marmots the least ; so that animals which
preserve their own temperature in low media, and those which readily follow the
surrounding temperature, are not widely separated, but insensibly run into each
other, (I. c. p. 257. sq.) to say nothing of the inferior power of the newly-born
among many of the former, and among all if born before full time, and of the
various degrees of this power in different adults, and in all at different seasons of
the year. (See section on animal heat.) Cold produces sleep in all, and if the
sleep is indulged, death is the result in those which cannot hybernate. Those
which can, become more and more torpid, by the mere continuance of the same
degree of cold. A very intense degree of cold has been found actually to arouse
animals in a state of torpidity, but the excitement of the functions could not con-
tinue long, and death ensued. (p. 398.) It appeared necessary that respiration
should be suspended in an experiment of M. De Saissy, who, by mere cold,
could not produce torpor in a marmot till he closed the lid of the vessel in which,
it was placed. (p. 154.) Hence, exposure to carbonic acid, hydrogen, &c., in
this state, was found by Spallanzini to have no ill effect upon a torpid marmot.
(Rapports de [ Air, t. ii. p. 207.) Yet respiration has often seemed not to cease
entirely. (See Dr. Reeve, Essay on the Torpidity of Animals.) The blood has
been found in a certain degree coagulated in torpid bats. (Hunter, On the
Blood, p. 25.) Cold, at any time of the year, will produce the torpid state, but
want of food must greatly assist in lessening the power of maintaining temper-
ature. On the other hand, a continual good supply of food and warm temper-
ature increases their power of evolving heat, and enables them to resist the power
of cold, so that, by domestication, some cease to hybernate in the winter. (Dr.
Edwards, |. c. p. 472.) Dr. Edwards found that the temperature of hybernating
animals sinks considerably during sleep, even in summer. (p. 473.)

Fish, and other cold-blooded animals, will survive anintense torpidity. ‘The
fish froze,” says Captain Franklin, “ as fast as they were taken out of the nets,


SU Pi as eo Bet na alae >, Scien ee i Oe aT RE I te


ceptibility. I conceive that the whole is but one fact: —that animals which
retain their powers well under privations, must be those which require less
frequent and less abundant supplies of food, air, &c.; and that respiration is
less in them from the less necessity of stimuli to support the system.


698 HYBERNATION,


and in a short time became a solid mass of ice, and by a blow or two of the
hatchet were easily split open, when the intestines might be removed in one
lump. If in this completely frozen state, they were thawed before the fire, they
recovered their animation.” \‘‘ We have seen a carp recover so far as to leap
about with much vigour, after it had been frozen for six and thirty hours.”
(Journey to the Polar Sea, p. 248.) Izaak Walton (The Complete Angler, p, 257.)
quotes Gesner for the fact of some large breams being put into a pond which
was frozen the next winter into one mass of ice so that not one could be found,
and all swimming about again when the pond thawed in the spring, —a thing
‘<almost as incredible,” says the sentimental sinner, as Lord Byron calls him, “ as
the resurrection to an atheist.”

Insects easily bear torpidity from cold. In Newfoundland, for example,
Captain Buchan saw a frozen lake, which in the evening was all still and frozen
over, but, as soon as the sun had dissolved the surface in the morning, was in a
state of animation, owing, as appeared by close inspection, to myriads of flies
let loose, while many still remained “ infixed and frozen round.” Ellis also
mentions that a large black mass, like coal or peat, upon the hearth, dissolved,
when thrown upon the fire, into a cloud of: musquitoes. (Quarterly Review,
1821, April, p. 200.) Those insects which hybernate are not thought by Kirby
and Spence (E£ntom. vol. ii. p. 460. sqq.) to prepare for and enter into that state
solely from cold, &c., as they do so when the season comes round, although the
weather be as warm as previously, and do not before this period, though the
temperature chance to be as low as it usually is in the season of hybernation.

Some animals become torpid on being deprived of moisture, — the most
simple infusoria, rotifera, vibriones for instance. A common garden snail
falls torpid if put in a dry place, and may be revived at any time by the
application of a little water. . Moisture has revived some animalcules after a
torpidity of twenty-seven years. (Spallanzani, Opuscoli di Fisica animale e ve-
getabile.) The same is true of some of the most simple vegetables, as mosses.
The microscopic wheel animal, after remaining three or four years as a shri-
velled point, capable of being broken to pieces like a crystal of salt, is still re-
coverable by a drop of water: and the eel of blighted corn (vibrio), after twenty
or thirty years. Yet electricity destroys their capability of resuscitation. Most
vegetables become torpid in winter. Many lichens and mosses, dried in her-
baria, have been restored to life by moisture after a century or two. Seeds
and bulbs which have remained for centuries in the bowels of the earth have
sprung into life on being thrown into a more congenial soil; and bulbs, taken
from the hand of a mummy found in one of the pyramids, after having been
immured between two. and three thousand years, produced unknown plants
when sown in one of our botanic gardens. (Dr. Fletcher, 1. c. P. ii. b. p. 144.)
Still more lately, a writer of rank, Baron Herberstein, who was twice ambas-
sador in Russia fromthe Emperor Ferdinaud, informs us, in his Commentaries
on Russian History, that, in the northern parts of Muscovy, near the Oby, on
the borders of Tartary, a people called Leucomori hybernate “like tortoises,
under ground,” ‘quite frozen,” from the 27th of November to the 23d of
April, when “ they come to life again.” No specimens have yet been imported
into this country.


bie weet A


Aa oR


‘Asi gals MaDe iad
bs aah ee wes bi hy


ott fegns: mas aie


Fagg oe)


Boreal


Lif rid a


Sate eh NMR at iis isaac
ee asec Metis Shed et Mee


Susp leper aes,

+ Wy Conte ite

‘ ahi tg
tee

ie cod


he
bovtonet tt


ts i e rd ti ree die


wit oy sleeker tig he


eyo’


nha ee EL a
+ ay ‘woithe we ny aha? "aad
- tia eras bhuektn

ie “


ve |
me


te vii re erties


* wr aouiie, ‘ia
, x i % iagetab ben aon rf
inal sho porns :
loiter bite iis’
eich i ie


ase eit
veered beer


ie i ‘
Re a rae bint


vert on yg Lae sa .


“a ary dal aber, “ab


pee


8: bg ibe
Bi quite evar

| Ore a 4 ey Re
fot i, wh tory. wie het we ti the
ea) ,


Py ‘ve
sabes i


e ae
ius, ena oo in Tie pee


nr Om,


io sci ae Beenie, » She: Thane 5 Fe:


"a ee


oa


thy He ru xf


suerte haa Al


iy,


ws Oty toi es Hh ea et ye se: tint ai Mi
. im (wibré py
f ses


lig bewdl
renee NY ivity


at © 4. :
ah
ae yy Vitae


. - — 4
ry Lipery


es a,


adie 3 a Geagapy


a


a as ial arid


5h on “it eee fiat wae,


iad, infamy 4 via,


w wana
eee

4 Ni ie a) aie

Pi
Laut oniirt ivy
babes vate we exit

| " vente Kare yor
P) f ”


ay prete,


a pe moe


rh
batons ab
Die a at rn rad


wf


or


pean pee IRS aR AA en FS de mn tal


ee or in ere ieee y


, "7
ij

Wh ae?

NY Be


a ———— = — ——— a
I Se ee SR ee ne Cle i RR a RS RR SR aN = eS eee

5 ' _ —- 2 = : = r ss = = 2 is ht ee ae
RT SS A a an ee RR Re a SSS tS =
